BACKGROUND
the mouse hybridoma method has been used previously for the production of candidate monoclonal antibodies  for therapeutic use  <cit> . however, immune responses against highly conserved human proteins are often weak in mice, resulting in the production of low affinity and/or non-specific mabs. to avoid the problem of human proteins being recognized as self-antigens in mice, the use of an evolutionarily distant animal from humans is essential to obtain better immunization against therapeutic target molecules. while a variety of animals have been used to produce polyclonal antibodies against human proteins, mabs from animals other than rodents have not been routinely produced due to the difficulties in establishing immortalized antibody-producing cell lines by hybridoma, viral transformation or reprogramming  <cit> . recently, the direct molecular cloning of cognate pairs of immunoglobulin gamma heavy chain  variable , light chain kappa variable  and light chain lambda variable  genes from single antigen-specific plasma/plasmablast cells  using the polymerase chain reaction  has attracted attention as an alternative method for generating mabs from immunized animals  <cit> . although the use of aspcs is best suited to the isolation of high affinity mabs, since they go through the processes of somatic hypermutation and affinity maturation, the application of this method for species other than humans and mice is limited because the current plasma/plasmablast cell  isolation protocols rely on a small number of identified pc-specific markers combined with the absence of one or more b cell differentiation antigens  <cit> . furthermore, expensive equipment and acquired technical skills are required to identify and isolate aspcs from the bulk of the pc population  <cit> . the manual vh and vl gene amplification from single cells followed by the construction of igh and immunoglobulin light chain  gene expression plasmids are also limiting steps of this method  <cit> . to achieve rapid and scalable automation for the generation of mabs from a large numbers of single cells, we previously proposed a high-throughput single-cell-based immunoglobulin gene cloning method by developing a non-contact magnetic power transmission system  for single-cell-based cdna synthesis and a target-selective joint pcr  for igh and igl gene expression  <cit> .

although fluorescence-activated cell sorting  has been used to enrich for particular cell types, there is no single method to achieve a high yield of isolated aspcs with high purity  <cit> . the main limitation with facs has been the use of multiple antibodies against lineage-specific markers to enrich for pcs, causing cell membrane damage that produces background noise when identifying aspcs with fluorescently labeled antigens. in this paper, we develop a new antigen-specific pc screening method, termed endoplasmic reticulum -based identification of antigen-specific antibody-producing cells , using facs and a fluorescent dye specific for the endoplasmic reticulum. by combining eriaa and our previously proposed high-throughput single-cell-based ig gene cloning method, we have created a 1-week protocol for the production of recombinant mabs from a variety of immunized animals .

RESULTS
pc identification without using antibodies against lineage markers
pcs contain abundant er, reflecting the commitment to producing large amounts of secreted antibodies. thus, we hypothesized that a fluorescent dye specific for the er could be used to identify pcs. lymph node cells from egg albumin-immunized mice were stained with er-tracker™ blue-white dpx dye , hereafter referred to as er-tracker) and anti-mouse igg dylight  <dig> ) to identify cells with intense cytoplasmic er-derived fluorescence and weak cell surface igg expression . facs analysis of the lymphocytes  with anti-mouse igg dylight  <dig> and er-tracker, combined with anti-cd38-apc and cd45r-pe, revealed that  <dig> % of the igglow erhigh cells  were found in the pc fraction, which is characterized as being cd138high cd45rlow . r2-gated cells were analyzed for their expression of cytoplasmic igg by their morphologic appearance, which was examined by immunofluorescence staining after facs sorting. an intense cytoplasmic igg signal was found in 82% of the r2-gated cells, representing a 68-fold enrichment of pcs compared with the original lymphocyte populations ; however, the igglow erlow cells  contained only  <dig> % pcs . using this procedure, we also tried to isolate human pcs from the lymph nodes of cancer patients . facs analysis of the lymphocytes  with anti-human igg dylight  <dig> and er-tracker combined with anti-cd38-apc and cd20-pe revealed that  <dig> % of the igglow erhigh cells  were found in the pc fraction. after r2-gated cells were sorted by facs, their capacity to express abundant cytoplasmic igg was examined by immunofluorescence staining. an intense cytoplasmic igg signal was found in 70% to 90% of the r2-gated cells, which represented a 143-fold to 223-fold enrichment of pcs compared with the original lymphocyte population  containing only  <dig> % to  <dig> % pcs. the percentage of pcs identified by igglow erhigh  in r <dig> gate is not compatible to that identified by lineage markers . given that the percentage of pcs determined by immunofluorescence staining of cytosolic igg was only  <dig> % to  <dig> %, pc separation with surface igg and er-tracker is more specific than that with two lineage markers. rapid amplification of 5' cdna ends pcr  of the single-cell-sorted r2-gated cells resulted in the amplification of cognate pairs of vh, vlκ and/or vlλ genes, with a success ratio of 71% to 77%. these results clearly indicate that pcs can be isolated without using antibodies against lineage markers.

isolation of aspcs by facs
the advantage of using the er-tracker is that a series of antibodies against lineage markers is not required for pc identification. therefore, this procedure enables pc isolation from a variety of animals and can also dramatically reduce cell damage, which in turn will decrease the non-specific binding of labeled antigens to the cell surface. thus, we next attempted to isolate aspcs using a fluorescently labeled antigen as a tag for a complementary cell surface igg and to sort the cells from the rest of the cell population using facs. green fluorescent protein  was selected as a model foreign antigen against immunized rabbits, which were chosen for their robust immune system compared to mice and other rodents. facs analysis of the lymphocytes of the gfp-immunized rabbits  with anti-rabbit igg dylight  <dig> , er-tracker and gfp dylight  <dig> revealed the presence of a pc fraction  . the cells in the r <dig> gate were further subdivided into fractions according to their binding levels of gfp to define the aspcs  and non-specific pcs  . we expected the r3-gated cells to contain gfp-specific igg in the cytoplasm. to test this hypothesis, the cells in the r <dig> and r <dig> gates were sorted and examined for expression of an igg specific for gfp by immunofluorescence staining. in all, 76% of r3-gated cells were found to express an igg specific for gfp, which was a 252-fold enrichment of aspcs compared to the original lymphocyte population . although 78% of the igglow erhigh gfp- cells  expressed an intense cytoplasmic igg signal, only 11% of the cells reacted with gfp . a single-cell-based 5' race pcr of the r3-gated and r4-gated cells resulted in the amplification of cognate pairs of vh and vlκ genes, with an overall success rate of 81% and 79%, respectively . when pairs of linear igh and igl genes were prepared from each pair of vh and vlκ genes by ts-jpcr and transfected into 293ft cells, mabs specific for gfp were produced with a high efficiency from the r3-gated cells . to determine if this facs-based screening method, termed eriaa, can be applied to other animals, we also evaluated aspc isolation using gfp-immunized rats . facs analysis of the rat lymphocytes showed the presence of pc cells , and the r2-gated cells were further classified based on their reactivity with gfp as either igglow erhigh gfp+ cells  or igglow erhigh gfp- cells . our immunofluorescence analysis of the r3-gated cells demonstrated that 76% of the cells reacted with gfp, whereas only 2% of the r4-gated cells reacted with gfp. although both rabbits and rats received the same gfp as the immunogen, rats had higher pc fraction than that of rabbits . this is probably due to the differences in antigen recognition between the two animals. amplification of cognate pairs of vh and vlκ genes followed by dna transfection of pairs of linear igh and igl genes into 293ft cells resulted in the highly efficient production of gfp-specific antibodies by the r3-gated cells but not by the r4-gated cells. these results clearly demonstrate that eriaa provides a powerful method to identify and collect aspcs from a variety of animals in a rapid one-step process.

production of guinea pig mabs against human insulin
because antibodies in animals are produced by their immune systems, a strong antibody response to a given antigen occurs when there is a wide phylogenetic distance between the immunized animal and the species providing the antigen. mature human insulin differs from guinea pig insulin at  <dig> of  <dig> amino acids but differs from rat and mice insulin at only  <dig> residues. therefore, guinea pigs produce high-affinity antibodies against human insulin. because the introduction of guinea pig mabs in insulin immunoassays may reduce the amount of undesirable variables caused by the use of polyclonal antibodies, we sought to generate a guinea pig mab against human insulin. lymphocytes from human insulin-immunized guinea pigs were stained with anti-guinea pig igg dylight  <dig>  er-tracker and insulin-cy <dig>  and the insulin-specific pcs were gated as igglow erhigh insulin+  . a high amplification success rate for cognate pairs of vh, vlκ and/or vlλ genes from the single-cell-sorted r3-gated cells was achieved  . dna transfection of pairs of the linear igh and igl genes into 293ft cells resulted in the highly efficient production of recombinant guinea pig mabs against human insulin . when eight of the highly binding clones were selected for large-scale expression and their dissociation constants were analyzed, they demonstrated high affinities  . dna sequencing of these clones revealed that the mabs were divided into three phylogenetic clusters . western blot and peptide competition analyses revealed that clones clustered in group  <dig>  were directed to an epitope that includes residues b20- <dig>  clones clustered in group  <dig>  react with the c-terminal of the b chain; however, their binding was partially inhibited by b1- <dig>  clone  <dig> in group  <dig> also reacted with the c-terminal of b chain, but its binding was neither inhibited by b1- <dig> nor b20- <dig> . an immunohistochemical analysis of paraffin-embedded mouse pancreatic sections showed the staining of β cells by the guinea pig mab c <dig> against human insulin .

discussion
the use of aspcs is best suited to the generation of high affinity mabs because somatic hypermutation of immunoglobulin genes allows a continual improvement in antibody recognition during the course of pc differentiation. however, the isolation of aspcs is one of the most challenging types of cell separation due to the scarcity of aspcs in lymph nodes and blood. recently, several groups reported a microengraving method for the selection of aspcs by using an array of on-chip micro wells  <cit> . but the microwell-based method suffers from several problems, including the limited application of this method for species other than humans and mice and the limited numbers of cells that can be analyzed per experiment. facs, on the other hand, enables the analysis of large numbers of cells at high speeds; however, the isolation of aspcs by facs had yet to be established. the main limitation in isolating aspcs has been the non-specific binding of cells to fluorescently labeled antigens, which is caused by the use multiple antibodies against lineage-specific markers to enrich for pcs. to overcome these limitations, we developed eriaa for detecting aspcs from a variety of animals by facs. because eriaa is based on weak cell surface igg expression and abundant cytoplasmic rough er, common features of pcs across animal species, a series of antibodies against lineage markers is not required for pc identification. by simply staining lymph node cells with antibodies against cell surface igg and er-tracker, we achieved pc identification from humans, mice, rabbits and rats with 70% to 90% purity, representing a 48-fold to 223-fold enrichment of pcs compared with the original lymphocyte populations. furthermore, the reduction of background noise, due to not using several lineage-specific markers, allowed us to isolate aspcs with a fluorescently labeled antigen. unlike hybridoma and antibody display technology, eriaa does not require a large number of lymphocytes. because of the abundant pcs and small amount of red blood cells, lymph node is best suited for pcs isolation by eriaa. although the number of pcs in blood is significantly lower than that in lymph node, peripheral blood mononuclear cells can be used as a source in the case where human monoclonal antibodies from patients are required. in such a case, the use of er-tracker in combination with known pc marker such as cd <dig> provides a high yield of pcs with very high purity. the isolation of aspcs from spleen by eriaa is less efficient due to the presence of non-plasma cells with strong er-tracker signal .

many protein targets are highly conserved between mice and humans and can therefore be recognized as self-antigens by a mouse host, making them less immunogenic. to avoid this problem of human proteins being recognized as self-antigens in mice, rabbit monoclonal antibody production by hybridomas was developed  <cit> . although a variety of animals can act as a potential host for producing mabs by hybridoma, further application of hybridoma technologies to animals are expected to be limited due to difficulties in establishing a partner cell line for fusion. an alternative method for the generation of monoclonal antibodies by hybridoma is antibody display, which bypasses immune tolerance issues with highly conserved antigens. however, antibodies selected from synthetic repertoires often resulted in low affinity and/or non-specificity compared to antibodies derived from immunized animals. to overcome these limitations, phage antibody libraries were made from immunized animals and monoclonal antibodies with high binding affinity have been obtained  <cit> . unlike antibody display technology, our method enables the preservation of original heavy-light chain pairings, which is useful in analyzing protective antibodies in infectious disease or identifying autoimmune antibodies in humans.

CONCLUSIONS
our approach of utilizing eriaa and high-throughput cloning enables the rapid generation of antigen-specific mabs from a variety of animals. we verified the advantage of our technology by isolating hundreds of human insulin-specific mabs from guinea pigs. our methods will greatly contribute to the isolation of high performance mabs needed for sensitive diagnostics and therapeutic purposes.

