BACKGROUND
a recent report by iucn indicates that amphibians are the most endangered group of vertebrates worldwide, with  <dig> percent listed as threatened with extinction and  <dig> species already believed to be extinct  <cit> . among the several factors often linked to the decline in amphibian populations is the chytrid fungus batrachochytrium dendrobatidis , the causative agent of chytridiomycosis. ever since the discovery of bd in  <dig>  <cit> , numerous cases have been reported for the destruction associated with chytridiomycosis  <cit> . the destructive path of chytridiomycosis fits all of the descriptors of a novel epidemic   <cit> . investigations of museum specimens collected from as far back as  <dig> in japan  <cit>  and  <dig> in africa  <cit>  have detected bd in skin cross sections. on the other hand, long-term population studies since the 1900's had no records of mass mortalities until the late 1970's when the first bd epidemics were reported  <cit> . this leads to an interesting question about how pathogenesis suddenly evolved in this previously benign organism.

many disease organisms existed in non-virulent/commensal forms until they acquired some novel traits allowing them to exploit new niches  <cit> . among the several possible underlying mechanisms, horizontal gene transfer  is the most rapid way for an organism to gain novel phenotypes  <cit>  and it has contributed to the origin and spread of pathogenesis in numerous bacteria  <cit>  and occasionally in eukaryotes  <cit> . in this study, we show that homologs of two large families of known virulence effector genes were likely acquired by bd. these families have been rapidly duplicated after their acquisition in bd and evolved under strong positive selection. we hypothesize that the acquisition of these virulence effector homologs may partly explain the evolution of chytridiomycosis.

RESULTS
phylogenomic analyses identified homologs of two large families of known virulence effectors in bd, including serine peptidases and crn proteins . of these, members of the serine peptidase family have been implicated as virulence effectors in bd because of their potential role in degrading host antimicrobial peptides  <cit> . previous microarray data also indicated that many serine peptidase genes in bd are highly expressed in the sporangia stage, which is associated with the infection of keratinized host tissue  <cit> . our analyses show that at least  <dig> serine peptidase genes are present in the bd genome . other identifiable homologs of bd serine peptidases are only found in bacteria, where they are more broadly distributed.

"type a" and "type b" show two different types of conserved n-terminal domains of bd crn proteins, whose detailed information is shown in additional file  <dig>  "m" and "s" show that the protein is likely localized in mitochondria and the secretory pathway, respectively.

the crn protein family consists of cytoplasmic virulence effectors only known in oomycete plant pathogens  <cit> . these effectors are referred to as "crinkler" proteins because of their association with cell death and leaf crinkling, which parallels the effects of bd on amphibian skin  <cit> . in oomycete pathogens, the n-terminal region of crn proteins contains a highly conserved lflak domain that is characteristic of all crn proteins. the c-terminal region is diverse in domain and motif structure, based on which  <dig> subfamilies were identified in the oomycete phytophthora infestans  <cit> . the c-terminal region of crn proteins also controls virulence and, when expressed in plant cells, may induce cell death  <cit> . our analyses identified  <dig> genes encoding crn protein homologs in bd . these genes are present in genomes of both bd isolates  and include eight of the  <dig> subfamilies of crn proteins known in oomycetes .

abbreviations: pi, phytophthora infestans; ps, phytophthora sojae; pc, phytophthora capsici; pr, phytophthora ramorum; pu, pythium ultimum; pb, phytophthora brassicae; pp, phytophthora parasitica; ae, aphanomyces euteiches.

1sequences were found in est data.

2homologs are present in green plants. all other subfamilies are solely restricted in bd and oomycetes.

compared to oomycetes, the number of genes in each subfamily is often higher in bd. in particular, the dxx-dha subfamily of crn proteins is highly duplicated in bd and contains  <dig> and  <dig> gene copies from the two respective genomes, many of which show very little sequence variation. the homology of crn proteins from bd and oomycetes is most obvious in the c-terminal effector region, with a sequence identity of up to  <dig> %. the n-terminal lflak domain characteristic of oomycete crn proteins also is largely conserved in some identified crn homologs in bd . as in oomycete pathogens  <cit> , only a fraction of crn homologs identified in bd are predicted to contain signal peptides . however, almost all other identified crn homologs in bd have short n-terminal extensions of about  <dig> amino acids in positions corresponding to signal peptides .

the observation that a gene is uniquely shared by distantly related organisms can be attributed to multiple possible scenarios, in particular differential loss and hgt  <cit> . although differential loss and hgt can always be invoked as alternative explanations to each other, each scenario becomes increasingly less likely if it requires considerably more corresponding  events  <cit> . in the cases of serine peptidases and crn proteins, because chytrids and oomycetes belong to opisthokonts and heterokonts respectively, the gene loss scenario entails numerous independent loss events in related taxa. a more parsimonious and plausible scenario is the occurrence of hgt between bd and oomycetes. to further investigate the number and the direction of potential hgt events involved, we performed phylogenetic analyses on serine peptidases and each of the eight crn subfamilies shared between bd and oomycetes. our analyses indicate that all serine peptidase homologs in bd form a weakly supported clade . given that serine peptidases are more widely distributed in bacteria, it is most likely that serine peptidases in bd are derived from a single hgt event from bacteria, followed by gene duplication. analyses of crn subfamilies show that, in most cases, sequences from bd form a distinct clade whereas those from oomycetes form another, suggesting independent hgt for each crn subfamily. with paralogous sequence clades as outgroup, our analyses of the dn <dig> subfamily also show that bd sequences were likely acquired from oomycetes, though the support is still modest . such low support is expected given the short length of sequences used in our phylogenetic analyses. additional evidence consistent with the direction of hgt from oomycetes comes from their higher crn gene diversity. the fewer crn subfamilies in bd  are in line with the transfer from oomycetes, as we would expect the recipient organism to receive a subset of the gene repertoire of the donor. nevertheless, for both serine peptidases and the crn family, we were unable to determine the timing of these hgt events because of the paucity of sequence data from other chytrids and oomycetes.

because both the serine peptidase and crn families are highly duplicated in bd, we reasoned that they may confer important functions and, therefore, investigated the possibility that strong selection has been involved in their evolution. the estimate of dn/ds for the serine peptidase family in bd is  <dig> , while this value is  <dig>  in bacteria. similarly, dn/ds for each of seven crn subfamilies  is significantly higher in bd than in oomycetes . these results indicate that both the serine peptidase and crn families evolved faster in bd than in oomycetes and bacteria. we further used three likelihood tests   <cit>  to identify the role of positive selection on the serine peptidase family and seven crn subfamilies in bd and in oomycetes or bacteria, respectively. a priori we stipulated that evidence for positive selection will be sufficient only if all three tests performed show statistical significance. in total, all eight families and subfamilies in bd show strong evidence of positive selection . in contrast, we found that only four subfamilies of crn proteins  evolved under positive selection in oomycetes. for the subfamilies that were influenced by positive selection in both bd and oomycetes, the improved branch-site model  <cit>  was used to identify positive selection specifically on the diverging bd lineages. the genes in bd were used as foreground branches and those in oomycetes were used as background. except for the subfamily dxx-dha, likelihood tests for the other three crn subfamilies show statistically significant support for positive selection in the bd branch . furthermore, multiple positively selected amino acid sites were identified using the bayes empirical bayes  estimation procedure  <cit> , suggesting that positive selection acted specifically on certain amino acid sites of the serine peptidase family and the crn subfamilies after their acquisition by bd.

1the dn /ds ratio average across all sites and lineages under paml model m <dig> 

2"+" signs indicate that positive selection acted on the evolution of these genes, while "-" signs indicate that no positive selection was identified. these results were obtained based on the likelihood ratio tests of three site-specific models . 

3pps indicates positively selected sites . the number of amino acid residues with the posterior probability  of positive selection greater than  <dig>  is shown. **: pp >  <dig> ; *: pp >  <dig> .

most genes of the serine peptidase family in bd were assigned to two clades in the phylogeny with strong bootstrap support . we estimated the coefficients of both type i   <cit>  and type ii functional divergence   <cit>  between them. the results showed that only the type i coefficient of functional divergence is significantly greater than zero . these results suggest that site-specific selective constraints have been altered for most of the members of this family, leading to group-specific functional evolution after their diversification. furthermore,  <dig> amino acid residues were found to be critical for type i functional divergence with a posterior probability higher than  <dig>  , indicating that the evolutionary rates for these sites have shifted between these two clades. some amino acid residues in the region of the peptidase_s <dig> domain may also have contributed to the functional divergence, as there are  <dig> critical residues that are located in this region.

the acquisition of the serine peptidase and crn families followed by rapid duplication and positive selection suggests that these acquired genes are likely important in the adaptation of bd. because both families are known virulence effectors, their presence in bd provides a starting point for biochemical investigations of chytrid pathogenesis. if members of these two families are indeed related to bd virulence, their acquisition may at least partly explain the emergence of chytridiomycosis. peptidases are ubiquitous tools of bacterial parasites that enable host infection, and have also been identified as key factors in fungal pathogenesis. for example, microsporum canis, a dermatophytic fungal parasite, infects keratinized tissue  in mammals. this fungus secretes dipeptidyl peptidases, which are homologous to serine peptidases of the s <dig> family in bacteria  <cit> . these and other proteases enable the fungus to obtain nutrients from the complex network of insoluble proteins that comprise keratin-rich tissues. as mentioned above, serine peptidases were identified as a class of proteins that are associated with virulence in bd using microarray expression analyses  <cit> . the crn genes were previously only known in oomycetes, which themselves also are important pathogens. although most attention has been paid to oomycete plant pathogens, there is also a diverse group of oomycetes that infect animals  <cit> . some of these pathogens are responsible for epidemics in aquatic animals such as crayfish  <cit> . the oomycete parasite saproglenia may induce high mortality in salmon populations, both in aquaculture and in the wild  <cit> , with effects similar to bd  <cit> . hence, the oomycete lineage is well adapted to parasitize vertebrate hosts. it is not surprising that oomycetes have an arsenal of genes associated with parasitism and that the acquisition of such genes may help convert a commensal chytrid to a parasitic pathogen.

CONCLUSIONS
our data show that two large families of known virulence effector genes, crn proteins and serine peptidases, were likely transferred to bd from oomycete pathogens and bacteria, respectively. these acquired virulence effector homologs have been under rapid gene duplication and strong positive selection, suggesting that they may play an important role in the adaptation of bd. given that pathogenesis is the outcome of microbe-host interactions, the impact of any virulence effector is likely more severe when the host becomes stressed. we hypothesize that the acquisition of virulence effectors, in combination with habitat disruption and climate change, led to the bd epidemics and the decline in amphibian populations. further investigations are warranted to fully understand the biological functions of virulence effector homologs identified in our analyses.

