BACKGROUND
experimental studies are needed in disease ecology to determine the relative importance of factors influencing disease outcome. results can be applied to conservation management of amphibians encountering a variety of infectious diseases emerging with global change
 <cit> . two predominant amphibian pathogens associated with global population declines are ranaviruses and the amphibian chytrid fungus batrachochytrium dendrobatidis .

ranaviruses are large icosahedral dna viruses belonging to the family iridoviridae. they have been detected in fish, amphibians and reptiles. ranavirus associated disease in amphibians has been reported in the americas, europe, and asia, and ranaviruses have also been detected in amphibians in australia
 <cit> . to our knowledge, there are no previous reports of ranavirus occurring in wild-caught amphibians in switzerland.

bd is the causal agent of chytridiomycosis, an amphibian disease capable of producing epizootics and perhaps species extinctions
 <cit> . the fungus is top-ranking in the most recent amphibian conservation action plan
 <cit> . in europe, the earliest archived specimens with bd infections were found in 1998
 <cit> , however, recent studies have detected the fungus in switzerland from much older samples , and both a swiss strain and a “global panzootic lineage” have been identified in switzerland . infection of wild amphibians has been documented in ten european countries and appears to be widespread . as in other regions, the disease affects some host species more than others
 <cit> . therefore, attention to disease resistance mechanisms may lead to protective interventions for threatened amphibian species.

in switzerland, many amphibian populations have declined in recent years, and 70% of the  <dig> species are on the swiss red list of threatened species
 <cit> . in contrast, few declines have been reported for populations of water frogs, pelophylax lessonae and p. esculentus. these species also appear to be relatively tolerant of bd in the wild
 <cit> . amphibian host mechanisms of disease resistance include a variety of behavioral, innate, and adaptive immune responses
 <cit> . symbiotic bacteria associated with amphibian skin can inhibit bd and disease development in some species
 <cit> . antimicrobial peptides  may also be important against chytridiomycosis
 <cit> . nearly  <dig> skin amps were previously described from the water frog complex
 <cit> , and given the similarity of peptide families, some are probably effective against bd <cit> . a unique aspect of this study compared to most previous bd-exposure experiments
 <cit> , is that adult frogs are examined upon capture from an abundant wild population with their immunity primed, as opposed to examining pathogen-naïve metamorphs. therefore, adult water frogs are ideal for experiments to test the mechanisms of disease resistance by reducing components of the innate immune system that may confer protection in the wild.

RESULTS
ranavirus infection
two frogs died within a week of collection. ranaviruses were deteced by pcr in the liver, kidney, and toe clip of one p. esculentus and in the liver of one p. lessonae. virus was isolated on igh <dig> from all of the organs tested from both frogs . cell culture supernatant from all isolates was positive for ranavirus by pcr. sequencing of the pcr products from the livers of each of the frogs showed that a  <dig> bp portion of the mcp gene was 100% identical between the two viruses and  <dig> % identical to the corresponding portion of the genome of fv <dig>  the type species of the genus ranavirus.

bd infection
bd was prevalent in field collected water frogs. swabs were bd positive for 10/ <dig> p. lessonae and 4/ <dig> p. esculentus before experimental treatments . about 40% of initially uninfected frogs of both species developed skin infections upon experimental exposure with bd . prevalence before or after treatments was not significantly different between species . these infections were sometimes not detected on feet swabs but were detected on body swabs and vice versa . the proportion of frogs that became infected in each treatment was not significantly different for p. lessonae or both species combined . the zoospore infection load did not differ significantly among treatments for p. lessonae or both species combined . no mortality occurred during the  <dig> d experiment. one naturally infected p. esculentus died shortly after the experiment  showing clinical signs of chytridiomycosis and high bd infection loads .

mass change
nearly all frogs gained mass during the experiment . results were similar for both species, thus, the combined results are reported here. frogs that became infected during the experiment gained slightly, but not significantly, less mass than frogs that remained uninfected . however, frogs that were initially infected in the field  gained a mean of  <dig> % body mass in comparison with initially uninfected frogs  that gained  <dig> % body mass . initially uninfected frogs that were exposed to bd during the experiment  gained  <dig> % body mass, and initially uninfected frogs that became infected during the experiment  gained  <dig> % body mass. frogs that were exposed to bd and had both skin peptides and microbiota reduced, gained significantly less weight than frogs in some other treatments, including immune reduced frogs that were not experimentally exposed to bd . thus, bd infection and immune reduction interacted to produce a growth reduction effect.

skin peptide recovery
the dry weight quantity of peptides recovered after norepinephrine administration was significantly correlated to body mass  for both species . correcting for surface area did not significantly improve this correlation; therefore, we used μg gbm- <dig> as the unit of peptide quantity recovered. norepinephrine administration induced significant quantities of skin peptides from both species in comparison with water-injected controls . the quantity recovered from controls was   <dig>  ±  <dig>  μg gbm- <dig> from p. lessonae and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μg gbm- <dig> for p. esculentus. p. esculentus produced more peptides on average  than p. lessonae  when stimulated with norepinephrine . peptide-reduced frogs had recovered peptide quantities similar to non-reduced frogs by  <dig> days after treatment . the quantities of peptides recovered on day  <dig> differed among treatments . small sample sizes prohibited testing the treatment effect on p. esculentus peptides, but p. lessonae with both peptide and microbiota immune defenses reduced and exposed to bd had significantly less peptides than frogs in some other treatments .

relative intensities of peptides
in addition to the overall quantity of peptides recovered, we measured the relative intensity of peptides within the mass spectra. mean peptide intensities varied among treatments. in p. lessonae, bd exposure and bd exposure with peptide reduction showed the highest intensities, and the control immune-reduced treatment the lowest . for p. esculentus, small sample sizes precluded statistical testing. dry weight of partially-purified peptides was significantly correlated to the sum relative intensity of peptide peaks identified by maldi-tof ms .

peptide production stimulated by infection with bd
in p. lessonae, bd infection significantly increased the quantity of peptides recovered from two treatments: bd exposed with microbes reduced, and bd exposed with both microbes and peptides reduced . thus, an interaction of reduced microbes and bd exposure increased skin peptide production .

peptide profiles differed among treatment groups
the profiles of p. lessonae skin peptide ranked intensities were independently analyzed for the effects of bd exposure, bd infection, norepinephrine treatment, and antibiotic treatment with multivariate analyses of variance. neither bd exposure, bd infection pre-treatment, nor bd infection post-treatment significantly affected peptide profiles . reducing peptides with norepinephrine significantly affected the profiles of recovered peptides . similarly, reducing microbiota with antibiotics significantly affected peptide profiles . when allocated to one of these four treatment combinations  differences in peptide profiles were apparent .

discussion
we found that both ranaviral disease and chytridiomycosis can contribute to mortality of water frogs in switzerland. field surveys have shown that at many sites, bd infection prevalence is high . however, most frogs that had naturally acquired infections in the field did not show subsequent signs of disease development in the lab. in addition, experimental exposure of frogs to bd zoospores under laboratory conditions ideal for bd growth in culture, did not lead to mortality. most frogs resisted infection, or tolerated low level infections without developing clinical signs of disease. thus, we conclude that p. esculentus and p. lessonae are largely disease resistant, and infection tolerant, as adults, given the strains of bd occurring in switzerland. these frogs may experience disease-related mortality at more susceptible life-history stages, but if so, such die-offs have not substantially affected population sizes
 <cit> . in addition,  <dig> of  <dig> pelophylax spp. tadpoles had detectable bd infections when sampled from  <dig> ponds in switzerland including ponds with infected adults
 <cit> . factors leading to the stable co-existence of host populations and the chytrid fungal pathogen are only beginning to be understood
 <cit> . both the adaptive and innate branches of immunity are involved
 <cit> .

by experimentally reducing two components of innate immunity, antimicrobial skin peptides and skin microbiota, we aimed to determine the relative importance of each defense. however, even when both defenses were experimentally reduced, and the frogs were exposed to repeated infectious doses of bd, we did not detect increased mortality or even an increase in infection intensity. thus, the effects of reduced immunity and bd were subclinical.

subclinical effects of bd have been determined in other systems including bufo bufo larvae
 <cit> , pseudacris regilla larvae
 <cit> , plethodon cinereus adults
 <cit> , and hyla chrysoscelis and bufo fowleri metamorphs
 <cit> . here, we found that bd infection and a reduction of both peptide and microbiota immune defenses interacted to produce a growth reduction effect. our data suggest a trade-off between energy expenditure on growth and immune defense. given that antimicrobial peptides may be costly to produce, it is not surprising that p. lessonae appeared to increase peptide production upon exposure to bd only when microbiota was reduced. microbiota may extend the host innate immunity against bd <cit> , thus reducing the need for costly peptide production.

the significant reduction of growth in naturally infected compared to uninfected frogs may indicate cause or consequence of bd infection. when uninfected frogs were experimentally exposed to bd and when they became infected, growth reduction was not simply a result of bd exposure, but an interaction of bd exposure and immune reduction. thus, factors in addition to natural bd exposure probably contributed to reduced growth in the  <dig> naturally infected frogs, and these co-factors may have contributed to the susceptibility of these frogs in nature.

there are at least three explanations for why water frogs continued to resist chytridiomycosis upon experimental innate-immune reduction:  host frogs increased synthesis or expression of antimicrobial skin peptide defenses upon exposure to bd. skin peptides were initially reduced, but when collected again after  <dig> d, peptide levels had recovered to previous quantities.  some beneficial bacteria may have persisted on skin despite treatments with broad spectrum antibiotics. ongoing studies will determine the resistance or resilience of amphibian skin microbiota to antibiotic treatments.  water frogs in this study were collected as adults from a population coexisting with ranavirus and bd. thus, frogs were immunologically primed prior to experimental exposure and may have activated adaptive immune responses. similarly, wild-caught hypsiboas crepitans resisted infection in one study and may have been immunologically primed
 <cit> . amphibians in several other studies were able to clear infections at various temperatures including those conducive to fungal growth [rev. in
 <cit> . although we did not determine the primary source of disease resistance in this study, it is clear that both bd and the maintenance of innate immunity have subclinical costs to water frogs. colonization by microbiota may help reduce these costs.

we found that the method of infection diagnosis is important for classifying the effects of bd exposure. although numerous studies have shown that hundreds of amphibian species were positive for bd when sampled , diagnostic pcr to detect bd dna does not always detect low-level infections, and thus may underestimate infection prevalence. we found that low level infections can be missed by swabbing at a single time point. we also found differences in detectability depending on body location of swabbing, however this is confounded by differences in swabbing date. other studies have demonstrated higher infection loads on ventral as opposed to dorsal skin surfaces
 <cit> . in addition, dna of dead fungal cells can be detected, as well as dna from zoospores in water or that happen to be on the amphibian skin, but not infecting it
 <cit> . this becomes very important for interpreting the effects of experimental exposure to bd when large doses of zoospores are applied. researchers use several techniques to discriminate between skin infection and transient pathogen presence: repeating diagnostic qpcr from skin swab samples taken over several days with rinses or water changes between sampling periods , microscopy of skin samples or shed skin
 <cit> , or histology of skin tissue samples
 <cit> . detecting the effects of the disease chytridiomycosis is usually determined by clinical signs and histological descriptions of disease state
 <cit> . diseased frogs exhibit increased skin sloughing, inappetance, lethargy, and loss of righting-reflex
 <cit> . these signs usually occur within hours to days of death
 <cit>  and indicate a standard endpoint for euthanasia in experimental trials to reduce animal suffering. only one frog in our study showed clinical signs of chytridiomycosis; unusual skin sloughing was observed for over  <dig> months before presentation of lethal disease.

CONCLUSIONS
amphibian species differ in their tolerance of pathogens such as bd or ranavirus
 <cit> . changes in ecological conditions including the microbial communities present in the host environment
 <cit>  may influence the immune competence of host amphibians. intact skin microbiota reduced immune activation and may minimize subclinical costs of infection.

