BACKGROUND
allergic contact dermatitis  is characterized by redness of the skin, accompanied by periodic and recurrent episodes of itching  <cit> . the disease is a type iv delayed type hypersensitivity reaction initiated and mediated by cytotoxic cd8+ t cells and cd4+ th <dig> cells  <cit>  and develops upon repeated or prolonged exposure to contact allergens  <cit> . with a prevalence of 15-20%  <cit> , acd has rapidly become a major occupational and environmental health problem  <cit> . acd is a chronic condition and the recommendation to affected individuals is complete avoidance of inducing contact allergen  <cit> .

contact allergens capable of inducing acd are termed skin sensitizers. an important group of skin sensitizers are chemical compounds present in common household products such as cosmetics and personal care products. to limit and control the use of sensitizers in such products, chemicals are regularly screened for their capacity to induce sensitization. historically, such assays have relied exclusively on animal experimentation, with the murine local lymph node assay   <cit>  being the preferred method. however, as of march  <dig>  an eu legislation  <cit>  imposed a ban on the use of animals for safety assessment of cosmetic products, regardless of the availability of non-animal test as an alternative to animal testing. thus, the demand for alternative in vitro methods for prediction of chemical sensitization is urgent.

recently, we developed the genomic allergen rapid detection  assay, a novel alternative to animal testing for identification and risk assessment of human skin sensitizing chemicals using a predictive genomic biomarker signature termed the gard prediction signature   <cit> . the gps was established using a panel of reference chemicals comprising  <dig> well known sensitizers and  <dig> non-sensitizers. by stimulating the myeloid cell line mutz- <dig> with the panel of reference chemicals, we were able to identify the  <dig> most potent discriminatory transcripts between non-sensitizers and sensitizers. the information given by differentially expressed transcripts in the gps was used to train a support vector machine model   <cit> . subsequently, the svm model is used for classification of unknown chemical compounds as either sensitizers or non-sensitizers.

the technical format currently used for transcriptional analysis in the gard assay is affymetrix® whole-transcriptome microarrays. the array platform has been valuable during assay development to identify differentially regulated genes in the gps from the entire transcriptome, yet it suffers from drawbacks in terms of low sample throughput, high cost per sample and time consuming protocols. furthermore, the microarray platform has known limitations in terms of sensitivity, reproducibility and dynamic range . for an in vitro method to be used for regulatory purposes and eventually for industrial screening of sensitizers, it needs to be validated according to internationally recognized procedures  <cit> . with the purpose to prepare gard for formal validation under the supervision of the european union reference laboratory for alternatives to animal testing , and in order to simplify assay procedures, improve technical parameters and increase sample throughput, the gard assay would benefit from a technical platform transfer. the number of available technologies for high throughput quantitative transcriptome analysis is steadily increasing, but only a handful of comparisons between gene expressions measurements on various platforms exist. thus, there is a need to evaluate and compare results obtained from the various technologies to assess reliability and biological significance of measurements. we performed a systematic head to head comparison to assess the performance of three of the most prominent high throughput gene expression platforms, including the ncounter® analysis system   <cit> , biomark hd™ system   <cit>  and the openarray® system   <cit> . the ncounter® analysis system is a novel hybridization based technology enabling gene expression measurements to be performed directly from cell lysate. the technology use transcript specific color coded molecular probe pairs to capture and count individual transcripts and has several advantages in comparison to microarray platform including easy protocols, less hands-on time and higher sample throughput  <cit> . biomark hd™ and openarray® are rt-qpcr based technologies which is considered as the gold standard for quantitative transcription analysis due to its high sensitivity, high reproducibility and large dynamic range . rt-qpcr is however a low throughput technology in its conventional format. utilizing slightly different strategies, both biomark hd™ and the openarray® system provides technologies that aims to conserve the intrinsic analytical benefits of the conventional rt-qpcr while enabling gene expression measurement in a high throughput format  <cit> . both systems use streamlined protocols that enable progression from cdna into results in less than three hours for the openarray® system and less than seven hours for the biomark hd™ system. in this report, we present a per application relevant comparison and evaluation of the ncounter®, biomark hd™ and the openarray® platforms in the context of the gard assay. this report is not intended to serve as a general recommendation of a particular platform, but rather to investigate the trade-offs in terms of price, throughput, protocols, analytical performance and applicability of a selection of high throughput platforms for the gard assay. primary focuses were to compare non-technical parameters such as sample throughput, price per sample and simplicity of protocols between the platforms as well as to evaluate the more technical parameters in terms of precision and data consistency within each platform, to assess inter-platform consistency, and to determine if transcriptional analysis performed on the evaluated platforms could be applied to the gard model to classify sensitizers from non-sensitizers. in conclusion, we found that it was possible to achieve acceptable detection sensitivity, reproducibility and discriminatory power of the gard assay while at the same time simplify assay procedures and reduce assay cost when using any of the suggested high-throughput platforms evaluated in this study.

RESULTS
biological model for evaluation of high throughput platforms and phenotypic analysis of unstimulated mutz- <dig> cells
the gard assay was chosen as a biological model to achieve a per application relevant assessment of the performance of selected high throughput platforms. the cell line used in the gard assay is the dendritic cell -like human myeloid leukemia-derived cell line mutz- <dig>  <cit> . analogous to primary dcs, mutz- <dig> cells express cd1a, hla-dr, cd <dig>  cd <dig> and cd <dig>  the mutz- <dig> population also consists of subpopulations of cd14+, cd34+ and double negative cells as previously described  <cit> . phenotypic analysis of cells was performed prior to each round of stimulation to ensure that mutz- <dig> cells were in an immature stage. cell surface expression levels of the markers cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  hla-dr, cd <dig>  cd <dig> and cd1a were verified using flow cytometry prior to stimulations. results are illustrated in table  <dig> and correlated with previously published examples of phenotypic profiles for the mutz- <dig> cells  <cit> .table  <dig> 
phenotype of mutz- <dig> cells



cd1a

cd14

cd34

cd54

cd80

cd86

hla-dr
expression levels of the cell surface markers cd <dig> cd <dig> cd <dig> hla-dr,cd1a, cd <dig> and cd <dig> were determined using flow cytometry to ensure proliferating cells were not differentiated. results illustrates average percentage of positive cells together with standard deviation .



inducible up-regulation of cd <dig> cell surface marker in response to stimulation of mutz- <dig> with skin sensitizers
to enable a comprehensive evaluation between platforms, a panel of  <dig> chemical compounds including eight sensitizers and eight non-sensitizers initially being used to define the gard prediction signature  were prepared for stimulation of mutz- <dig> cells . each stimulation was performed in biological triplicates, generating a dataset comprising  <dig> chemical stimulations. the gard assay uses the inducible cell surface expression of cd <dig> after chemical stimulation as a general measure of the maturity state of the cells and as a quality control to ensure bioavailability of chemical stimulations. cell surface expression of cd <dig> was confirmed after 24 h of stimulation with chemicals using flow cytometry . cd <dig> was significantly up-regulated on cells stimulated with the sensitizers 2-hydroxyethyl acrylate, 2-aminophenol, 2-nitro- <dig> -phenylendiamine and p-phenylendiamine in comparison to vehicle controls. none of the non-sensitizers induced a significant up-regulation of cd <dig>  the outcome of the experiment correlated with previously published data  <cit> .table  <dig> 
list of chemical compounds used during evaluation of platforms



sensitizers

non-sensitizers

vehicle controls
list of chemical compounds used for evaluation of platforms. list includes information on sensitizing potency, vehicle, gard input concentration and abbreviation for each chemical.
cell surface expression of cd <dig> in mutz- <dig> cells after stimulation with sensitizing and non-sensitizing chemicals. levels of expression of the cell surface marker cd <dig> were determined using flow cytometry after stimulation with various chemicals for 24 h. figure illustrates percentage of cd <dig> positive cells for each chemical . gating were performed to exclude dead cells/debris and quadrants were established by comparing with isotype controls. statistics were performed using student’s t-test .



transcriptional profiling of mutz- <dig> using high throughput gene expression platforms
selection of transcripts for this study was performed in two consecutive steps. in a first step, transcripts were selected in order to obtain a representative expression profile from the gps to allow for a decisive evaluation of technical parameters such as intra platform reproducibility and limit of detection. in this step, transcripts were selected to cover the whole dynamic range of gene expression present in the original gps  as well as to include heavily regulated transcripts, weakly regulated transcripts and to include both up- and down regulated transcripts when comparing expression profiles of chemically stimulated cells to non-stimulated cells. for the transcripts selected in the first step, a second round of selection was performed to include only the most potent predictor genes to allow for assessment of the biological relevance of gene expression data in terms of the gard assay. selection of the most potent predictor genes were based on validation call frequencies as described in  <cit> . the abundance of each transcript included in this study  was determined on all platforms using samples from the same cellular stimulation. data were analyzed to evaluate intra-platform reproducibility, inter-platform reliability and relevance of data produced on each platform for construction of a predictive model for skin sensitization in the gard assay. a schematic view of the experimental workflow from chemical stimulation to mrna quantification using the various platforms is illustrated in figure  <dig>  the data from the high throughput platforms were compared to affymetrix® microarray data from a previous study  <cit> . a comparison of non-technical parameters of evaluated platforms is illustrated in table  <dig> table  <dig> 
list of transcripts used during evaluation of platforms



adam20

cd33

cd86

cd93

dhcr24

dhx33

fas

fasn

fdxr

gdap2

gdf11

gnl3l

hist1h3j

hmgcs1

hnrnpl

ly96

mapk13

mtr

nqo1

or5b21

pfas

phlda3

rfc2

sfpq

slc37a4

sqle

tlr6

tmem97

txnrd1

abcb4

gapdh

hprt1
a set of  <dig> transcripts from the gps was analyzed on all three platforms. transcripts are listed by gene symbol, entrez gene id, deltagene™ assay id, nanostring® probe id and life technologies™ assay id. in addition to transcripts from the gps, three reference transcripts, abcb <dig>  gapdh and hprt <dig> were analyzed on the evaluated platforms and used for normalization of data.
experimental workflow for evaluation of high throughput platforms. schematic view of the experimental design illustrating the procedure from chemical stimulation to mrna quantification on the various platforms.


comparison of platforms


pricea
comparison are based on the  <dig> samples analyzed in the present study. a platforms were graded based on total cost to analyze the complete set of  <dig> samples. the number of $ denotes the relation in costs between the platforms, with the highest number assigned to the most expensive platform.

preprocessing of data
gene expression data obtained on evaluated platforms were normalized prior to any analysis as described in methods. due to issues with a batch of samples during rna preparation, one of the replicates from the following chemical stimulations had to be removed from analysis on all platforms: p-phenylendiamine, geraniol, eugenol and 1-butanol. in addition, one of the replicates from the following chemical stimulations had to be removed from analysis on ncounter® platform due to platform specific issues: 2-aminophenol and water. total dataset analyzed on ncounter® consisted of  <dig> samples. in addition to the samples removed due to issues during rna preparation, one of the replicates from the following chemical stimulations had to be removed from analysis on biomark hd™ and openarray® platforms due to insufficient amounts of cdna: propylene glycol, methyl salicylate, geraniol and dimethyl sulfoxide. total dataset analyzed on biomark hd™ and openarray® consisted of  <dig> samples. all stimulations except geraniol was present in at least biological duplicates. for chemical stimulations consisting of two replicates, averaged values were calculated from duplicate reactions instead of on triplicate as applied to remaining stimulations. the total number of sample shared between all platforms comprised  <dig> samples.

detection sensitivity
to determine how evaluated platforms compared in sensitivity to each other, we estimated the total number of transcripts detected on each platform. using the set of  <dig> chemical stimulations shared between all platforms and measuring the expression levels of all  <dig> transcripts in each stimulation, a total of  <dig> transcripts were assayed on each platform. transcripts were defined as either detected or undetected in a certain chemical stimulation based on platform specific criteria as described in methods. the overall number of detected transcripts in all samples was higher on the biomark hd™ platform  in comparison to both the openarray® platform  and the ncounter® platform . in order to generate a uniform set of transcripts for comparative analysis between the platforms, we chose to include only those transcripts detected in at least two of the three replicate reactions for all stimulations and on all of the evaluated platforms during downstream analysis. identities and number of detected transcripts for all stimulations and on each platform are summarized in table  <dig>  while all transcripts were detected in at least two of the three replicates for all stimulations on biomark hd™, one transcript  on the openarray® platform, and three transcripts  on the ncounter® platform, did not fulfill the stringent requirements for use in downstream analysis. subsequently, abcb <dig>  orb5b <dig> and adam <dig> were removed from the set of transcripts. two of the removed transcripts, orb5b <dig> and adam <dig> originated from the gps while the transcript abcb <dig> was originally considered to be used as a reference gene. all of the removed transcripts were confirmed as low expressed transcripts in the mutz- <dig> cell line based on microarray data . the total gene set used for further analysis thus consisted of a total of  <dig> transcripts from the gps.table  <dig> 
comparison of the number of detected genes in the  <dig> samples shared between all platforms



abcb4

fdxr

or5b21

adam20

hist1h3j

gdf11

ly96

tlr6

cd86

fasn

pfas

mapk13

gdap2

tmem97

dhx33

rfc2

acly

txnrd1

hprt1

gapdh
the set of  <dig> transcripts were measured in the  <dig> chemical stimulations shared between all platforms. the table illustrates the number of detected calls for a specific transcript across the  <dig> samples with percentage in parentheses. table lists only transcripts declared as undetected in any of the stimulations on either ncounter®, biomark hd™ or openarray®. d denotes that transcript is present in all samples.



intra-platform reproducibility and data consistency
we chose to evaluate precision and to measure data consistency within each platform by calculating coefficient of variation  between biological replicate measurements. calculations of cv were performed on intra-platform replicates for each chemical stimulation using quantitative gene expression signals from the subset of  <dig> transcripts shared between the evaluated platforms. the distribution of replicate cv values across all transcripts are summarized in a series of box and whiskers plots visualized in figure  <dig>  all platforms demonstrated good reproducibility of gene expression data. the replicate cv median values for affymetrix® were the lowest amongst the platforms, ranging from 1-3% for all chemical stimulations. the replicate cv median values for the majority of the chemical stimulations measured on ncounter®, biomark hd™ and openarray® platforms were in the range of 5-15%, although the distribution of replicate cv varied slightly between various chemical stimulations measured on the same platform. examples include larger dispersion of replicate cv values for the stimulations ethyl vanillin, 1-butanol, salicylic acid, methyl salicylate, dimethyl formamide, dimethyl sulfoxide and water in comparison to 2-aminophenol, 2-nitro- <dig> -phenylendiamine, p-phenylendiamine and ethylendiamine. however, the pattern of dispersion of the cv values for the different stimulations seems to be comparable across the evaluated platforms.figure  <dig> 
distribution of replicate coefficient of variation . as a measure of intra-platform precision and data consistency, the replicate cv of  <dig> transcripts present in all stimulations were determined from triplicate stimulations and illustrated in a series of box and whiskers plots. the interquartile range , median  and the 10th and 90th percentile values as well as outliers are indicated in each plot.



inter-platform consistency
we further evaluated reliability of gene expression data measured on the ncounter®, biomark hd™ and openarray® platforms by comparing their abilities to measure transcripts in the gard signature to each other and to affymetrix® microarrays. absolute signals of gene expression values generated on the different platforms could not be compared directly since the different platforms utilized different chemistry, quantitation, and normalization methods. therefore, we evaluated the correlation between data in fold change matrices. cross-platform comparisons were performed by evaluating concordances of log <dig> fold changes by pair wise regression analysis of fold differences for chemical stimulations in comparison to vehicle controls. biological replicate measurements for the  <dig> samples shared between all platforms were used to calculate the average log <dig> fold changes across the  <dig> transcripts present in each stimulation. dimethyl sulfoxide and water were used as reference samples. the chemical stimulation geraniol was removed from the analysis as no replicate samples were available. this left a dataset consisting of  <dig> matched measurement pairs . the matched measurement pairs from each platform were pair-wise plotted against each other and subjected to bivariate analysis. pearson correlation coefficients and linear fits to the log <dig> ratios were calculated for each pair-wise platform comparison . strong correlation was observed between log <dig> fold change measurements on ncounter® and biomark hd™ platforms . lower correlations were observed of either of biomark hd™  or ncounter®  to affymetrix®. low correlations were also observed between log <dig> fold change measurements of either of biomark hd™ , ncounter®  and affymetrix®  with the openarray® data. level of compression or expansion of gene expression data measured on the different platforms were evaluated by comparing the slope of the best fitted line of a least square linear regression of the log <dig> fold changes between pairs of platforms to the ideal slope of  <dig>  only a minor compression was observed between ncounter® and biomark hd™ . compression effects were observed for both ncounter®  and biomark hd™  in relation to openarray®. affymetrix® data compressed log <dig> fold change measurements relative to the other platforms .figure  <dig> 
fold change correlations between gene expression data quantified by the various platforms. cross-platform comparisons were performed by evaluating the concordance of log <dig> fold changes by pair wise regression analysis of fold differences for chemical stimulations in comparison to vehicle controls. the average log <dig> fold changes for  <dig> transcripts present in all stimulations and detected on all three platforms were subjected to bivariate analysis. subplots  illustrates the correlation between the following platforms: a) ncounter® and biomark hd™, b) affymetrix® and biomark hd™, c) affymetrix® and ncounter®, d) biomark hd™ and openarray®, e) ncounter® and openarray®, f) affymetrix® and openarray®. the solid line in each plot illustrates the linear regression fit while the dashed line represents the  <dig>  slope of complete concordance. pearson correlation coefficients  and equation for the linear fit  are indicated for each subplot. p-values for hypothesis of no correlation were calculated using fisher’s transformation .



comparison of transcriptional profiles from different platforms as predictive models for skin sensitization
we evaluated overall structure and relevance of gene expression data measured on evaluated high-throughput platforms on a per application basis in order to determine if platforms could be used to distinguish sensitizers from non-sensitizers in the gard assay. principal component analysis  was used to visualize gene expression data from the various platforms. pca plots were constructed in the software qlucore omics explorer v. <dig>  using the subset of  <dig> transcripts shared between evaluated platforms as variable input. construction of pca plots based on the  <dig> samples in the biomark hd™ and openarray® sample datasets revealed significant outliers that had to be removed, otherwise they would have prevented visualization and classification of separate groups . from the biomark hd™ data set, one of the replicate of dimethyl formamide had to be removed, leaving a dataset comprising  <dig> samples. from the openarray® data set, one replicate of dimethyl formamide, 1-butanol, methyl salicylate and water had to be removed, leaving a dataset comprising  <dig> samples. all  <dig> samples measured on ncounter® were employed for construction of the ncounter® pca plot. for comparative reasons, a pca plot was constructed based on affymetrix® gene expression measurements of the  <dig> samples originally selected for this evaluation using the subset of  <dig> transcripts shared between evaluated platforms as variable input. to determine if gene expression measurements from evaluated platforms could be used to distinguish sensitizers from non-sensitizers, each sample in the pca plots was colored according to sensitizing potency as defined by the llna assay . neither of the evaluated platforms were able to achieve a complete separation of sensitizers and non-sensitizers. the pca plot constructed from ncounter® data showed highest level of similarity to the affymetrix® pca plot. for both these platforms, discrimination between sensitizers and non-sensitizers were seen along the first principal component. while all strong sensitizers clustered together, separated from the non-sensitizers, a few of the moderate and all the weak sensitizers clustered close to the non-sensitizers for the affymetrix® platform, and together with the non-sensitizers for the ncounter® platform. the separation profiles for both the biomark hd™ and the openarray® platforms demonstrated a clear discrimination between strong sensitizers and non-sensitizers while a few moderate sensitizers and most weak sensitizers clustered together with non-sensitizers. however, in contrast to the ncounter® and the affymetrix® data, discrimination between sensitizers and non-sensitizers was observed along the second principal component. to further investigate the quality and similarity of gene expression data produced on the various platforms for the different chemical stimulations, each sample in the pca plot was instead colored according to stimulating agent . two important observations were made: firstly, the moderate sensitizer that consistently clustered together with the non-sensitizers for all platforms could be identified as being the same chemical, ethylendiamine. secondly, replicate stimulations grouped together in all pca plots, indicating high quality data from all platforms.figure  <dig> 
principal component analysis  of gene expression data after 24 h of chemical stimulation. to investigate overall similarities of gene expression data and to outline relevance of data from evaluated platforms for the gard assay, gene expression data from  <dig> transcripts shared between all platforms were used for construction of pca plots in the software qlucore. samples were colored according to sensitizing potency as defined by the llna assay. subplots  illustrates pca plots constructed from gene expression data obtained on the various platforms. a) affymetrix®,  <dig> stimulations , moderate , strong , non-sensitizer ). b) ncounter®,  <dig> stimulations , moderate , strong , non-sensitizer ). c) biomark hd,  <dig> stimulations , moderate , strong , non-sensitizer . d) openarray®,  <dig> stimulations , moderate , strong , non-sensitizer .
principal component analysis  of gene expression data after 24 h of chemical stimulation. to investigate consistency of gene expression data from evaluated platforms, samples from figure  <dig> were instead colored according to chemical stimulation. subplots  illustrates pca plots constructed from gene expression data obtained on the various platforms. a) affymetrix®,  <dig> stimulations. b) ncounter®,  <dig> stimulations. c) biomark hd,  <dig> stimulations. d) openarray®,  <dig> stimulations.



discussion
the gard assay was recently developed as an in vitro alternative to animal testing for identification and classification of skin sensitizers. the assay classifies chemicals as either skin sensitizers or non-sensitizers with high accuracy, sensitivity and specificity, using a genomic biomarker signature in the myeloid cell line mutz- <dig>  the mutz- <dig> cell line is ideal for assay development as they resemble dendritic cells  which are important modulators of immune reactions in response to foreign substances  <cit> . the use of a cell line in the gard assay ensures a constant supply of cells and enables a large number of cells to be grown via standardized protocols in short time, allowing for a capability to scale up the format of the assay. we believe that the testing strategy behind the gard assay has potential to replace animal experimentation for classification of chemicals, but that the technical platform currently used for transcriptome analysis, the microarray platform, is a limiting factor for adaption of gard into a routine assay for analysis and screening of potential sensitizers. to improve gard and place the assay in a better position for formal validation following an established assessment procedure with the ultimate aims to simplify assay procedures, improve technical parameters and increase sample throughput, we assessed the performance of three high throughput platforms for gene expression measurements and correlated their performance metrics against our previously generated microarray data  <cit> . we measured the levels of  <dig> representative genes from the gps across  <dig> samples on all platforms. samples comprised  <dig> chemical stimulations in biological triplicate reactions and included both sensitizers and non-sensitizers. to achieve a comprehensive evaluation, we applied an experimental design allowing us to perform measurements on all platforms from the same chemical stimulation and a single rna preparation. thus, only platform-specific protocols downstream from rna isolation discriminated between measurements on the different platforms.

the key findings from the current study are threefold. firstly, good intra-platform reproducibility of gene expression data for all platforms was observed. secondly, all evaluated platforms displayed modest to low correlation of gene expression measurements compared to affymetrix® microarray data. thirdly, all platforms were able to discriminate most of the extreme and moderate skin sensitizers from non-sensitizers when gene expression data obtained from the various platforms were subjected to pca analysis.

high intra-platform reproducibility of gene expression measurements was considered a key criterion during the evaluation of platforms. high reproducibility might reduce number of replicates needed for measurements, affecting experimental design, sample throughput and eventually also costs. considering that evaluated platforms not only use different technology for gene expression measurements but also different protocols for preparation of samples prior to final quantification, we chose to calculate precision based on biological replicate measurements where replicates for each stimulation was prepared individually for analysis according to protocols for a certain platform. thus, the estimated precision included both technical variations during final measurements as well as variations possibly introduced during sample preparation prior to quantification. the present study demonstrates high intra-platform precision for all platforms. the majority of replicate cv median measurements for ncounter®, biomark hd™ and openarray® were in the range between 5-15% which was slightly higher than the cv values observed on the affymetrix® platform. in contrast to the cv values observed on the affymetrix® platform, the distribution of replicate cv values varies between stimulations on evaluated platforms. the distribution of replicate cv values for a certain stimulation is however comparable across the evaluated platforms. considering that a single stimulation was prepared for analysis on ncounter®, biomark hd™ and openarray®, while affymetrix® data was based on previously generated data it is likely that the higher cv values observed for the evaluated platforms in comparison to affymetrix® originate from sample preparation and not from the quantification itself. in addition, evaluated genes were chosen by a data-driven approach, using the affymetrix® data as an exploratory data set. thus, the very low cv values observed for affymetrix® data might be explained by a selection bias. the multiple steps included in sample preparation  are all possible steps for introduction of variations. the ncounter® system has the simplest protocol since measurements can be performed directly on rna samples and in a single reaction. the openarray® system requires reverse transcription, but most steps in the analysis is fully automated using a mechanic liquid handler. finally, the biomark hd™ system requires both reverse transcription, pre-amplification and several steps of technical pipetting. however, these differences did not seem to affect the reproducibility of the measurement to any large extent as indicated by the similarity in cv values across platforms.

in contrast to reproducibility measurements, we also reported differences in the number of transcripts that could be detected on each of the evaluated platforms. reasons for not detecting a transcript can be explained by a bad probe for the specific gene or insufficient sample target concentration. since high frequencies of undetected genes correlated well with low levels of expression, we suggest that the major contribution in this study was due to transcript levels under the limit of detection for the specific platform. results indicate superior sensitivity of the biomark hd™ platform in comparison to both ncounter® and openarray®. the increased detection sensitivity may be linked to the additional cdna pre-amplification step implemented prior to rt-qpcr on biomark hd™. in contrast, the ncounter® platform does not involve any target amplification and the openarray® technology involves amplification only during the rt-qpcr reaction when using standard protocols. an unexpected observation was also that the performance of the reference transcripts were different between the platforms . while both gapdh and hprt <dig> performed equally well on ncounter®, only gapdh performed satisfactory on the biomark hd™ and the openarray® platforms suggesting that care must be taken in selecting appropriate reference genes.

equally important as reproducibility was to achieve consistency of gene expression measurements across platforms. this would provide a possibility to directly compare new measurements to previous data and to use svm model trained on historical microarray data for classification of new samples measured on alternative platforms. however, the cross-platform comparison of log <dig> fold change measurement indicates modest to poor correlation between gene expressions data measured on the different platforms. we suggest that the major contributions to poor correlations are attributable to either platform specific differences in protocols, data processing or differences inherent to each technology. contributing factors may include slight differences in probe sequences, small differences in the location of probes or primers and the lack of industrial standards across different technologies. since the selection of primers and probes in this study was based on probe annotations, slight differences in the location of probes or primers on the target sequence might result in the detection of different types of splice variants on the different technologies. previous experiments have shown that it is possible to achieve improved correlations across platforms using probes matched at exon levels  <cit> . other groups have also stated that differences in probes across microarray platforms can be a major cause of discordance  <cit> . we do not have full access to the complete primer and probe sequences for all platforms preventing us from investigating the actual contribution of this factor in this experiment. we feel that the low concordance of gene expression measurements between evaluated platforms and to affymetrix® microarray data will prevent a direct comparison of previously generated microarray data to new measurements on an alternative platform in this type of application.

finally, we evaluated the overall structure and similarities of gene expression measurements from the various platforms in order to investigate if data from evaluated platforms contained enough biological information to distinguish sensitizers from non-sensitizers in pca analysis. all platforms were able to distinguish strong sensitizers as well as several of the moderate sensitizers from the non-sensitizers. however, information contained in the gene expression data were not sufficient to distinguish weak sensitizers from non-sensitizers on any of the evaluated platforms. previous work has reported variations in transcriptional profiles related to the relative potency of stimulating agent  <cit> , indicating a smaller variation between weak sensitizers and non-sensitizers in comparison to strong and moderate sensitizers. although significant efforts were made in order to select target genes with highest discriminatory power between sensitizers and non-sensitizers in this study, the inability to accurately classify weak sensitizers on the evaluated platforms could potentially be an artifact generated by the smaller number of genes included in this study  in comparison to the complete gard signature . therefore, we filtered the affymetrix® data set to include the same genes as analyzed by evaluated platforms. results indicate that the genes selected for this study contains sufficient information to distinguish also the weak sensitizers as the affymetrix® data illustrated a more obvious separation between weak sensitizers and non-sensitizers in comparison to evaluated platforms . considering that the gard signature was initially selected based on affymetrix® microarray data and the poor correlations observed between affymetrix® and evaluated platforms, we suggested that a reasonable explanation to why evaluated platforms were not able to completely distinguish all sensitizers from all non-sensitizers derives from differences in technology between platforms, i.e., the same factors that contributed to the poor correlation between platforms as discussed above. in support of this argument, the pca plot constructed from data measured on the hybridization based ncounter® platform shows most similarities to the pca plot constructed from affymetrix® data. alternatively, the observed differentiation between weak sensitizers and non-sensitizers in the affymetrix® data may also be due to a selection bias, as the affymetrix® data is the historical data set used to identify the genomic predictors. therefore, we cannot exclude the possibility that including a larger set of genes from the gps to be analyzed on the evaluated platforms might provide more information relevant for the separation also of weak sensitizer as a larger set of genes would allow for a data driven approach to select for better predictors also on evaluated platforms. in addition, we observed that the separation of sensitizers were seen along the second principal component in pca plots for gene expression data from the biomark hd™ and openarray® data instead of along the first principal component as seen with affymetrix® and ncounter® data. the observed separation along the second principal component indicates that much of the variation in the datasets may be attributable to systematic artifacts from the technologies and not from the transcriptional variations. this has previously been shown for other high-throughput technologies as reviewed by  <cit> .

other important parameters to consider are price per assay, simplicity of protocols, time to results and sample throughput. these parameters had to be balanced in relation to the technical parameters in order to select a suitable platform for gard. in comparison to the affymetrix® platform, evaluated platforms enable higher sample throughput, having shorter turnaround time for results and provides more flexible solutions for focused gene expression of a specific sets of genes. the ncounter® platform has the additional advantage of not requiring reverse transcription, being highly multiplexed regarding the amount of transcripts to be measured in a single reaction, requires low amount of hands-on time, provides fully automated liquid handling steps and has the easiest workflow. the biomark hd™ system is most cost effective and provides a straightforward and simple method for data normalization. the openarray® system has an easy work flow and streamlined protocol were most liquid handling steps are automated and enables progression from cdna into results in less than three hours.

in summary, all of the evaluated platforms produced high quality gene expression data, demonstrated acceptable reproducibility of gene expression measurements and retained discriminatory power for separation of strong and moderate sensitizers. although slight differences between the high-throughput platforms in terms of cost per sample, sample throughput and simplicity of protocols were observed, the evaluated platforms were superior in relation to the microarrays when considering these parameters.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we evaluated the performance of three high-throughput platforms using a restricted set of probes from the gard biomarker signature. we showed that it was possible to achieve acceptable detection sensitivity, reproducibility and discriminatory power between strong and moderate sensitizers and non-sensitizers in the gard assay and at the same time reduce time to results and assay costs, simplify assay procedures and increase sample throughput by using a high throughput platform. as a final remark, we conclude that all of the evaluated platforms are suitable candidates to replace microarrays as the technical platform for gard. changing the platform for gene expression measurement will be a first step in order to prepare gard for validation and industrial screening of potential sensitizers.

