BACKGROUND
micro-invertebrates, though very important to the soil biocenose  and energy flux of a system, are still poorly understood in terms of their taxonomy and geographical distributions  <cit> . like many microfaunal organisms, rotifera and tardigrada pose problems for taxonomists and evolutionary biologists due to the difficulties associated with isolation, identification and enumeration of organisms that do not preserve any discernable morphological characters. even when it is possible to successfully culture these organisms, limited phenotypic differentiation among taxa and cyclomorphosis  confound accurate taxonomy. this lack of consistent morphological information and the extreme abundance of meiofaunal organisms makes identification of rare, or even common, cryptic taxa a large and unwieldy task  <cit>  as only painstaking microscopy can be used to identify synapomorphies.

environmental sequencing is valuable for performing large-scale surveys of the diversity of organisms that cannot be cultured or grown in the laboratory or when species are difficult to distinguish using phenotypic characters. these issues argue for culture independent molecular surveys of meiofaunal diversity in natural ecosystems. microbiologists have faced many of the same problems and solved them by turning to conserved dna sequences as a means of describing communities  <cit> . instead of isolating and culturing individuals, communities are characterized by extracting all of the dna in a particular sample , amplifying a specific gene using pcr, cloning individual pcr products, and then sequencing individual clones. this environmental dna approach has revolutionized microbiology. for example, these techniques have been successfully used to provide new insights into fungi  <cit> , novel chloroflexi  <cit> , abundance and distribution of psychrobacter and exiguobacterium  <cit>  and have been used to provide information about the structure and function of alpine and arctic soil microbial communities  <cit> .

our survey focuses on the 18s rrna gene, commonly used for phylogenetic inference of eukaryotes due to its highly conserved sequence and ability to resolve relatively deep nodes. this is the first description of the general utility of environmental dna sequencing approaches for characterizing difficult to study ecological communities of eutardigrades and bdelloid rotifers.

environmental sequencing as described here differs from other molecular survey methods  <cit>  in that there is no need to pre-isolate the bdelloid rotifers or eutardigrades of interest from soil  before amplifying their dna. the successful development of clade-specific 18s ssu primers has shown to be effective when surveying the diversity of targeted groups of organisms. for example, clade specific 18s ssu primers have been used to describe soil metazoans <cit>  and reveal the hidden diversity and biogeographic endemism of kinetoplastids   <cit> .

the use of 18s rdna allows for sequences to be combined into already existing 18s and 16s rdna databases, including those being developed by microbial ecologists through their large scale molecular surveys as referred to above. here we describe the utility of screening for bdelloid rotifer and eutardigrade diversity in two very distinct sample sites with targeted 18s primers: the high-elevation sites located within the niwot ridge long term ecological research  site in the colorado rockies, and the low-elevation sites located within the calhoun experimental forest in south carolina.

RESULTS
we developed two forward primers for taxon specific amplification of eutardigrades and bdelloid rotifers. these primers were used in combination with a universal reverse 18s rdna primer to specifically characterize the diversity of these two groups from several environments. pcr, blast and phylogenetic analysis confirmed that each set of primers amplifies the targeted groups with fidelity and specificity . we have observed many invertebrates within the soils prior to dna extraction and amplification, including mites, nematodes, and insects; none of these were observed within the sequencing data produced using the specific primers in this study. thus, our primers are shown to be specific to the targeted groups of organisms. the closest known sequences or clades to the environmental sequences are noted below. note that we do not infer that the environmental sequences are of the same species or genera to those closest to them.

tardigrada
out of  <dig>  nucleotide positions there were  <dig> variable sites, of which  <dig> were phylogenetically informative, comprising  <dig> unique phylotypes. phylogenetic analysis clearly separates the two main groups of tardigrades: the heterotardigrada and the eutardigrada . many of the environmental sequences from the high-elevation talus sites clustered into distinct clades, suggesting each clade may comprise a separate species. eutardigrade sequences from soils near the arikiree glacier  grouped within the macrobiotoidea and hypsibiodea groups. those within the macrobiotidea are most closely related to richtersius coronifer, a cosmopolitan species sampled from high elevation and arctic habitats  <cit> . the agl sequences that grouped within the hypsibiodea are related to those of the englacial dominating hypsibius genus. these hypsibius sequences from the agl site are nearby and grouped with the two talus sites .

the calhoun hardwood site sequences cluster closest to isohypsibius papillifer typically found in europe, asia, australia, & south america  <cit> . the genus isohypsibius is composed of species that are widespread and has been documented circumglobally as well  <cit> , .

the calhoun grassland sequences cluster basally with the arikiree and talus sites within the hypsibius group, noted as "acutuncus/hypsibius" in contrast to another group labeled "acutuncus/calohypsibius" in figure  <dig>  .

bdelloidea
out of  <dig> sites  <dig> were variable and  <dig> where phylogenetically informative. the environmentally obtained sequences totaled  <dig> unique phylotypes . phylogenetic analysis clearly separates all of the main clades of rotifers: seisonidea, monogononta and bdelloidea . all of the environmental sequences we sampled grouped within the bdelloidea. we also discovered three relatively diverse clades. the first is dominated by niwot ridge sequences . one of the clades within clade a  is mainly dominated by sequence types from the t1t <dig> site. the second clade  is dominated by those sequences from the calhoun sites. what is interesting here is that the most derived cluster within clade b contains uncultured sequences from japan  along with sequences from a high elevation site in socompa, south america   <cit> .

the final main group of sequences, clade c, contains sequences from several locales, but mostly those from the agl site. again, like in sub b, we observe uncultured sequence data from japan  clustering with a sequence from socompa.

the lack of 18s rdna sequence information in online data bases , makes the identification of environmentally obtained sequences even more difficult.

discussion
the development of clade-specific primers that allows characterization of eutardigrade and bdelloid rotifer communities from environmental samples should greatly increase our ability to discern the community diversity of these taxa in environmental samples. moreover, the rdna sequence data can be directly stored  and compared with other surveys that attempt to characterize invertebrate community composition  <cit> .

we anticipate that environmental dna surveys using clade-specific primers, like those we have developed, will be used to complement more directed studies that cultivate individual micro-eukaryotes as a means of more fully describing the diversity of ecological communities. we have yet to assess whether isolation of individuals and environmental dna surveys yield different estimates of community composition, as is the case for surveys of bacteria  and bdelloid rotifers  <cit> .

environmental sequencing as shown here differs from other molecular survey methods  <cit>  in that there is no need to pre-isolate the organisms of interest from soil , in order to amplify their dna. here, we simply extract total cellular dna from all organisms in the soil and use targeted primers for the group of interest. this allows for a single dna extraction prep instead of one dna extraction prep for each targeted organism of interest.

eutardigrada
although there are too few data to make robust biological inferences, several results are noteworthy. we found sequences from the highest elevation site in colorado  that grouped together with r. coronifer, a cosmopolitan morpho-species known to exist in high mountain and arctic habitats which is also known to survive extreme desiccation and temperatures down to -196°c  <cit> . additionally, several sequences from the calhoun hardwood forest were very similar to isohypsibius papillifer, a widespread european species. moreover, the genus isohypsibius is ubiquitous, distributed from north america, northern europe, and asia, all the way to antarctica.

interestingly, the sequences from the agl site seem to have the most distant set of sequences compared to the other sites. one set of sequences is from within the macrobiotidae, richtersius group and the other from the hypsibiodea, hypsibius group. this is probably due to the longer duration of moist and wet soils that allows for a greater diversity of eutardigrade groups.

it is not too suprising that the majority of the eutardigrade sequences amplified from the talus and glacier sites are dominated by hypsibius-related sequences. the hypsibidae are known to dominate englacial habitats and are the dominate family of polar and cryoconite tardigrades. hypsibius species are hydrophilic and are composed of bacteriophagous and/or algivorous feeding types. these biological factors aid in the colonization of nunatuks and glacial habitats .

however, several sequences from the macrobiotidae were also found within the glacial habitat of the agl site. macrobiotidae are traditionally considered cosmopolitan occurring in many habitats, including those that are periodically frozen  <cit> . the agl sequences cluster closest to the known sequences of richtersius sp. . richtersius have been the focus of many anhydrobiosis studies and have shown significant improvements in desiccation survival when many individuals aggregate together during anhydrobiosis  <cit> . this could lead to positive density dependence and even allow these animals to achieve greater monopolization  to local habitats that encounter extreme desiccation events like the high elevation agl and talus sites. however, aggregation can create problems with environmental sequencing strategies like the one proposed here. if aggregation in the wild occurs within other eutardigrade groups then environmental sequencing may lead to amplification of only those extremely high-abundant clusters of animals.

bdelloidea
in contrast to the tardigrades, there was less agreement of support between the two different phylogenetic reconstruction methods of bayesian and parsimony analysis for bdelloid rotifers. it was not possible to identify what bdelloids the environmental sequences were related to due to lack of abundant reference sequences. however, while it was possible to make some general statements about the bdelloid communities at the listed sample sites, the lack of resolution of 18s rdna compared to 28s rdna  <cit>  makes it difficult to delineate the more recent clades of bdelloidea . in fact, a similar level of poor resolution of bdelloids is also seen from phylogenies produced via cytochrome oxidase subunit  <dig> sequence data, wherein the early nodes are mostly saturated with polytomies . better resolution of this group at the tips of the phylogeny is often seen regardless of the phylogenetic reconstruction method chosen.

it is interesting that sequences from socompa  <cit>  cluster with the calhoun sequences as opposed to other high elevation sites like the dry talus, in niwot ridge. although socompa is a very high elevation site , it is most likely similar in its microhabitat to the calhoun sites, where there is greater moisture compared to the dry talus. the socompa site is characterized as a fumerole environment  <cit> . typically fumaroles are areas where steam and volcanic gases vent out of the earth's crust due to the degassing of magma and/or geothermal heating of shallow ground water. this particular fumerole site is weakly active, creating an environment in which communities of mosses and liverworts are sustained by warm water vapor. the potentially similar microhabitats may be the reason for finding such similar sequence types in very different locales.

bdelloid rotifers in particular show evidence for geographic structure among clades. whether this apparent pattern reflects environmental filtering, priority effects , or some other process remains to be seen. nonetheless, the data presented here support the contention of  <cit> , in which instances of endemism are seen , with a few phylogenetic clusters of widespread bdelloids sampled from very different locales . it may be that harsher conditions in which there are very ephemeral moments of soil moisture creates higher levels of endemism of bdelloids, whereas environments in which soil moisture is sustained for longer periods of time allow for increased chances of long distance dispersal to suitable habitats and persistence. the location of the socompa fumerole sites in the phylogeny  and its high similarity to sequences from japan and within the calhoun sites  may be an indication of the latter point. one caveat here is that the 18s rdna sequences are more conserved than their cytochrome oxidase subunit  <dig> counterparts  <cit>  preserving more ancient than contemporary relatedness.

CONCLUSIONS
large-scale surveys of rotifer and tardigrade diversity using traditional approaches makes for a large and unwieldy set of tasks .

environmental sequencing is valuable for performing large-scale surveys of the diversity of organisms that cannot be cultured or grown in the laboratory or in which species are difficult to distinguish using phenotypic characters. the dna sequences obtained from non-cultured based methods can be identified post-hoc  as closely related sequences are obtained from morphologically identified conspecifics. our environmental sequence based approach, which does not require culturing or isolation of animals from soils, provides a rapid and large-scale screening for the presence, absence and diversity of bdelloidea and eutardigrada in a variety of soils.

we have shown that targeted amplification of eutardigrades and bdelloid rotifers are possible from a range of soil types. this sequence data can be used to quickly assess the peculiar biogeography  <cit>  and genetic diversity of soil samples, more often informing us of dominate groups within each sample.

it should also be emphasized that environmental sequencing strategies like this are not intended to replace, but instead complement ongoing morphological work, explore the possible effects of heterogeneity within individuals, and the effect of this variation on phylogenetic analysis  <cit> . this highlights the need for morphological taxonomists and molecular ecologists to work together in order to make environmental sequencing methods, like the one proposed here, more robust. in particular, studies such as these are most empowered by the cataloging of sequence data from vouchered specimens.

