BACKGROUND
during the past century, the presence of cancer in tissues has been diagnosed on the basis of histopathology  <cit> . the major limitation of this approach is that it cannot achieve high accuracy of prediction in clinical practice. therefore, there has been a persistent need to identify robust cancer signatures which could complement conventional histopathologic evaluation to increase the accuracy of cancer detection  <cit> . more recently, dna microarrays have been developed as a means to simultaneously measure the transcript abundance  of mrna for thousands of genes. this technology provides a potentially powerful tool for identifying molecular signatures capable of accurately detecting the presence of cancer.

many studies have used dna microarrays to identify cancer type-specific gene expression signatures which can discriminate certain types of cancer from normal tissues  <cit> . the diversity of these signatures makes it difficult to distinguish the genes that play a crucial role in oncogenic processes from those that are spuriously differentially expressed and therefore irrelevant to the oncogenic processes. since all cancer cells share two common characteristics, uncontrollable growth and local tissue invasion or metastasis, it is of high importance to identify a universal cancer type-independent signature to better understand cancer pathogenesis and ultimately to improve therapeutics. after such a signature is identified, it could be used as a component of genomic-based clinical diagnostic tools for cancer patients to determine the presence of cancer cells in tissues.

recently, several studies used meta-analysis methods to identify genes differentially expressed across multiple cancer types  <cit> . in the study of rhodes et al.  <cit> ,  <dig> published cancer microarray data sets, spanning  <dig> distinct cancer types, were collected and analyzed in an effort to identify a cancer type-independent transcriptional signature of neoplastic transformation. a statistical meta-analysis method, termed comparative meta-profiling, was proposed to compare and assess the intersection of many cancer type-dependent signatures, the goal being to identify a common cancer meta-signature. the comparative meta-profiling method works as follows. first, an overexpression direction  and significant threshold are set to define differential gene expression signatures from a set of cancer versus normal studies . next, genes are sorted by the number of signatures in which they are present. finally, a meta-signature is defined as those genes appearing in a given number of signatures  <cit> , where the cutoff is determined by a random simulation. rhodes et al used this method to identify a set of  <dig> genes that are universally activated in most cancer types relative to corresponding normal tissues.

one limitation of meta-analysis of microarray data is that small sample sizes typical of individual studies, coupled with variation due to differences in study protocols, inevitably degrades the results of meta-analysis. an additional and major limitation of the comparative meta-profiling method is that those genes which are common to the various array platforms used in these studies are highly overrepresented in the identified meta-signature. this way of defining a meta-signature by gene enrichment in signatures implies that many potentially informative genes which are not common to the various array platforms used in these studies may be overlooked due to the intrinsic properties of this method. as a specific example, the relationship between the numbers of total genes on two major affymetrix microarray platforms used in the study of rhodes et al. and the corresponding numbers of genes included in the reported common cancer meta-signature is shown in the venn diagram of figure  <dig>  among the  <dig> meta-signature genes,  <dig> genes are on one or both of these two microarray platforms and the other eight genes come from other microarray platforms. almost all of the  <dig> meta-signature genes come from the set of  <dig> genes which are common across the two microarray platforms employed in this study.

in our previous work, we proposed a novel, simple method, referred to as the top-scoring pair  classifier, to integrate inter-study microarray data and validated the method on prostate cancer data  <cit> . it has also been applied recently to differentiating between gastrointestinal stromal tumors and leiomyosarcomas  <cit> . the tsp method is based only on the ranks of the expression values within a profile and hence there is no need to perform data normalization and transformation before data integration because rankings are invariant to nearly all types of preprocessing. further, the tsp method identifies only a pair of genes as a gene signature and the decision rule is based simply on comparing their expression values. this approach to data integration was validated on prostate cancer data  <cit> , resulting in a powerful two-gene diagnostic classifier. here, we extend this method to predict distant metastases in breast cancer, and attempt to overcome the limitations of previous study-specific methods and meta-analyses.

here, we present a generalization of this method, termed top-scoring pair of groups , which preserves the basic properties of the tsp classifier, namely invariance to normalization and comparison-based rules, but incorporates more genes into the decision-making. we apply this generalization to identify a cancer type-independent signature by integrating microarray data from different cancer studies across almost all major human cancer types. this overcomes the limitations of previous meta-analyses by integrating large-scale microarray data generated using the same microarray platform, resulting in one signature per platform  and effectively increasing sample size. integrating microarray data from the same platform can guarantee that all the genes on the platform will be included in the analysis, therefore avoiding losing any potential signature genes. moreover, unlike the approach in  <cit> , which requires cross-validation for decision-making, and hence an ensemble of new samples for testing the predictive power of the common signature, the tspg method provides a classifier in the standard sense of a prediction rule which can be applied to label a single new sample.

by combining the tspg method and a repeated random sampling strategy, a common cancer signature, which consists of  <dig> distinct genes, is identified from the integrated microarray data. the tspg classifier, which discriminates cancer from normal samples, is built from the signature and validated on both the training data and independent cancer microarray data. upon further validation on large-scale independent data, the signature may be used to develop a novel cancer diagnostic tool and provide new insights regarding the mechanism of cancer.

RESULTS
data collection
microarray data sets were obtained from public gene expression data repositories, including gene expression omnibus  <cit> , oncomine  <cit>  and supporting web sites identified from the published literature. in particular, we focused on analysis of human cancer gene expression data obtained using the affymetrix hugenefl, hg-u95a and hg-u133a microarray platforms. of these collected data,  <dig> individual data sets generated from hugenefl arrays  and hg-u95a arrays  were used as training data and six individual data sets from hg-u133a arrays  were used as independent test data. in total,  <dig> microarray experiments from  <dig> independent studies across almost all human cancer types were used in this analysis. studies are named using the same convention as in  <cit> : firstauthor_tissue .

common cancer signature
we directly merge  <dig>  cancer/normal microarray data sets generated from affymetrix hugenefl  , using the common  <dig>  probe sets among all these data sets to form an integrated training data set with  <dig>  samples. these data sets span  <dig> tissue types including lung, breast, bladder, ovarian, pancreas, brain, prostate, uterus, colon, blood, kidney, uvula, salivary gland, thyroid gland, liver, skin, gastric tissue, myometrium, bone marrow, adrenal cortex and gastroesophagus. for each of the two integrated data sets, we randomly select s% = 90% of the total samples from the integrated data set and then apply the tspg algorithm to the selected data to construct two groups, g <dig> and g <dig>  of genes. after the experiment is repeated  <dig> times, the appearance frequency for each gene which is present in any of the  <dig> g1's  is calculated. for the default frequency threshold f = 80%, the appearance frequency of  <dig> genes  from the hugenefl integrated data set and  <dig> genes  from the hg-u95a integrated data set exceeds f . there are three genes  which are selected from both integrated data sets. therefore, a common cancer signature, which consists of the  <dig> genes  obtained from the two integrated data sets, is identified from the integrated microarray data. for f = 90% and 70% the common cancer signatures consist of slightly different genes.  for the rest of this paper, we will focus on the 46-gene common cancer signature corresponding to f = 80%.

* these genes were also identified as common cancer signature genes in rhode et al.  <cit> .

validation of the common cancer signature on the training data
to validate the reliability and robustness of the common cancer signature, the tspg classifier, which predicts cancer vs. normal status, is built based on all the signature genes, with  <dig> genes in g <dig> and  <dig> genes in g <dig> as indicated above. the classification rule for the tspg classifier is that if the average relative rank of the genes in g <dig> is less than that of the genes in g <dig>  a test sample is classified as normal; otherwise it is classified as cancer. the expression values of the  <dig> signature genes are illustrated in figure  <dig> using some of the training data, including stearman_lung, frierson_salivary, giordano_adrenal and gutmann_brain data sets. distinct patterns of expression values of the genes in g <dig> and g <dig> can be observed for normal and cancer samples. the classifier is then used to assess the prediction accuracy of the signature on the training data sets spanning a wide range of cancer types. for the  <dig> individual data sets which have been integrated and used to identify the signature, the classification accuracy and the p-values of the fisher's exact test are shown in table  <dig>  the classifier achieves high accuracy  on  <dig> of  <dig> data sets and the overall accuracy is about 86%. from the p-values of the fisher's exact test, we learn that the classification is significant  on  <dig> of  <dig> data sets. there is no p-value available for four data sets which only have samples from one class. the classifier is both significant  and accurate  on  <dig> of  <dig> data sets. the results suggest that we have identified a common cancer signature for most, if not all, human cancer types.

* for the data sets with samples from only one class, no p-value is available.

validation of the common cancer signature on independent test data
to further validate the generality and robustness of the common cancer signature, the tspg classifier built based on the signature is tested on six independent test data sets generated from a different generation of affymetrix microarray platforms, hg-u133a . the six independent data sets represent six different human cancer types, one of which is not represented in the training data sets . the classification accuracy and statistical significance  of the common cancer signature are listed in table  <dig>  the signature significantly  discriminates cancer from normal samples with very high accuracy  on four of the six data sets, including the new cancer type data set. on the other two data sets, the signature achieves much higher accuracy  than that of coin-flipping but only marginally significant . the independent test results have validated that the signature is common to a wide range of cancer types and may be used to detect the presence of cancer cells in tissues.

comparison with the rhodes signature
we compare our common cancer signature to the one for meta-signature of neoplastic transformation reported in  <cit> . it is not surprising that there is a small overlap between the two signatures with four common genes . on the one hand, this implies that both studies have identified some molecular features common to all cancer types. on the other hand, the difference between the two signatures may result from the two major differences between the two methods. first, the comparative meta-profiling method overlooks a large number of potential signature genes due to its intrinsic properties whereas our method includes all possible genes in the analysis. second, the analysis in  <cit>  focuses on differentially expressed genes; more specifically, it chooses genes which are over-expressed in one direction . in contrast, our selection criterion is not based on differential expression, but rather on finding pairs of genes whose expression values typically invert from cancer to normal tissues. one consequence is that our signature includes genes over-expressed in both directions, as illustrated in figure  <dig>  as well as genes which are not differentially expressed.

we then compare the classification performance of the two signatures on the same independent test data. results are reported in table  <dig>  in this way the two signatures and corresponding cancer prediction rules are evaluated on completely independent data not involved in learning either signature. significantly, the approach in rhodes  <cit>  does not provide a well-defined classifier corresponding to the signature; important aspects of the classifier must be learned on the test data, producing an upwardly-biased estimate of classification accuracy.  nonetheless, the tspg classifier based on our common signature out-performs the classifier based on the rhode signature  <cit>  on three of the six independent test data sets and achieves the same accuracy on the other three data sets. unlike the rhodes classifier, the tspg classifier is completely determined by the signature itself and was applied sample-by-sample to the test data; no learning on the test data was involved.

discussion
the advent of dna microarray has had a tremendous impact on cancer research. this technology provides a novel molecular tool, complementary to histopathologic examination, to assess the presence of cancer cells in patient tissues. the rapid accumulation of cancer microarray data makes it possible to integrate a large amount of microarray gene expression data across a wide range of cancer types to identify a universal cancer signature to detect cancer cells, regardless of the tissue from which the cancer is derived. in this study, by integrating microarray data and applying the tspg method combined with repeated random sampling, we have identified a robust cancer gene expression signature common to almost all major human cancer types. the discriminative power of the signature has been validated on both data sets involved in identifying the signature and independent test data sets. the tspg classifier built from the signature, which simply compares the average relative ranks of two groups of genes, achieves high accuracy on most of the training and test data sets with statistical significance. although the signature has the potential to be developed as a robust and objective clinical diagnostic test for cancer, larger number of samples will be required to further refine and validate it.

an intriguing advantage of inter-study cancer microarray data integration is that it increases the statistical power to capture essential, cancer type-independent gene expression features, which might be masked by specific features of individual cancer types and small sample sizes of individual data sets. in this sense, the signature is reliable and robust to variations in individual cancer data sets. the universal cancer signature described here may play a crucial role in oncogenic processes and be used to improve our understanding of cancer pathogenesis and ultimately design improved anticancer treatments. it also suggests the possible existence of therapeutic targets common to different cancer types.

we have observed that the signature seems to perform better for certain tissue types, such as lung, skin, and soft tissue cancer. there are many possible reasons to cause the different performance of the signature on different cancer types. these reasons may include differences in sample composition and preparation, experimental protocols, rna quality, proportion of cancer cells in a tissue, and microarray quality. in addition, some cancer types might be easier to detect than other cancer types.

it is not surprising that many of the signature genes  have been reported to be associated with specific types of cancer in the literature and some other genes  have been previously found to be associated with a variety of distinct human cancer types. as defined by gene ontology consortium, the common signature genes are involved in cell cycle , regulation of transcription , dna metabolism , cellular biosynthesis , cellular protein metabolism  and other important biological processes, such as cell organization and cell adhesion. these findings are consistent with the fact that all cancer types share the common features of uncontrollable cell growth and local tissue invasion, and therefore the genes that are essential to these cellular processes are possible signature genes among almost all cancer types.

one limitation of our proposed method for microarray data integration is that it can only directly integrate microarray data generated from the same standard microarray platforms. even with this limitation, we still obtain a large number of samples  on each of the two microarray platforms used in this study. with the rapid increase of available microarray data and the standardization of microarray technologies, the mass of microarray data generated from the same platforms will continue to grow, which will make our method become increasingly useful.

it is quite interesting that a similar study on common cancer biomarkers was published very recently  <cit> . the uniqueness of the study is that the researchers have generated microarray data across various cancer types using the same spotted cdna microarray, and therefore no data integration is needed. by applying a gene pairing method to a training set with  <dig> samples of various normal and cancer tissues, a subset of  <dig> genes identified as common cancer biomarkers with high predictive power  in segregating cancer from normal samples. two of the  <dig> genes, pon <dig> and sox <dig>  have also been identified in our common cancer signature. the major limitation of the study is that the cancer samples are dominated by only a few cancer types . therefore, the biomarkers identified in the study may not really be common to a broad range of cancer types. in our study, motivated by the work of rhodes et al., we collected a broader range of microarray gene expression data for about  <dig> cancer types and each of them is reasonably represented in the training data sets. the signature identified in our study has been validated on independent data sets of various cancer types, including one cancer type which is not represented in the training data sets. 

finally, we have also compared our classifier with the method in rhodes et al. on the same test sets; in this way the two signatures and corresponding cancer prediction rules are evaluated on completely independent data not involved in learning either signature. in classifying a test sample, the rhodes classifier must use all the other samples in the same test set to compute class averages; hence cross-validation is necessary. in contrast, our classifier operates in the conventional way, classifying each sample independently of all others. despite this source of bias in the rhodes classifier, our method still achieves higher overall accuracy.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, by combining large-scale microarray data, a robust common cancer signature has been identified. upon more large-scale validation, it could be developed as a component of genomic-based clinical diagnostic tools for cancer patients. further studies of the signature might also improve our understanding of cancer and identify new drug targets.

