BACKGROUND
because of consumers' demands, the emphasis of modern day porcine breeding programmes and selection criteria is gradually shifting towards a higher meat quality, instead of the more classical focus of just selecting for a lean carcass and high growth rate  <cit> . two strongly genetically determined factors influencing meat quality are the amount of intramuscular fat  and muscle fibre type composition  <cit> . the first factor has a large impact on the taste of the meat and its deposition is strongly influenced by the surrounding muscle  <cit> . peri- and post-mortem biochemical processes in muscle and meat are strongly influenced by muscle fibre type composition and in their turn influence meat tenderness  <cit> . the fibre type composition depends on the location and use of a muscle. muscles used for posture are more oxidative, while more active muscles contain more glycolytic fibres  <cit> . in general, meat quality increases if more oxidative fibres and less glycolytic fibres are present, but the influence of fat distribution and fibre type composition on meat quality also varies between different breeds  <cit> .

unfortunately the selection of leaner pigs was often accompanied by a decrease in imf and a lower percentage of oxidative fibres, resulting in a decrease of meat quality  <cit> . to understand the complex relationship between all the traits affecting meat quality, it is important to trace the responsible genes. one particularly interesting gene in this regard is the peroxisome proliferative activated receptor γ coactivator 1α , a coactivator that influences the expression of many genes through a whole range of nuclear hormone receptors and other transcription factors, like the peroxisome proliferative activated receptors , nuclear respiratory factors and the thyroid hormone receptor  <cit> . ppargc1a plays an important role in adipogenesis and adipocyte differentiation  <cit> , mitochondrial biogenesis and respiration  <cit> , and hepatic gluconeogenesis  <cit> . this means that the gene is involved in adaptive thermogenesis, fat metabolism and energy homeostasis. ppargc1a can be induced by cold and exercise, it has been proven to function as a natural protection against obesity in brown fat of mice by producing heat and it is especially expressed in tissues with a high energy demand, like muscle and brown fat  <cit> . the expression is higher in muscles that contain more oxidative fibres and it has been shown that ppargc1a is an important factor in determining fibre type in that it enhances the number of oxidative muscle fibres  <cit> . also, other candidate genes for meat quality like glucose transporter  <dig>  are regulated by ppargc1a, making it an even more interesting gene  <cit> . all these functions and the fact that already a quantitative trait locus for leaf fat weight in the pig has been located in the chromosomal region to which ppargc1a was mapped  <cit> , illustrate that ppargc1a is a very promising candidate gene with regard to meat quality.

in humans, ppargc1a has been thoroughly investigated because of its presumed role in the obesity pandemic and correlated diseases like type ii diabetes mellitus and cardiovascular complications, especially in search of possible future therapies  <cit> . in the pig however, very little is known about ppargc1a although it has a great economic potential and, because of the strong genetical resemblance between pig and man, the information could be useful in human research as well  <cit> . jacobs et al.  <cit>  already described the porcine ppargc1a coding sequence and discovered several polymorphisms, of which at least one was significantly associated with backfat.

to study mrna expression levels, one needs a set of carefully selected and validated reference genes  for normalization purposes. in the pig however, virtually no information is available on reference genes. in this study, we therefore designed assays to measure the mrna expression levels of several candidate reference genes, followed by determination of their expression stability and suitability for normalization purposes in the tissues of interest. the first aim of this study was to develop a set of reference genes that can be used for normalizing real-time rt-pcr mrna expression data from backfat and longissimus dorsi muscle of the pig. these two tissues comprise an important part of the carcass and have quite opposite demands regarding fat content, as explained above. if the regulation of ppargc1a expression proves to be different in these tissues, unravelling the mechanism can possibly enable future selection towards one feature without influencing the other. therefore the second aim of our study was to assess whether ppargc1a mrna expression differs between backfat and several longissimus dorsi muscle locations.

RESULTS
reference gene expression and selection
the cycle threshold value  range of the reference genes is shown in figure  <dig> and demonstrates that their expression levels can vary considerably. backfat samples sometimes showed a minimal sdha mrna expression , but for most of these samples no sdha could be detected in our experimental setup. the expression pattern of rpl13a varied between animals: either there was expression in all  <dig> tissue samples of the same animal, or no ct-values could be measured, or expression could only be detected in muscle samples but not in fat. for the other  <dig> reference genes, ct-values were detected in all  <dig> tissue types and their raw data were analyzed using the genorm algorithm  <cit> . the stepwise exclusion of the reference gene with the least stable expression showed that actb and top2b were the most stably expressed reference genes in the analyzed samples . of note, the conventionally used reference gene gapdh proved to be quite unstable in our tissue samples, further underscoring the need for reference gene evaluation. genorm indicated that normalization using a set of the  <dig> most stably expressed reference genes  would provide reliable results for mrna expression analysis in backfat and longissimus dorsi muscle.

ppargc1a expression
the same analysis was performed on the data obtained from the larger independent group of  <dig> pigs and showed exactly the same significant differences in ppargc1a expression .

discussion
real-time rt-pcr is a sensitive and accurate technique for measuring gene expression  <cit> , but to be able to compare mrna expression across samples, it is essential to correct for variables such as differences in the amount of starting material in the reaction and enzyme efficiency. this normalization can be performed by using internal reference genes. contrary to original expectations, it has been proven that their expression level can vary extensively with tissue type and  conditions, and that their use needs to be validated for each type of tissue and every experimental setup  <cit> . furthermore vandesompele et al.  <cit>  showed that more than one reference gene should be used for accurate normalization of expression data.

in the pig however, very little is known about the expression of reference genes, certainly in combination with real-time rt-pcr. analysis of the expression stability of the  <dig> chosen reference genes showed that rpl13a and sdha cannot be used for normalization of longissimus dorsi and backfat data. the expression of rpl13a, a component of the 60s ribosomal subunit, varied per animal. as far as we know, this is the first time such an expression pattern is described for this reference gene, and could reflect a large difference in basic transcriptional activity depending on the animal and/or tissue used. because of the importance of a correct protein synthesis mechanism, it is likely that for the samples in which no rpl13a was detected, its function was  taken over by another ribosomal protein  <cit> , or that an alternative splice product exists to which the used primer could not anneal  <cit> . another possible explanation for this variability is technical variation, because the assay could have been at the limit of its sensitivity. sdha, an enzyme involved in energy production   <cit> , could not be detected in backfat samples, except for a very weak signal in a few pigs. this could indicate sdha is present in much lower concentrations in backfat compared to longissimus dorsi muscle, which agrees with one of the main functions of white adipose tissue, storing energy. but from the data presented here no definitive conclusions can be drawn regarding the cause of this variability. 

as mentioned before, expression results are considerably more reliable if they are normalized using the geometric mean of multiple reference genes  <cit> . genorm analysis indicated that addition of the 3rd reference gene to the normalization factor had the largest impact on reducing variability. though variability further decreased by including a 4th and 5th gene, the decrease is minimal and does not outweigh the practical considerations accompanying the inclusion of more genes. therefore, the use of the geometric mean of the  <dig> most stably expressed reference genes  provides reliable results for backfat and longissimus dorsi mrna expression comparison in the pig.

although it has been investigated which tissues express ppargc1a and what the effects of sequence polymorphisms are  <cit> , little is known in the pig about its relative mrna expression when comparing tissues to one another. because this knowledge is essential in researching differences in ppargc1a regulation in view of selection for improved meat quality, we compared its mrna expression in  <dig> economically important tissue types. our results not only clearly indicate that the ppargc1a mrna expression is significantly higher in longissimus dorsi muscle than in backfat , but also that its expression is significantly higher in the most cranial of the  <dig> muscle samples . the pcr efficiencies of the standard curves indicated that the lower mrna expression of ppargc1a in backfat was not due to inhibition. nevertheless, if there would be any inhibition present, this should be corrected for by normalization. these results correspond with findings in humans where ppargc1a mrna expression in vastus lateralis muscle was clearly higher than in subcutaneous fat  <cit> , and are similar to studies in the pig on the mrna expression of pparγ  which showed variation between visceral and subcutaneous fat  <cit> . in a study on the effect of exercise on ppargc1a protein expression in rats, differences were not only found between various skeletal muscles, but also basal protein expression in a control group differed between the more oxidative and the more glycolytic part of the gastrocnemius muscle  <cit> . keeping this in mind, a possible explanation for the higher mrna expression in the most cranial longissimus dorsi sample could be that because of its location, it has other energy demands and fibre type composition compared to more caudal parts of the muscle. our findings could indicate a tissue and location specific regulation of ppargc1a expression correlating with the functions of ppargc1a in longissimus dorsi muscle and backfat  <cit> . but on the other hand mrna expression differences do not necessarily translate into protein expression differences  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the data from this study not only present a newly developed set of reference genes for normalization of mrna expression data from porcine backfat and longissimus dorsi muscle, but also prove that significant differences exist in ppargc1a mrna expression between and within  these economically important tissues, providing a basis for possible selection towards improved meat quality while maintaining a lean carcass.

