BACKGROUND
the understanding of the determinants of molecular recognition between proteins and small molecules is still an elusive goal in structural bioinformatics. different proteins bind their cognate ligands with different degrees of specificity and such differences have important functional implications in a multitude of biological processes such as drug metabolism <cit> , the immune response <cit>  and many more. understanding the structural grounds of these differences is therefore of paramount importance for both the precise and complete functional annotation of proteins and for the development of selective and active binders.

the increasing number of protein structures of unknown function determined in structural genomics projects <cit>  has prompted the development of a number of methods aimed at annotating ligand binding sites using structural information only  <cit> . even when proteins belong to well characterised protein families, their ligand binding specificity is not trivial to identify and cannot simply be transferred by homology <cit> .

in order to understand the rules underpinning the interaction of proteins with small ligands, a wealth of information can be derived from the comparative analysis of binding pockets of known structure. such analysis can be performed starting from either the ligand or the protein. in the former case a number of protein pockets that bind a ligand of interest are selected. the ligand moieties are subsequently superimposed in order to identify similarities and differences in the neighbouring protein atoms. this approach reveals some interesting relations  <cit> , but necessarily limits the analysis to pockets that bind ligands with an overall similar structure, since these are used as a reference to guide the superimposition of the binding pockets.

conversely, if the analysis starts from the protein side, two approaches can be conceived. the first possibility is to compare a family of homologous proteins with diverse binding specificities with the aim of correlating binding site variations with the presence or absence of specific chemical groups in the context of similar ligand molecules. indeed detailed structural knowledge of a binding site is routinely used to engineer mutants with altered specificity  <cit> . najmanovich et al. <cit>  investigated the extent to which binding site similarities correlate with small-molecule binding profiles in the sulfotransferase family. they concluded that proteins with similar binding profiles show similarity in their binding site. conversely, given the current state of knowledge about molecular recognition, it is difficult to use binding site similarity to infer the specificity of a protein.

the alternative approach is to mine the protein data bank, looking for binding motifs which are present in evolutionarily unrelated proteins. since such motifs have evolved independently multiple times, they should represent favourable modes of interaction between protein residues and ligand moieties  <cit> . indeed a number of sequence-independent local structural comparison methods have been applied to the analysis of protein binding sites  <cit> . the results of these experiments showed that the similarity of portions of two binding sites can be ascribed to common chemical moieties in the ligand. however none of these analyses did systematically take the structure of the bound ligands into account during the comparison and such observations were made a posteriori by manual inspection. this is indeed the main shortcoming of all the "protein-centric" approaches: in order to assess the functional significance of a structural similarity, the identified motifs have to be analysed to check whether they establish analogous interactions with the chemical groups of the ligand.

here we propose a novel methodology that combines the advantages of both approaches, without being impaired by the above-mentioned limitations. more specifically, we firstly compare the structures of a set of binding pockets to identify regions of local similarity. when one such region is found, we investigate whether the corresponding residues also interact with similar chemical groups in the ligand moiety.

to demonstrate the validity of our approach we performed a novel analysis of all the binding pockets belonging to the structures classified in the structural classification of proteins  database <cit> . we focused our attention on structural motifs shared by proteins belonging to different folds. indeed our approach, which is based on local as opposed to global similarities, is expected to be well tailored to investigate such cases. more than  <dig> structural motifs were identified, each one associated to a specific ligand fragment. some of these motifs occur in more than  <dig> folds.

RESULTS
description of the approach
here we propose a new method to identify structural motifs in protein binding pockets in a ligand-dependent manner. our approach does not require the proteins, or their bound ligands, to be similar. moreover one does not have to make any a priori assumption about the existence of common structures in the binding pockets or the ligands. the procedure comprises two steps. we first identify local structural similarities shared by a set of input structures. following this first step we have a number of binding pockets superimposed in space according to the presence of a shared structural motif. subsequently we analyse the coordinates of the bound ligands looking for the largest common fragment that has a similar position in space.

therefore, by taking into account the structure of both the binding pocket and the ligand, we first identify structural motifs whose functional significance is readily explained by the presence of the interacting ligand fragment. this approach is akin to decomposing a binding pocket in small patches each one interacting with a given chemical group of the ligand.

to demonstrate the usefulness of our approach we performed a comparative analysis of all the binding pockets in the pdb structures classified in scop. we focused especially on the cases which are difficult to analyse with traditional approaches, namely binding sites on proteins with different scop folds involved in binding similar as well as different ligands. it should be emphasised that such cases effectively represent the largest class when one considers all the possible pairs of binding pockets of known structure and have been largely neglected in previous works for lack of an appropriate comparison methodology.

our method exploits the pdb data to its maximum because it enables the pair-wise comparison of structures containing different ligands that interact with different protein folds. in either case what we are looking for are small structural motifs  which are used in multiple and possibly different contexts.

identification of similarities in binding pockets extracted from the pdb
we applied the method to the analysis of the  <dig> pdb structures classified in the scop database. for each ligand we defined a binding pocket made up of all the neighbouring protein residues . the above procedures identified  <dig> binding pockets, mapping to  <dig> different ligands.

the query3d structural comparison algorithm was used to identify local similarities in the dataset of protein binding pockets. since we were only interested in similarities between non-homologous structures, we did not compare with each other binding pockets belonging to proteins assigned to the same sequence cluster .

following this procedure  <dig>  ×  <dig> comparisons were performed which resulted in the identification of  <dig>  ×  <dig> structural matches. to further guarantee that only similarities between non-homologous structures were included in our analysis we also discarded all matches between proteins belonging to the same cath architecture and those belonging to the same scop fold. these steps removed respectively  <dig> and  <dig> matches, bringing the total number to  <dig>  this set of matches involves only non-homologous proteins but is still redundant since the same pair of scop folds can appear multiple times in the results. in order to generate a non-redundant set we grouped together all the matches between the same pair of scop folds and involving the same pair of ligands . this last step produced a list of  <dig> non-redundant structural similarities between non-homologous binding pockets.

after the identification of pair-wise similarities the funclust algorithm was used to search for sets of matches involving residues common to different structures. this last procedure reduced the list of  <dig> motifs present in two different folds to a non-redundant list of  <dig> unique motifs located in a number of different folds . more specifically,  <dig> motifs were found to map to three folds and  <dig> to 4– <dig> folds; a few exceptional cases involve from  <dig> up to  <dig> different folds  .

identification of shared ligand fragments
having identified a set of structural motifs shared by two or more scop folds we analysed the coordinates of the bound ligands looking for the largest common fragment  that has a similar position in space. to this end we devised a computationally efficient procedure to identify the common atoms in a set of superimposed ligands.

the ligands belonging to each binding pocket are first superimposed according to the 3d transformation  used for the protein residues . the algorithm then searches all the possible combinations of fragments  using a recursive depth-first procedure and identifies the one with the highest score. the score is defined  as a trade-off between the size of the fragment and the fact that it should be present in the highest possible number of bound ligands.

for the purpose of this application we were interested more in finding common motifs in proteins of completely different structure than in studying binding site variations in proteins of the same fold. accordingly during the common-fragment identification step we selected only one representative structure for each fold possessing a given motif. this was done by identifying the common ligand fragments in all the possible combination of proteins possessing the motif  and then selecting the combination that gave the fragment with the best score.

it should be noted that this approach of eliminating redundancy a posteriori guarantees to have the best result for the specific problem at hand. the opposite strategy, i.e. choosing one representative per fold at the beginning of the analysis, would have clearly been inferior since this selection would necessarily had to be done on arbitrary grounds .

following this procedure  <dig> of the  <dig> identified structural motifs were found associated to specific ligand fragments , despite a high variability in the structure of the ligand as a whole. in addition to that a lesser number  of motifs were identified on the structure but no common fragment was found in the bound molecules . this last set of motifs was not considered any further. in 86% of the cases the common ligand fragment is associated to more than 60% of the folds possessing the motif, i.e. few binding pockets that have the motif do not share the common ligand fragment . also in 78% of the cases such fragments are quite small, comprising less than 20% of the ligand atoms . overall these figures suggest that the presence of specific residues in a binding pocket can be related to the identity and position of a number of ligand atoms. to further test this hypothesis we devised the following benchmark.

benchmark of the method
we devised a benchmark to test the assumption that underlies our method, i.e. that the presence of specific protein residues implies a discernible preference for certain ligand fragments. we identified a set of non-redundant pairwise structural similarities between binding pockets belonging to proteins of different folds . our aim was to test whether the correspondences we identified on the ligand have a functional significance i.e. whether the ligand fragments that match are effectively those that are close to the residues comprising the structural motif.

each protein structural similarity implies a 3d transformation  of the binding sites and, accordingly, of the bound ligands. using the ligandscout <cit>  software we identified a total of  <dig> pharmacophoric groups  in the  <dig> ligands included in our benchmark dataset. the pharmacophoric features were distributed as follows:  <dig> h-bond acceptors ,  <dig> h-bond donors ,  <dig> h-bond donors or acceptors ,  <dig> negative ionizable areas ,  <dig> positive ionizable areas . we did not take into account aromatic and hydrophobic features because they could not be effectively captured by our local comparison methods. indeed such features are primarily due to the size and shape of the binding pocket and its electrostatic nature . these characteristics of a binding pocket cannot be described by local comparison methods that, by their nature, focus on the 3d position of a small set of residues or chemical groups. we think that such motifs are more suited to the description of hydrogen-bond patterns between the ligand molecule and the protein residues. accordingly we limited our analysis to these pharmacophoric features.

if the correspondences we identify have a functional significance, one would expect the features that match after applying the above-mentioned 3d transformation to be located close to the residues identified in the structural comparison. in other words, the matching pharmacophores must be the ones that interact with the residues involved in the superposition as opposed to another pair of pharmacophoric points, which has no relationship to them. we counted the number of points having at least one other pharmacophore in the superimposed ligand at a distance of less than  <dig>  angstroms. we identified  <dig> pairs  of pharmacophoric points matching this criterion. to correct for the fact that a higher number of ligand atoms is expected as one moves closer to the protein surface we measured the ratio of the number of matching pharmacophores which give similar interactions with the protein atoms to the total number of matching pharmacophores. we found  <dig> compatible and  <dig> non-compatible pairs. we then sorted these couplets of pharmacophores according to their distance from the geometric centroid of the residues comprising the structural match. this sorted list was divided in  <dig> bins, each containing  <dig> pairs. the plot in figure  <dig> shows the fraction of compatible pairs of pharmacophores in each bin as a function of their average distance from the residues identified in the structural match. there is a clear trend for similar pharmacophores in the ligands to be located close to the structural motif. moreover the proportion of compatible pairs reaches a plateau when the distance exceeds  <dig> angstroms. this shows that the correspondences we identify are functionally significant, because the shared ligand atoms are those that effectively interact with the residues involved in the structural similarity.

manual classification of the identified motifs
the  <dig> motifs with a score greater than  <dig> have been manually analysed in order to categorise the types of ligand fragments recognised. the results of this classification show that the vast majority of the analysed structural motifs are involved in the binding of anions  and nucleotides,  <dig> and  <dig> motifs respectively. other highly represented motifs bind metals,  <dig>  and heme groups,  <dig>  overall these figures confirm that our methodology is sound. most of our results comprise motifs that are already known in the literature as having widespread occurrence in fold space .  <dig> of the identified motifs are listed that recognize important and widespread biological ligands . in particular, hexoses are associated to  <dig> motifs, flavin to  <dig> motifs, nucleobases to  <dig> motifs, riboses to  <dig> motifs and heme to  <dig> motifs. in figure  <dig> a number of significant motifs are described. the motifs have been chosen in order to represent the variability of recognized ligand fragments. for the sake of clarity in the graphical representation small motifs and motifs shared by only two fold have been preferred.

several structural motifs resulting from our analysis were, to the best of our knowledge, previously unknown. we describe here two specific examples. figure 4a displays a structural motif used to bind a sugar by an e. coli d-allose binding protein . this motif is also present in a human glycolipid transfer protein . the figure clearly shows that these two proteins have completely different folds, indeed they also belong to different scop classes . in 1rpj, the ligand binding cleft is located in a hinge region between two domains, composed of a three stranded beta-sheet. asp <dig> and gln <dig>  together with ten other residues, form a network of hydrogen bonds with the hydroxyl groups and ring oxygen atoms of the sugar <cit> . the structure of 1sx <dig> is completely different: in this case the binding site is sandwiched between two layers of alpha helices <cit> . asn <dig> and asp <dig>  similarly to the matching residues gln <dig> and asp <dig> of 1rpj, are hydrogen bonded to the hydroxyl groups of the sugar.

the second example is shown in figure 4b and shows a nucleotide binding motif found in four proteins: a methyltransferase from dengue virus , saccharopine reductase from magnaporthe grisea , riboflavin kinase from schizosaccharomyces pombe  and a group ii chaperonin from thermococcus . these structures all belong to different folds and indeed, as the figure clearly shows, they are completely different despite a remarkable similarity of the binding motifs. in each case there is a conserved interaction between the backbone of a hydrophobic residue  and the n <dig> atom of the nitrogen base. the same leucine of 1n <dig> also interacts with the n <dig> atom while this role is fulfilled by an aspartate residue in 1e5q and by a water molecule in 1l9k.

these two examples show the validity of our approach. by looking at similarities of portions of the binding pockets we were able to identify structural motifs that recognise specific chemical groups in different contexts.

CONCLUSIONS
this work details a novel methodology to study small molecules recognition by protein structures. the main point of our method is that the structures of the binding pocket and the ligand are both considered when comparing a set of proteins. following this approach we identify structural motifs whose functional significance is readily defined by the presence of common fragments in the ligand moiety.

an all-against-all comparison of all the binding pockets in the pdb structures classified in scop resulted in the identification of more than  <dig> structural motifs, each one associated with a definite ligand fragment and identified in at least two different protein folds. the validity of our method is proved by the fact that we are able to identify known structural motifs together with a number of novel ones. some of these motifs have an exceptionally widespread occurrence, being present in more than  <dig> protein folds. in particular we found that the motifs of more widespread occurrence are those involved in binding anions , metals and nucleotides.

in analogy to short linear motifs <cit> , short structural motifs are also subject to severe overprediction, because of the lack of an adequate statistics <cit>  and cannot be efficiently used in a classic 3d pattern matching approach. the advantage of our method lies in the fact that the motifs we identify are associated to specific ligand fragments and therefore their functional significance is readily apparent. once a motif has been identified and validated in this way it can be used to screen a target structure, irrespectively of whether the protein has been crystallized with a ligand or not. in other words the ligand is only needed for defining the motif, which can then be used by itself.

one important outcome of this work is the high-throughput identification of the functional 3d motifs in different protein folds. these data offer the opportunity to discuss the evolutionary origin and history of the 3d motifs. one possibility is that this distribution arose by convergent evolution; in this case, we must stress the somehow unexpected plasticity displayed by the evolutionary unrelated protein folds able to host the 3d motifs. an opposite scenario is also possible, the one with short structured peptides, in relatively limited number, that gave rise to different proteins in a diverging process <cit> . if so, the analysis of the motifs distribution could be used to trace the evolutionary neighbourhood of protein folds now considered unrelated.

moreover, the focus on local features of the protein and ligand can be used to study variations in binding specificity in groups of homologous proteins as such changes are likely guided by specific residue substitutions in the binding site.

