BACKGROUND
one of the biggest challenges facing biologists today is the structural and functional classification and characterization of protein sequences. for example, in humans, the number of proteins for which the structures and functions are unknown makes up more than 40% of the total number of proteins. as a result, over the past couple of decades, extensive research has been done on trying to identify the structures and functions of proteins.

it is well known that the subcellular localization of proteins plays a crucial role in their functions  <cit> . a number of computational approaches have been developed over the years to predict the localization of proteins, including recent works like  <cit> .

initial efforts relied on amino acid compositions  <cit> , the prediction of signal peptides  <cit>  or a combination of both  <cit> . later efforts were targeted at incorporating sequence order information  in the prediction algorithms  <cit> .

there are drawbacks associated with all these methods. for example, prediction algorithms based on amino acid compositions suffer from the drawback that there is a loss of contextual information. as a result, sequences which are completely different in function and localization but that have a very similar amino acid composition would both be predicted as belonging to the same region of the cell. on the other hand, approaches that rely on predicting signal peptides can lead to inaccurate predictions when the signals are missing or only partially included  <cit> .

recent efforts have also focused on the use of physicochemical properties to predict subcellular localization of proteins  <cit> . bhasin et al.  <cit>  created an algorithm which was a hybrid of four different predictive methods. in addition to using amino acid compositions and dipeptide composition information, they also included  <dig> different physicochemical properties of amino acids, averaged over the entire protein. however such a globally averaged value again leads to a loss of contextual information. bickmore et al.  <cit>  studied the characteristics of the primary sequences of different proteins and concluded that motifs and domains are often shared amongst proteins co-localized within the same sub-nuclear compartment. since the structure and hence the function of proteins is dictated by the different interacting physicochemical properties of the amino acids making up the protein, it would stand to reason that co-localized proteins must share some conservation in the different properties.

in this paper, we present a new algorithm called pslip: prediction of subcellular localization in proteins. we use multiple physicochemical properties of amino acids to obtain protein extracellular and subcellular localization predictions. a series of svm based binary classifiers along with a new voting scheme enables us to obtain high prediction accuracies for six different localizations.

RESULTS
we implemented our algorithm on park and kanehisa's dataset . we divided the dataset into clusters based on sequence length and ran n-fold cross validation  tests for each of the protein clusters. the accuracies for each of these clusters were recorded and finally, these cluster accuracies were combined to produce overall accuracies. table  <dig> lists them along with results from park and kanehisa's work  <cit>  and chou and cai's work  <cit> . the protein subcellular localization method used in  <cit>  is based on amino acid compositions. chou and cai's method  <cit>  uses a hybrid algorithm called go-fund-pseaa  <cit>  that combines gene ontology  <cit> , functional domain decomposition  <cit>  and pseudo-amino acid composition  <cit>  for localization prediction.

the results reported by park and kanehisa are obtained after 5-fold cross validation testing. to ensure fairness in comparing results, we ran a 5-fold test on our algorithm. as is apparent from table  <dig>  our method provides good overall accuracy of  <dig> % which is significantly higher than  <dig> % and  <dig> % obtained for the two different cases from park and kanehisa's paper. even more interesting is the fact that the accuracies obtained by park and kanehisa are skewed towards those locations that have the most number of proteins in the dataset, viz., nuclear and plasma membrane. total accuracies can sometimes present a misleading picture about the efficacy of a classification technique. local accuracies, on the other hand can provide a more realistic view of classification efficiencies. we obtained a local accuracy of  <dig> % which is only slightly less than the overall accuracy  of the technique. on the other hand, the local accuracies obtained by park and kanehisa are significantly lower than the corresponding total accuracies 

chou and cai have used the leave one out cross validation  test to assess the performance of their go-fund-pseaa predictor. due to reasons described later, we've used only nf-cv tests. in order to make a reasonable comparison with their results, we did a 10-fold test which provides a good trade-off between bias and variance in test results. as results in table  <dig> show, our algorithm performs as well as the go-fund-pseaa predictor and the obtained accuracy of  <dig> % compares favorably with the  <dig> % accuracy obtained by chou and cai. although chou and cai's work tackles the harder problem of classifying over more subcellular locations than we do, the results do show the promise in the approach of using physicochemical properties for localization prediction.

cross validation experiments are frequently prone to an optimistic bias  <cit> . this occurs because the experimental setup can be such that the choice of the learning machine's parameters becomes dependent on the test data. we've tried to minimize the possible effect of this by using only a small subset  of the available sequences for parameter search, as described later in this paper. as a further experiment, we've also carried out an independent dataset  test using the the eukaryotic sequences dataset developed by reinhardt and hubbard  <cit> . this dataset has also been widely used for subcellular localization studies. instead of doing cross-validation testing on this dataset, we use the svm classifiers generated by our method using park and kanehisa's dataset and predict the subcellular localization of all sequences in the reinhardt and hubbard dataset.

the results of this test, along with the results obtained by others using this dataset, are shown in table  <dig>  the first set of results are from reinhardt and hubbard's work  <cit>  in which a neural network based classifier built upon amino acid composition as input is used. the next set of results are from hua and sun  <cit>  who used an amino acid composition based svm method. esub <dig>  <cit>  uses some sequence information along with amino acid composition for classification using svm. eslpred  <cit>  is a hybrid model combining amino acid composition, dipeptide composition and average physicochemical properties as features for sequences that are then classified by svm.

the results in table  <dig> illustrate the importance of incorporating sequence order information in the classification method. the first two methods ignore order information entirely and we believe that their prediction accuracy suffers as a result of this. furthermore, although the prediction accuracies of esub <dig> and eslpred are better than those of our method, it must be borne in mind that these results are from training and testing on the same dataset while our results are from training the classifiers on a different dataset. it must be noted however that the prediction accuracies for mitochondrial proteins, which are notoriously difficult to predict, are significantly higher using our method than any of the other methods .

the go-fund-pseaa predictor, whose classification performance on the park and kanehisa dataset is shown in table  <dig>  has also been tested on the reinhardt and hubbard dataset. the predictor performs well on this dataset too and yields the highest total accuracy of  <dig> %  <cit>  using the rigorous leave one out cross validation test. however, we could not include these results in table  <dig> since the results in  <cit>  do not provide a subcellular location-wise breakdown of prediction performance.

we have implemented our algorithm for predicting subcellular localizations as a web server which can be accessed at .

CONCLUSIONS
protein subcellular localization has been an active area of research due to the important role it plays in indicating, if not determining, protein function. a number of efforts have previously used amino acid compositions as well as limited sequence order information in order to predict protein localization. in this work, we have developed a novel approach based on using multiple physicochemical properties. in order to use sequence order information, we divide the set of proteins into four different clusters based on their lengths. within each cluster, proteins are mapped onto the lowest length in that cluster .

we then developed multiple binary classifiers for each cluster. for each protein, the output from each binary classifier was encoded as a binary bit sequence to form a meta-dataset. to predict the localization of a query protein, a similar binary sequence was generated based on the outputs of the different binary classifiers and the nearest neighbor to this protein was sought in the meta-dataset.

we obtained significantly higher classification accuracies  for the park and kanehisa dataset. the prediction accuracies obtained for mitochondrial and extracellular proteins in particular are among the highest that have been achieved so far.

the clustered approach was chosen to not only be able to include sequence order information beyond that of di-, tri-and tetra-peptide information but also to mitigate the effects of over-averaging. one of the problems we encountered was the small number of proteins of length greater than  <dig>  as a result, these were averaged down to a base length of  <dig> leading to a drop in accuracies for the  <dig> cluster. obviously larger datasets, with more representative samples in the length range greater than  <dig> might yield greater accuracies.

