BACKGROUND
the management of multi-host infections requires that the true one or two species maintenance host are identified  <cit> , which can be difficult even for well-known diseases such as rabies  <cit> , and will depend on the density of both host species. rabies is a fatal viral disease that affects mammalian carnivores  <cit>  and is a multi-host disease throughout the world  <cit> . in europe, the red fox vulpes vulpes  is considered the major rabies reservoir, but the invasive raccoon dog nyctereutes procyonoides  becomes an important part of the reservoir as its density increases  <cit>  and is the second most common wildlife rabies host in europe. there are other wildlife mammals that were reported to play a minor role in rabies epizootics in europe, such as stone martens martes foina   <cit> . however, the comparably low salivary titre of virus may inhibit longer chains  <cit>  and references therein]. also, small numbers of rabid badgers meles meles  were recorded in areas with epizootic fox rabies  <cit> . the low number of observed cases of rabid badgers is surprising, given the fact that they are highly susceptible to the fox adapted circulating strain of rabies, produce viral titres similar to foxes and suffer from local eradication suggestive of within-species rabies transmission  <cit> . however, the low badger density in eastern europe would impede larger outbreaks in this species  <cit> .

this situation would be different in great britain, where badger densities are much higher than in the rest of europe  <cit> . due to the higher density, badger control measures would very likely be required to manage a rabies outbreak in wildlife in most parts of southern britain  <cit> . the united kingdom is free of terrestrial rabies and introduction of the disease into wildlife is highly unlikely  <cit> , particularly following the recent successful rabies eradication in neighbouring western european countries  <cit> . nevertheless, the particular conditions of high fox and badger densities would fuel a potential outbreak and cause a major epizootic. the british strategy, therefore, is to combat an outbreak as quickly as possible, trying to eliminate the disease before it spreads and establishes in the high-density host reservoir  <cit> . in the face of two hosts , the control measures need to contain the disease in both species because encounters between species and the potential for cross-species infection are common  <cit> . cross infection produces two problems:  the numbers of infected animals and the pool of susceptible animals are increased, which causes more intense outbreaks , and  the different species traits and behaviour increase the variability in the epidemiological dynamics   <cit> .

this simulation study analyzes rabies epidemiology and control in the community of hosts. the analysis is focused on the south of england, because this region has both a high fox density   <cit>  and the highest badger densities recorded   <cit> . it is also a likely entry point of the virus into the uk, due to high human population density.

it was shown previously that rabies could establish in a pool of two host species, even if each of the host populations were too small to maintain rabies  <cit> . in such a case, regular cross-species transmission was essential for rabies spread  <cit> . however, it is unclear how cross-infection of rabies contributes in a community of host species at higher densities. the british situation provides a good basis for a case study, because of its relevance for disease management, but also for the extensive data on the host species populations.

our study assesses emergency strategies in response to a recently detected outbreak . it is often useful to organize emergency control fundamentally different to management of an endemic disease, because of the spatially localized scenario and because of differing control objectives. in particular, the transient dynamics of an emerging disease that involves heterogeneous distributions of hosts requires that temporal and spatial characteristics of control strategies need careful consideration  <cit> . for this reason, we applied a spatially-explicit model specifically tailored to the southern english situation of a rabies outbreak in the fox and badger community. results of this work should give useful indications for the management of other two-host disease outbreaks, including raccoon dog/fox rabies in eastern europe or multi-species canid rabies in africa.

RESULTS
rabies in single species
the fox population in the south of england is a competent rabies host. competent means that the host population can sustain virus transmission such that the disease does not go extinct during the simulated time horizon. in the model, an introduced rabies infection would usually cause an epizootic. figure 1a shows that rabies can be eliminated from the fox population. two campaigns of a 40% cull, or five campaigns of a 40% vaccination, are successful in over 90% of simulations.

badger populations at both medium and high density were also suitable rabies hosts with an epizootic at least as likely in badgers as in foxes . the success of rabies control in badgers at medium density was similar to that in foxes, although less vaccine applications were required to eliminate rabies. in the high density area, the epizootic was much more intense: disease control required four culling campaigns and six vaccine campaigns were insufficient to eliminate rabies.

rabies in host community
as both host populations could sustain rabies, it is not surprising that rabies can spread in the community of species. to control the disease, both species have to be targeted at both medium and high density , as targeting only a single species at best achieved 10% success.

if rabies was controlled in both hosts, control success was comparable to success in that host where rabies was hardest to control. this means that the main effect of cross-transmission was to cause a second self-sustained epizootic, but did not intensify the disease in the other species, nor did it lower control success by re-introducing the virus back into the species in which rabies was eliminated.

the risk of a rabies epizootic was generally slightly lower, if the outbreak occurred initially in foxes. it was found that there was a higher chance  that a small outbreak in foxes would fade out before badgers were cross-infected.

improved control strategy
the previous analysis showed that the risk for development of a wildlife rabies epizootic was high for the south of england. it became clear that at least in high badger density areas, rabies could not be controlled by anti-rabies-vaccination only. further analysis for the medium density showed that vaccination on its own had difficulty in controlling rabies if realistically achievable vaccination rates were assumed, due to the achievable level in badgers: in the best case scenario , the disease was eliminated in no more than 90% of simulations. therefore, to control rabies in a community of foxes and badgers in the south of england, badgers would have to be culled. we aimed to develop a realistic control strategy under the premise of the lowest possible culling effort.

figure  <dig> displays a comparison of the success of different control strategies. at medium badger density , two strategies proved successful: control at a two monthly interval over 4– <dig> campaigns involving badger culling over an area of 5 km radius. alternatively, 3– <dig> campaigns could take place in a 6-monthly interval, but the badger-culling radius would have to be enlarged to 9 km. at high badger density, an even larger badger culling area was required: 9 km for the two monthly intervals and 14 km for the  <dig> monthly intervals. both strategies had to be repeated at least  <dig> times.

control effectiveness
control affected both the spread and strength of disease . the time until the first rabid animal left the simulated area  increased with the number of control applications . thus, control slowed down the speed of spread of rabies. the fox was primarily responsible for the speed of rabies spread due to its longer dispersal range. however, if the spread was slower, more badgers were involved.

since rabies first escapes from the simulated area mostly after the last control campaign, it is not surprising that the risk of escape closely matched unsuccessful elimination . thus, if control ended unsuccessfully, disease recovered in the host and then spread beyond the observed area.

the total number of rabies cases accumulated over the simulated 5-year period was much higher if disease was not eliminated . in these cases disease recovered after control finished producing more rabies cases. nevertheless, the number of cases declined with increasing control effort.

at high badger density, around twice as many rabies cases were predicted in badgers than in foxes, due to differences in population densities. in an outbreak, the higher badger density is a major concern: the model showed a slow spatial spread of rabies through the badger population. as the zone of high infection in badgers moved outwards from the centre, rabies infected almost all animals.

in contrast, if rabies could be eliminated , in at least 75% of simulation runs, the total number of rabies cases stayed below  <dig>  hence, the disease was safely controlled.

certainty of control strategy success
sensitivity analysis demonstrated that population density and control measures were important for the success of the control strategies. the model predicted that for badger family sizes with on average up to  <dig> adults and fox families with an average size of  <dig>  rabies elimination could be achieved with more than 90% certainty. however, control effectiveness must not drop much below that suggested above. for low levels of control per campaign, the model predicted that success rates in high badger density could fall below 70%. increasing the number of campaigns to six did increase the chance of success but still did not achieve rabies elimination in 90% of the simulations. further analysis revealed that a low control probability for one species could lead to a problematic drop in the success of control. control of rabies in badgers was most important, although effective fox vaccination had to be maintained.

disease transmission rates within or between species were relatively unimportant, due to high host density. in many simulations, if rabies started in foxes, a single cross-transmission event to badgers was sufficient to exacerbate the epizootic. if rabies started in badgers, the problem was severe from the start.

discussion
this study looked at emergency disease control in a two-species system, where both species were competent hosts. previous studies of rabies control in the uk focused on either rabies epizootics in urban fox populations  <cit>  or in rural badger populations, including the effects of landscape heterogeneity  <cit> . both took account of the high density host population in england compared to other european countries, concluded that introduction of rabies in the south of england was highly likely to cause an epizootic and that a contingency plan was justified.

rabies in single species
this study confirmed previous results on the high risk of rabies spread in the south of england. both species, foxes and badgers, would be competent rabies hosts, with either species able to be a sufficient reservoir for a rabies epizootic in the short term.

to compare control efficacy, similar control rates were applied to foxes and badgers. in areas of medium badger density, control efficacy was comparable for foxes and badgers, where  <dig> – 70% of the population had to be culled, or  <dig> – 80% vaccinated, in order to achieve high disease elimination success rates. vaccination effort was comparable to previous findings  <cit> , and may be slightly higher than figures used on the continent  <cit>  due to the higher simulated host density. for a given probability of vaccination, disease elimination was more likely in badgers than in foxes, mainly because recruitment of foxes interfered more with control by vaccination. these findings are in line with earlier modelling that suggests that cub productivity  is a major reason for the reduced success of vaccination, and that this could in the future be overcome by the use of fertility control  <cit> .

in areas of higher badger density there were much more intense rabies epizootics in badgers, meaning that the susceptible badger population had to be reduced to around 20% to eliminate disease. vaccination at relatively high rates of 40% per campaign over one year in two monthly intervals was not successful in eliminating the disease, although this effort meant that more than 90% of the existing population in one year was vaccinated.

rabies in a community of foxes and badgers
multi-host pathogens have recently become more prominent for their impact on conservation   <cit> , agricultural livestock   <cit> , and their risk to humans   <cit> . rabies is also a multi-host zoonosis, with the red fox seen as the major wildlife host in europe, but with spill-over to other mammals. the badger is a known spill-over host for rabies in europe with a small number of cases  <cit> , it is a suspected short-term host  <cit>  and it was argued that badgers could become hosts if their density was higher, such as in the uk  <cit> .

by using computer models we suggest that the badger population in southern england could sustain a rabies outbreak in the short-term, and thus it was not surprising that the community of foxes and badgers is a strong rabies host. multi-host reservoirs have been suggested for rabies in africa  <cit> , northeast europe  <cit>  and in parts of the united states  <cit> . this work suggests that at moderate to high density the fox/badger community could also act as a multi-host reservoir.

we found that rabies control is only effective in the multi-host system if both species are targeted, if only one species was targeted, a single cross infection event would trigger uncontrolled spread in the non-targeted population. the finding is similar to suggested rabies control in finish raccoon dogs and foxes, where both species had to be targeted, even although separately the species could not sustain the disease  <cit> .

in our study, if both species were controlled, rabies elimination success was almost as high as success rates for the single host species that was harder to control. this indicated that no substantial extra effort had to be taken to control rabies in the host community compared to controlling it in each of the two host species separately. cross-species transmission appeared to be a minor issue. it did not significantly impact on the risk of an epizootic. this phenomenon can be explained by considering the possible contributions of cross infection on rabies epidemiology and how they affected rabies spread in the model:

first, disease establishment could be more likely due to rabies spread in two species. indeed, it was more likely that the disease died out, when it started in the fox population compared to a start in a high density badger population. this was because the chance of an initial die out of a small infection was higher in the smaller fox families. however, it took only one cross transmission and badgers  became the main driver of disease.

second, the disease could be re-enforced by cross-species spillover. however, the results show that this was unnecessary, as epizootics can occur in each species separately.

third, there was the chance of re-infection, after control had eliminated the disease from one of the species. this process turned out to be less important, because the virus was re-introduced into a controlled population, which was now too small to sustain an epizootic on its own. therefore, each re-introduction caused spill-over cases, but did not affect the over-all success of rabies elimination.

thus, at low rates of cross-species transmission, the impact of cross-infection for the spread of a disease depends on the ability of host species to sustain the disease independently. if populations of both host species are sufficiently large, epizootics are driven by within-species transmission, while cross-species-infection appears to be of minor importance. in contrast, if single host populations are low , cross-infection is an essential process to sustain the disease  <cit> . this finding is in line with model results for the spread of canine distemper virus in three wildlife species , where with strong interspecific transmission the virus would be driven into the less competent lion population, while at low rates of cross-infection, spill-over from other species caused erratic small scale outbreaks  <cit> . notably, due to cross species transmission, the community of two competent host species, jackals and hyenas, acted similar to a single host population doubled in size, although this did depend on transmission rates. such qualitative differences in disease dynamics, due to cross-infection, should be considered in disease control strategies.

feasible rabies control strategy for southern england
achievable rates of fox vaccination  are greater than the minimum required for disease control in rural foxes  <cit> . in contrast, for badgers, the level of vaccination achieved in reality is much lower because anti-rabies vaccine appears to be less effective in immunizing badgers  <cit> . it was assumed for this study that, when vaccinating foxes, about 20% of the badger population would be vaccinated as well. this level did not control rabies, even in the south east of england . therefore a successful rabies control strategy in areas of medium to high badger density had to include more pronounced badger population control. in case of a focal rabies outbreak in the uk, the contingency plan permits limited badger culling, potentially using a poison specifically designed for rabies control  <cit> . badger control is highly labour intensive, but it is assumed that a campaign could realistically target a minimum of 40% of the badger population. to reduce effort and non-target impact, we reduced the area in which culling had to be performed without compromising the success.

for medium density, assuming that every two months 70% of foxes and 20% of badgers could be vaccinated within a circle of 18 km radius around the centre of the outbreak, and additionally 40% of badgers  would be culled in a radius of 5 km around the outbreak, rabies would be eliminated after 1 year with more than 90% probability. a slightly higher success and quicker elimination was achieved if the badger-culling radius was extended to 9 km. it could be argued that the success rate achieved here is higher than would occur in reality, due to the social perturbation of badgers  <cit> , which may be greater than the simulated level of perturbation in the model, but this will be ameliorated to some extent by the assumption of avoiding stochastic fadeout.

to control rabies in at least 90% of simulations for the high badger density, a minimum badger-culling radius of 9 km was needed. success could be slightly increased by extending the control area, but both strategies would take about 10 months to reach completion.

if control campaign frequency was reduced to twice yearly, the total control effort  had to be increased substantially, because “temporal refuges” allowed the disease to spread in initially less-intensively targeted host populations, with enhanced numbers of susceptibles between each reproduction period. this suggests that the eu recommended strategy designed to eliminate endemic rabies  <cit>  is likely to be less successful as an emergency control strategy in medium or high density areas.

the model showed that current uk control options tested in this study were suitable to control a rabies outbreak even in high badger and fox density areas, if well-organized and rapid, assuming an early detection of disease. the suggested strategies proved robust: the strategies controlled species under different assumptions on spatial heterogeneity of host density, which indicates that their effectiveness is in general situations insensitive to landscape heterogeneity and specific landscape features. instead, failure in control at realistic population densities was only found if at least one of the host species was poorly targeted. thus, proper organization and commitment will likely lead to successful rabies control.

in some local areas with an extremely high badger density, , rabies control success may be lower.

in the model, each control campaign contributed to a reduction in the number of rabies cases as well as a reduction in the speed of disease spread. this was important as the model predicted a median of roughly  <dig>  rabies cases for an uncontrolled disease within the high density simulated area  over a 51-month period. this was on average almost  <dig> rabies case per month per km <dig> with about three out of four cases in badgers. control reduced this number considerably, in particular during the period when control was applied. that is, most rabies cases in the model occurred after control ended and the disease was not eliminated but could recover. the small number of rabies cases during control also meant that disease spread was slowed down. therefore the risk that the virus would escape the controlled area was considerably reduced during the period of control.

prolonging the period of control improved the chance of eradication success and simultaneously reduced the strength of disease. thus, even if rabies is not eliminated within the predicted time frame, it is likely that continuing control will achieve elimination, as long as the virus does not escape the control area. also, given the difficulty of accurately monitoring wildlife disease  <cit> , control should continue after the last recorded case, in accordance with international recommendations.

this study suggests that a rabies outbreak in the south of england can be controlled before it causes a major epizootic. but, if immediate control was not successful, then disease control purely based on anti-rabies vaccination of foxes may not be sufficient to contain and eliminate the disease, and large-scale badger culling is logistically difficult. this suggests that new methods for population control, such as immuno-contraceptives, could be investigated to substitute for culling. a combined application of contraception and vaccination to control fox rabies proved to be about as effective as culling in a simulation study  <cit> . however, even if such methods become available, the best option for rabies control in the uk and other rabies-free areas will be to prevent introduction of the virus and quickly detect and control any potential disease outbreak.

the case of rabies in southern england is an important example of the general impact of several large and competent host populations on the spread of disease. our findings on emergency control strategies for the uk can inform the development of other rabies contingency management e.g. in northern and eastern europe, given the increase of the raccoon dog population, and also for northern america  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in a rabies community of multiple host species emergency control subsequent to a recent rabies outbreak has to contain and eliminate the disease in both species. if several species are competent rabies hosts on their own, within species transmission drives disease spread. the risk of cross-species transmission is that it seeds a new, parallel and relatively independent outbreak in the second species.

the rabies control strategy for a community of wildlife hosts must take into account host-specific behaviour  and species-specific control effectiveness . control strategies might involve a range of control actions.

considering these factors feasible strategies were developed to control a rabies outbreak in the combined high density populations of red fox and badger in southern england.

