BACKGROUND
metabolomics is a newly arising field aiming at the measurement of all endogenous metabolites of a tissue or body fluid under given conditions  <cit> . the resulting metabolome of a biological system is considered to provide a readout of the integrated response of cellular processes to genetic and environmental factors  <cit> . understanding the complex biochemical interplay between hundreds of measured metabolite species is a daunting task, which can be approached by combining advanced computational methods with data from large population-based studies. on the biochemical level, metabolite concentrations are determined by a set of specific metabolic enzymes. variabilities in both enzyme activity and metabolite exchange rates - induced by a continuous spectrum of metabolic states throughout measured samples - give rise to characteristic patterns in the metabolite profiles which are directly linked the underlying biochemical reaction network  <cit> . although human metabolism has been extensively characterized in the past decades  <cit> , the reconstruction of metabolic networks from such metabolite patterns is a key question in the computational research field. previous attempts focused on linear metabolite associations measured by pearson correlation coefficients. these include studies utilizing time-course measurements and clustering  <cit> , theoretical approaches relating metabolite fluctuations to properties of the dynamical system  <cit>  and metabolic control analysis to derive effects of enzyme variability  <cit> . other reconstruction methods rely on specific perturbations of the biological system, like the induction of concentration pulses for certain metabolites  <cit> .

a major drawback of correlation networks, however, is their inability to distinguish between direct and indirect associations. correlation coefficients are generally high in large-scale omics data sets, suggesting a plethora of indirect and systemic associations. for example, transcriptional coregulation amongst many genes will give rise to indirect interaction effects in mrna expression data  <cit> . similar effects can be observed in metabolic systems which, in contrast to genetic networks, contain fast biochemical reactions in an open mass- flow system. metabolite levels are supposed to be in quasi-steady state compared to the time scales of upstream regulatory processes  <cit> . that is, metabolites will follow changes in gene expression and physiological processes on the order of minutes and hours, but will appear unchanged on the order of seconds. these properties, even though substantially different from mrna expression mechanisms, also give rise to indirect, system-wide correlations between distantly connected metabolites.

gaussian graphical models  circumvent indirect association effects by evaluating conditional dependencies in multivariate gaussian distributions  <cit> . a ggm is an undirected graph in which each edge represents the pairwise correlation between two variables conditioned against the correlations with all other variables . ggms have a simple interpretation in terms of linear regression techniques. when regressing two random variables x and y on the remaining variables in the data set, the partial correlation coefficient between x and y is given by the pearson correlation of the residuals from both regressions. intuitively speaking, we remove the  effects of all other variables on x and y and compare the remaining signals. if the variables are still correlated, the correlation is directly determined by the association of x and y and not mediated by the other variables. partial correlations have recently been applied to biological data sets for the inference of association networks from mrna expression data  <cit> , and for the elucidation of relationships between genomic features in the human genome  <cit> . one previous study used second-order partial correlations of genetic associations to elucidate genetically determined relations between metabolites  <cit> .

in this manuscript we now study the capabilities of ggms to recover metabolic pathway reactions solely from measured metabolite concentrations. first, we discuss the quality of the method and possible problems and pitfalls on computer-simulated systems. we then apply ggms to a lipid-focused targeted metabolomics data set of  <dig> blood serum samples with  <dig> measured metabolites from the german population study kora  <cit> . the ggm is sparse in comparison to the corresponding pearson correlation network, displays a modular structure with respect to different metabolite classes, and is stable towards changes in the underlying data set. we demonstrate that top-ranking metabolite pairs and further densely connected subgraphs in the ggm can indeed be attributed to known reactions in the human fatty acid biosynthesis and degradation pathways. in order to systematically verify this finding, we map partial correlation coefficients to the number of reaction steps between all metabolite pairs based on a literature-curated fatty acid pathway model. we observe statistically significant discriminatory features of ggms to distinguish between directly and non-directly interacting metabolites in the metabolic network. in addition, low-order partial correlations turned out to be a suitable alternative to full-order ggms for the present dataset. finally, we will summarize and discuss the relevance of ggms for metabolomics data sets, point out limitations of the method and suggest future steps. all metabolomics data used in this study, the generated correlation networks, model files and metabolite annotations are available online at http://hmgu.de/cmb/ggm.

RESULTS
ggms delineate direct relationships in artificial reaction systems
computer-simulated reaction systems are a valuable tool for the evaluation of correlation-based measures prior to their application to real metabolomics data sets. previous works focused on the modeling of biological replicates with intrinsic noise on the metabolite levels  <cit> . in contrast, we here investigate the effects of variation of enzymatic activity in a human population cohort. such variation might be genetically determined or, more likely, be the result of distinct regulatory effects and metabolic states between individuals. all reaction systems were implemented as ordinary differential equations with simple mass-action kinetics rate laws and reversible michaelis-menten-type enzyme kinetics . in order to account for the above-mentioned enzymatic variability we applied a log-normal noise model, which has been previously described to be a reasonable approximation of cellular rate parameter distributions  <cit> . the standard deviation σ was set to a value of  <dig>  for the underlying normal distribution . for each parameter sample we calculated the metabolite steady state concentrations on log-scale, and subsequently estimated the ggm by calculating partial correlation coefficients. all analyzed systems exhibit single, unique steady states independent of the respective parameter values. this feature was structurally verified using the ernest toolbox  <cit>  for all networks except the negative feedback system. for the latter one, we employed empirical initial state sampling to ensure monostability in the given parameter range .

the first network we analyzed consists of a linear chain of three metabolites with different variants of reaction reversibility . we observe high pairwise correlations for metabolites in mutual equilibrium due to reversible reactions . this is in accordance with previous findings from  <cit> , where correlation-generating mechanisms in metabolic reaction networks were identified. furthermore, this simple example demonstrates how partial correlation coefficients in ggms discriminate between directly and indirectly related metabolites. if only irreversible reactions are employed in the chain, neither regular correlation networks nor ggms can distinguish between direct and indirect effects . species a is the only input metabolite in the system, and thus completely determines the levels of both b and c. this leads to generally high and non-distinguishable correlations between the three metabolites. however, if we introduce exchange reactions for all species, the ggm again correctly describes the network connectivity . such exchange mechanisms are likely to be present for most intracellular metabolites, which usually participate in multiple metabolic pathways . note that for this third case both regular and partial correlation values are notably lower than for the first two chain variants. in addition to linear chains, pathway modules consisting of branched topologies with first-order, reversible reactions are correctly reconstructed by our method . an overview of the reconstruction accuracy of ggms on various types of first-order networks with different variants of reaction reversibility can be found in additional file  <dig>  section  <dig> 

interestingly, for some reaction setups, the accuracy of the method improves drastically with an increasing amount of external noise. specifically, if the metabolite transport towards a pathway is subject to higher fluctuations, the ggm edge weight difference between directly and indirectly connected metabolites becomes larger. for a detailed discussion of this finding we refer the reader to additional file  <dig>  section  <dig>  the second question we addressed with artificial reaction networks was the influence of enzyme-catalyzed reactions on ggm estimation. therefore we setup reaction chains with four metabolites incorporating reversible enzymatic reactions. forward maximal reaction rates vmax were set twice as fast as the backward reactions in order to ensure a directed mass flow. we found that the usage of michaelis-menten-type enzyme kinetics instead of mass-action kinetics does not alter our general findings. when forward reaction rates exceed backward reactions by far, the ggm discrimination quality is impaired. this is in line with the observation that purely irreversible reactions cannot be distinguished in the mass-action case . other specific parameters, like the michaelis constant km , did not affect ggm calculation . another important aspect of enzyme-catalyzed reactions are allosteric regulation mechanism, like end-product inhibition for instance, which constitutes a negative feedback from the end to the beginning of a pathway  <cit> . the reconstruction results differ depending on whether exchange reactions are included in the system for not . if the inhibitory module represents a closed system , the regulatory interaction does not in influence ggm calculation. the net metabolite turnover speed might be drastically affected, but the topological effects of this reaction chain on the correlation structure remain unchanged. in contrast, when exchange reactions are introduced , the inhibition decouples a from the other metabolites and the reconstruction fails for this metabolite. detailed results for different strengths of the inhibitory interaction are presented in additional file  <dig>  section  <dig> 

next, we studied the influence of cofactor-driven reactions on the reconstruction. cofactors are ubiquitous substances usually involved in the transfer of certain molecular moieties or redox potentials  <cit> . we investigated such cofactor-coupled reactions  because they introduce non-linearity in the simulated dynamical systems, and  because cofactors are usually involved in many reactions and thus generate network-wide metabolite dependencies. we set up a network resembling the first three reactions from the glycolysis pathway. it consists of four metabolites and two energy transfer-related cofactors, atp and adp, involved in two phosphorylation reactions  <cit> . again the ggm precisely describes metabolite connectivity in the system, whereas a regular correlation graph leads to false interpretations of the network topology . cofactors were modeled with input and output reactions to the rest of the metabolic system in order to account for the above-mentioned participation of cofactors in various reactions of the system. again, it makes a substantial difference whether such exchange reactions are included in the model or not. since our toy model only represents a small part of a larger system, missing exchange reaction for cofactors would create a false mass conservation relation that compromises correlation calculation. finally, we investigated the effects of rate laws with non-linear substrate dependencies in the absence of cofactors. therefore we modeled a reversible, bimolecular split reaction with isomerization of the two substrates . an example of such a reaction network can be found in the glycolysis pathway between fructose- <dig> -bisphosphate, glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate and dihydroxyacetone phosphate. our simulations demonstrate that again a regular pearson correlation network cannot delineate direct from indirect relationships in the pathway. the ggm only detects a weak association between b and c. this is due to counterantagonistic processes in this reaction setup: isomerization and other reversible reactions generally induce positive correlations, whereas coparticipation as substrates in the same reaction induces negative correlations. such effects of correlation-generating mechanisms which cancel each other out have been described before  <cit>  and pose a problem to all reconstruction approaches which rely on linear dependencies.

the drawbacks of correlation-based methods discussed in this section, especially inhibitory mechanisms with exchange reactions and antagonistic mechanism, have to be kept in mind when attempting to reconstruct metabolic reactions from steady state data. for the present study, however, we assume the primarily linear lipid pathways not to contain such problematic reaction motifs.

a ggm inferred from a large-scale population-based data set displays a sparse, modular and robust structure
in the following we estimated a gaussian graphical model using targeted metabolomics data from the german population study kora  <cit>  . we used a subset of the data set previously evaluated in a genome-wide association study  <cit> , containing  <dig> targeted metabolomics fasting blood serum measurements with  <dig> quantified metabolites. the metabolite panel includes acyl-carnitines, four classes of phospholipid species, amino acids and hexoses . both regular pearson correlation coefficients and partial correlation coefficients  were calculated on the logarithmized metabolite concentrations. all edges corresponding to correlation values significantly different from zero now induce the networks displayed in figure 2a+b. in order to exclude correlation effects generated by genetic variation in the study cohort, we investigated the in influence of snp allele data from  <cit>  on the ggm calculation. we found genetic effects to be neglectable , indicating that ggms capture intrinsic biochemical properties of the system.

pearson correlation coefficients show a strong bias towards positive values in our data set ; a typical feature of high-throughput data sets, also observed e.g. in microrarray expression data, which can be attributed to unspecific or indirect interactions  <cit> . we obtain  <dig> correlation values significantly different from zero with α˜= <dig> .10− <dig> , yielding an absolute significance correlation cutoff value of  <dig>  . in contrast, the ggm shows a much sparser structure with  <dig> significant partial correlations after bonferroni correction . most values center around a partial correlation coefficient of zero, whereas we observe a clear shift towards positive significant values. note that negative partial correlations provide particular information that will be discussed later in this manuscript.

the ggm displays a modular structure with respect to the seven metabolite classes in our panel, while the class separation in the correlation network appears rather blurry . we observe a clear separation of the amino acids and acyl-carnitines from all other classes. the four groups of phospholipids  still showed locally clustered structures, but are strongly interwoven in the network. this is probably an effect of the dependence of all phospholipids on a similar fatty acid pool and, subsequently, the biosynthesis pathway acting on this substrate pool. in order to get an objective quantification of this observation, we calculated the group-based modularity q on all significantly positive ggm edges according to  <cit>  . the same measure was calculated for  <dig> randomized ggm networks . for the original ggm we obtain a modularity of q =  <dig> , and the random networks yield q =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , resulting in a highly significant z-score of z =  <dig> . furthermore, the modularity value induced by using the metabolite classes was compared to a partitioning optimized by simulated annealing. the optimized modularity is only slightly higher with q =  <dig>  and the resulting partitioning is very similar to the metabolite classes . performing the modularity analysis with the full, weighted partial correlation matrix produces equivalent results .

an important question for a multivariate statistical measure such as partial correlations is the robustness with respect to changes in the underlying data set. furthermore, the dependence of the measure on the size of the data set needs to be addressed. to answer these questions, we performed two types of perturbations of our data set. first, we applied sample bootstrapping with  <dig> repetitions and compared the resulting partial correlations to the original data set . we observe small mean differences with low standard deviation . this indicates that for a large data set with n =  <dig> samples, ggms are robust against the choice of samples. we assume that each distinct metabolic state in the cohort is captured by a bootstrap sample, and thus all information required to calculate the ggm is contained. in addition to the bootstrap analysis, we estimated partial correlations for continuously decreasing sample sizes . for each data set size we randomly picked samples from the original data set and repeated the procedure  <dig> times. the analysis shows that the ggm is stable even under decrease of the sample number. for instance, for a data set containing only around half of the original samples  we get a partial correlation difference of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  10- <dig>  only when the number of samples gets close to the number of variables  the correlation matrix becomes ill-conditioned and strong differences from the original partial correlations occur. these problems of smaller metabolomics studies could be dealt with by regularization approaches or the usage of low-order partial correlation  <cit> . taken together, our results demonstrate that the analyzed metabolomics data set is sufficient to robustly elucidate relationships between the measured metabolites.

strong ggm edges represent known metabolic pathway interactions
the next step in our analysis was the manual investigation of metabolite pairs displaying strong partial correlation coefficients. remarkably, we are able to provide pathway explanations for most metabolite pairs in the top  <dig> positive partial correlations . in the following, we will specifically discuss interesting, high-scoring metabolite pairs along with their responsible enzymes in the metabolic pathways.

most metabolite pairs can be directly linked to reactions in the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway, the β-oxidation pathway or amino acid-associated pathways.

the highest partial correlation in the data set with ζ =  <dig>  is found for the two branched-chain amino acids valine and xleucine, where the latter compound represents both leucine and isoleucine . the three metabolites are in close proximity in the metabolic network concerning their biosynthesis and degradation pathways. further related amino acid pairs that display significant partial correlations are histidine and glutamine , glycine and serine  as well as threonine and methionine .

clear-cut signatures of the desaturation and elongation of long chain fatty acids can be seen for various sphingomyelins and lyso-pcs . for example, sm c18: <dig> and sm c18: <dig> strongly associate with ζ =  <dig> , most probably representing the initial Δ <dig> desaturation step of the polyunsaturated fatty acid biosynthesis pathway from c18: <dig> to c18:1-Δ <dig> by scd . the similarly high partial correlation between sm c16: <dig> and sm c18: <dig>  as well as lysopc a c16: <dig> and lysopc a c18: <dig>  can be attributed to the elovl6-dependent elongation from c16:1-Δ  <dig> to c18:1-Δ  <dig>  interestingly, this reaction is not contained in the public reaction databases but has been previously described by  <cit> .

we identify a variety of strong ggm edges between diacyl-pc  and acyl-alkyl-pc  metabolite pairs . for instance, pc aa c34: <dig> and pc aa c36: <dig> associate strongly with ζ =  <dig> , and pc aa c36: <dig> and pc aa c38: <dig> show a partial correlation of ζ =  <dig> . while the first pair can be precisely explained by an elongation from c16: <dig> to c18: <dig> by elovl <dig>  different combinatorial variants come into play for the pc aa c36:4/pc aa c38: <dig> pair. our mass-spectrometry technique only measures brutto compositions, that is the bulk side chain carbon content and total degree of desaturation. depending on the exact composition of both fatty acid residues in the respective lipids, this association could be caused by long-chain elongations , by very-long-chain elongations  and even by peroxisomal β -oxidation of fatty acids . an interesting situation arises for the phospholipids pc ae c34: <dig>  pc ae c36: <dig> and pc ae c36: <dig>  from its brutto formula the latter species could represent an intermediate step between the other two metabolites. however, it associates poorly with both other phospholipids, which in turn display a strong partial correlation . this finding can be explained by distinct fatty acid side chain compositions, showing differential incorporation of c18: <dig>  c18: <dig> and c18: <dig> .

for the acyl-carnitine group we observe a remarkably high partial correlation of ζ =  <dig>  for c8-carn and c10-carn and further acyl-carnitine pairs with a carbon atom difference of two . these associations can be attributed to the β-oxidation pathway, i.e. the catabolic breakdown of fatty acids in the mitochondria  <cit> . during this degradation process, c <dig> units are continuously split off from the shrinking fatty acid chain. four acyl-coa dehydrogenases, acads, acadm and acadl, acadvl, catalyze the rate limiting reactions of β-oxidation for different fatty acid chain lengths  <cit> . our interpretation of acyl-carnitine correlations as signatures of mitochondrial β-oxidation is in accordance with  <cit> , where we identified associations between c8+c <dig>  c <dig> and c <dig> with genetic variation in the acadm, acadl and acads loci, respectively.

we observe several associations that were not directly attributable to enzymatic interactions in the fatty acid biosynthesis or degradation pathways. for instance, lysopc a 18: <dig> and lysopc a 18: <dig> share a strong ggm edge  although the Δ12-desaturation step from oleic acid to linoleic acid is known to be missing in humans  <cit> . this missing reaction gives rise to the essentiality of fatty acids in the ω- <dig> unsaturated fatty acid pathway. a functional explanation could be a systemic equilibrium between the two fatty acids or remodeling processes specific for the lyso-pc metabolite class. further examples are high partial correlations between the hydroxy sphingomyelins sm  c22: <dig> and sm  c22: <dig>  as well as the sphingomyelins sm c24: <dig> and sm c24: <dig> . to the best of our knowledge, there is no evidence for such fatty acid desaturation reactions in humans. the detected associations might therefore represent novel pathway interactions recovered by the gaussian graphical model.

negative values play a particular role in the interpretation of partial correlations coefficients. on the one hand, they obviously occur whenever regular negative correlations are involved. mechanisms giving rise to negative correlations are, for example, coparticipation in the same reaction , mass conservation relations  <cit>  or opposing regulatory effects. it is to be noted, however, that negative correlations are rare in our specific metabolomics data set . on the other hand, due to the mathematical properties of partial correlation coefficients negative partial correlation coefficients occur whenever two metabolites a and b have a strong correlation with a third metabolite c, but do not share a high correlation value with each other. two examples from our data set are shown in figure 3d. first, sm c18: <dig> is negatively partially correlated with sm c16: <dig>  and both of these in turn are highly positively partially correlated with sm c18: <dig>  the fatty acids c16: <dig> and c18: <dig> have no direct connection in the pathway, causing the strong negative partial correlation value. a similar situation can be found for three diacyl-pcs: pc aa c34: <dig> and pc aa c36: <dig> show a high partial correlation with pc aa c36: <dig>  but a negative partial correlation with each other. again, there is no possible direct reaction from a c34: <dig> lipid species to a c36: <dig> species. not all metabolite triads in the network show such a one-negative/two-positive motif. but if present, they provide another step in the reconstruction of metabolic pathways  by detecting metabolites which are exactly two steps apart.

partial correlation coefficients discriminate between directly and indirectly connected metabolites in a literature-curated fatty acid pathway model
the analyses from the previous section strengthened our conception that a ggm inferred from blood serum metabolomics data represents true metabolite associations. to systematically assess how ggm edges and pathway proximity between our lipid metabolites are related, we generated a literature-based model of fatty acid biosynthesis . this model includes reactions from the public databases bigg   <cit> , the edinburgh human metabolic network  <cit>  and kegg pathway  <cit> . we then mapped the partial correlation coefficients from the kora data set onto the minimal number of reaction steps between each pair of metabolites . since our metabolite panel contains fatty-acid based lipids, we project the respective lipid compositions onto the fatty acid biosynthesis pathway . for the analysis of acyl-carnitines we implemented a model of the β-oxidation pathway, consisting of a linear chain of c <dig> degradation steps .

we observe a strong tendency towards significantly positive partial correlations for a pathway distance of one, i.e. directly connected metabolite pairs, for all five metabolite classes . in total,  <dig> out of  <dig> partial correlations  for a pathway distance of one are significantly positive. for instance, for the lyso-pc class  nearly all partial correlation coefficients for a pathway distance of one are above significance level, whereas most values for a distance of two or larger remain insignificant. some outliers from this observation, however, require closer inspection: first, for some metabolite classes we observe negative partial correlation values for metabolite pairs that are exactly two steps apart in the metabolic pathway:  <dig> of  <dig> partial correlations in the diacyl-pc class and  <dig> of  <dig> partial correlations in the sphingomyelin class are significantly negative for a distance of two. these negative values are effects of the coregulated metabolite triads described previously in this text. second, we find  <dig> of  <dig>  unconnected metabolite pairs  with a partial correlation above significance level. these pairs represent potentially novel pathway predictions, missing interactions in the model or effects upstream of the metabolic network like enzyme coregulation.

a direct comparison of both partial and pearson correlation coefficients for the diacyl-phosphatidylcholine class is shown in figure 5b. as described earlier in this manuscript, we observe a general over-abundance of significant pearson correlations independent of the actual pathway distance. even for the metabolites without a known pathway connection,  <dig> of a total of  <dig> pearson correlations are significant , in contrast to  <dig> out of  <dig> for the partial correlations .

the significantly different correlation value distributions between directly and indirectly linked metabolites  barely provide a good quantification of the actual discrimination accuracy of this feature. therefore we assessed the discriminative power of partial correlations to tell apart direct from indirect interactions by means of sensitivity and specificity. the sensitivity evaluates which fraction of directly connected metabolites in the pathway are recovered by significant ggm edges, whereas the specificity states how many of the significant edges actually represent a direct connection. a commonly used trade off measure between sensitivity and specificity is the f <dig> score, which is defined as the harmonic mean of both quantities  <cit>  . figure 5c lists sensitivity, specific city and f <dig> for all  <dig> metabolite classes along with an evaluation of partial correlation distribution differences between directly and indirectly linked metabolites . f <dig> values over  <dig>  and significant p-values for the ranksum test indicate a strong discrimination effect of partial correlation coefficients concerning direct vs. indirect pathway interactions. possible reasons for non-perfect sensitivity and specific city values will be discussed in detail at the end of this text.

low-order partial correlations
the data set from our present study contained enough samples to calculate full-order partial correlations, that is to calculate pairwise correlations conditioned against all other n- <dig> metabolites. however, previous studies demonstrated that low-order partial correlation approaches can already be sufficient to elucidate direct interactions  <cit> . in order to assess how these measures perform in comparison to the full-order ggm, we calculated first-, second- and third order partial correlations using the approach developed by  <cit>  for both computer-simulated networks and the metabolomics data . the toy systems reveal clear cases where low-order approaches fail, for instance in the diamond motif displayed in figure 1d. surprisingly, however, especially first-order partial correlations worked remarkably well in discriminating direct from indirect interactions in the real data . this result provides two valuable pieces of information. first, low-order partial correlation approaches, which require much less samples to obtain stable estimates, appear to be a suitable alternative to ggms for the metabolite panel used in this study. second, the high relative scoring of first-order partial correlations provides insights into the correlation structures in the data set. in particular, this result indicates that the underlying metabolic pathways are primarily composed of acyclic, linear chains, which fits well to the fatty acid pathways dominating our measured lipid species.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we addressed the reconstruction of metabolic pathway reactions from high-throughput targeted metabolomics measurements. previous reconstruction approaches employed pairwise association measures, primarily standard pearson correlation coefficients, to infer network topology information from metabolite profiles  <cit> . we here demonstrated the usefulness of gaussian graphical models and their ability to distinguish direct from indirect associations by estimating the conditional dependence between variables. ggms are based on partial correlation coefficients, that is the pearson correlation between two metabolites corrected for the correlations with all other metabolites.

from computer simulations of metabolic reaction networks we deduced a set important aspects to be considered when interpreting partial correlation coefficients in reaction systems:  metabolites in equilibrium due to reversible reactions can readily be recovered, whereas irreversible reactions pose a substantial problem to association-based reconstruction attempts .  input and output reactions for intermediate metabolites, however, improve the reconstruction accuracy. such exchange reactions are likely to be present for most naturally occurring metabolites due to highly interconnected metabolic pathways.  with an increasing amount of fluctuations on the input reaction, the partial correlation difference between direct and indirect interactions increases for certain network topologies . this indicates that a high heterogeneity of metabolic states in a population data set like the kora cohort might be beneficial rather than problematic for our approach.  metabolite connectivity in cofactor-driven networks can be accurately reconstructed. the presence of exchange reactions for cofactors, as they are likely to be present in real systems, has substantial impact on the reconstruction quality. the connectivity of the cofactors themselves, however, remains spurious.  saturation effects in enzyme-catalyzed reactions do not pose a problem for the reconstruction process. however, inhibitory influences in metabolic modules that include exchange reactions might decouple certain metabolites and lead to false negative results.  non-linear rate laws and antagonistic, correlation-generating mechanisms might impair reconstruction quality.

in the next step we inferred both a ggm and a regular correlation network from a large-scale metabolomics data set with  <dig> strictly standardized samples from overnight fasting individuals measured by state-of-the art metabolomics technologies  <cit> . we investigated the influence of the  <dig> genome-wide-significant snps from this study on our ggm and demonstrated that genetic variation in the general population is neglectable for partial correlation calculation. we found that the ggm displays a much sparser structure than regular correlation networks. only around  <dig> partial correlation values were above significance level , whereas half of all pearson correlation values were significant after bonferroni correction. this depicted the nature of partial correlation coefficients to neglect indirect associations between distantly related metabolites. we detected a strongly modular structure in the ggm with respect to the different metabolite classes, except for the four types of phospholipids which appear slightly interwoven. this provides a unique picture of the separation of metabolic pathways , but also the interaction between different lipid classes dependent on a single intracellular fatty acid pool. finally, ggms were stable with respect to both choice and number of samples in the data set. even a smaller data set with only a few hundred samples would have been sufficient to achieve the results from this study. the estimation of ggms for data sets with less samples than metabolites is possible  <cit> , but notable deviations from the true partial correlation coefficient shave to be expected.

manual investigation of high-scoring substructures in the ggm revealed groups of metabolites that could be directly attributed to reaction steps from the human fatty acid biosynthesis and degradation pathways. we detected effects of elovl-mediated elongations and fads-mediated desaturations of fatty acids as well as signatures of the catabolic β-oxidation pathway. for instance, our method successfully recovered a direct elongation from c16: <dig> to c18: <dig>  which has been experimentally shown by  <cit>  but is not present in the public reaction databases. furthermore, we identified highly negative partial correlations as an indication for a pathway distance of two, serving as a further hint in the reconstruction of metabolic network topology. in order to systematically evaluate whether high partial correlations represent direct interactions, we generated a consensus model of fatty acid biosynthesis reactions from three publically available reaction databases. by mapping partial correlation coefficients to the number of reaction steps between two metabolites we observed a statistically significant enrichment of high values for a pathway distance of one. we calculated a high accuracy for partial correlations to discriminate between directly and indirectly associated metabolites, as measured by sensitivity, specificity and the f <dig> measure. interestingly, we could show that the discrimination quality of low-order partial correlations  <cit> , especially the first-order variants, is close to the full-order ggm. even though this might be a feature specific to the metabolite panel used in this study, low-order partial correlations represent a suitable alternative especially for studies with only few samples. if more samples than variables are available, however, we recommend ggms as an unbiased approach conditioning against as many parameters as possible.

taken together, our results demonstrate that ggms inferred from metabolomics measurements in blood plasma samples reveal strong signatures of intracellular and even inner-mitochondrial processes. previous studies on blood plasma samples detected similar relationships with cellular processes based on genetic associations  <cit>  and case/control drug trials  <cit> . in this work we could now show that metabolite profiles alone are sufficient to capture the dynamics of metabolic pathways.

however, ggms can never provide a perfect reconstruction of the underlying system. there are several factors that lead to the absence of high partial correlations between interacting metabolites, that is false negative edges in the ggm:  counterantagonistic correlation-generating processes and bimolecular reactions  might lead to the elimination of pairwise association; cf.  <cit> .  the respective enzyme might not be active in the current metabolic state, or its effects on the respective metabolite pools are neglectable.  contrary to our general finding that even blood plasma metabolites carry strong signatures of metabolic pathways, the signal might be diminished for certain types of metabolites. furthermore, the actual origins of blood plasma metabolites, e.g. in terms of measured cell types or causal tissue activity, still remain to be unraveled. the above-mentioned mechanisms are possible explanations for the non-perfect sensitivity values observed in figure 5c. false positive ggm edges, on the other hand, provide interesting new metabolic pathway hypothesis. the presence of strong partial correlations in the absence of known metabolic connections could point out missing pathway information or regulatory effects not captured in a simple stoichiometric representation of the pathway.

conclusively, this study presented gaussian graphical models as a valuable tool for the recovery of biochemical reactions from high-throughput targeted metabolomics data. the present work could be extended by comparing high partial correlation coefficients with enzyme activity or expression data, or by the experimental validation of promising interaction candidates. we suggest using ggms as a standard tool of investigation in future metabolomics studies, utilizing the upcoming wealth of metabolic profiling data to form a more comprehensive picture of cellular metabolism.

