BACKGROUND
proteins are made up of domains. protein domains in this context can be regarded as the building blocks of proteins, and the smallest units of protein evolution. a small protein may consist of a single domain, larger proteins maybe contain multiple domains. a domain can be defined as a protein unit which is seen in nature either on its own or in combination with other different domains.

detecting the evolutionary relationship between two or more domains using sequence information alone is often not possible, as sequences often diverge beyond the point of detection by comparison methods. lack of sequence information does not necessarily show that there is no relationship between domains. if the three dimensional structure of the domains is known, evolutionary relationships can usually be recognised. the structural classification of proteins 
 <cit> , is a hierarchical classification system of proteins for which atomic resolution three dimensional structures are known; units in scop are protein domains. the scop classification takes protein structures published in the protein data bank 
 <cit>  as the primary data source from which the domain classification is derived. the classification of domains is based on both manual curation and automatic methods, the balance of which has resulted in a classification system which is regarded as the ‘gold standard’, and is an essential bioinformatics resource.

levels of classification in scop from the top down are: class, fold, superfamily, family. a class is just a convenient grouping, e.g. domains containing only alpha-helices. folds and superfamilies have a clear and precise definition of what they are supposed to represent: a fold groups together domains which have the same topological arrangement of secondary structure; a superfamily groups together domains which share a common evolutionary ancestor. the family level sub-groups domains within a superfamily, but unlike the other levels lacks a precise definition. the first scop paper
 <cit>  states 30% sequence identity between members of a superfamily as significant support for a family grouping. however, in the first release of scop there were far fewer protein structures available , and selecting an arbitrary sequence identity cutoff was possible. there are now nearly ten times the number of domains . the family level of the classification further draws on structure and functional information in the absence of strong sequence similarity, but the meaning and the properties of the family object in scop remains unclear.

many projects have been based on the scop classification leading to several thousand citations
 <cit> . most of these projects make use of the clear evolutionary definition of a domain, and of a superfamily, so a better understanding of the family level will add value to future work which makes use of scop, and enable new research questions to be addressed. the research presented in this paper was carried out in order to elucidate the meaning and significance of the scop family level, in particular with regard to sequence, structure and function and their relationships to family classification.

we also draw on protein functional information taken from gene ontology  terms
 <cit> . go is a standardised vocabulary for depicting gene products in three biological concepts: biological process, molecular function and cellular component. since many proteins are enzymes enzyme commission 
 <cit>  numbers can also aid in the understanding of protein function.

RESULTS
to understand the meaning of a family, we compared the groupings of domains in scop to determine the similarity to automatically generated groupings based independently on the three aspects we wished to investigate: sequence, structure and function. since we begin without a pre-conceived idea of the granularity or size/depth of the groupings it is necessary to generate the automatic groupings at every possible level. this is represented by a tree which is the result of hierarchical clustering of the domains based on one of the three sources of information: sequence similarity, structural similarity, functional labels . the level of agreement between one type of information and the grouping of a scop family can be assessed by asking whether each edge in the tree divides domains into family groups, or splits a family, grouping together domains from different families.

the roc curve figure
 <dig> shows the number of disagreements/agreements of the trees produced from sequence, structure and functional data with the scop family classification for varying confidence values. for sequence, confidence is ranked by bootstrap percentages, for structural data the confidence is based on the structural distance scores, and for function, confidence is based on the total number of terms which suggest a particular clade in the trees. see materials and methods for details of a web resource providing all data and trees.

sequence
within the literature there is variation in suggested levels for the minimum informative bootstrap confidence
 <cit> , with most suggesting about 70-80% required for confidence. we found that from  <dig> families across  <dig> superfamilies,  <dig> % of the phylogenetic trees agree with the scop groupings for bootstrap values above 80%. we also found that, although less reliable, there is useful information which can be acquired from the trees for bootstrap values down to 60%. these results show that, to the extent to which sequence information can reliably determine evolutionary relationships, scop family groupings are evolutionarily consistent. classical sequence phylogenetics are quite reliable for high bootstrap values, but are limited in the evolutionary distance over which they can resolve relationships. there are plenty of scop family groupings which sequence-based phylogenetics alone is unable to determine with high confidence - the low confidence parts of the tree. although the classical phylogenetic analysis cannot inform us directly about the evolutionary consistency of many family groupings, the fact that there is such strong agreement with those that it can, gives a strong suggestion that the others  are also likely to be evolutionarily consistent.

the top  <dig> edges which conflicted with the sequence trees were examined. these are shown in a table in figure
 <dig>  along with an example of each type of disagreement. the most frequent disagreement was from families which were classified not long after the creation of scop. these families were classified at a time when pfam
 <cit>  sequence data was not available, and therefore did not provide evidence in the curation of scop families. sequence information from pfam is now a contributing factor of data used to guide the classification. an example is shown in example  <dig>  we also find examples such as that shown in example  <dig>  where a family has been decided in scop based on function. trees based on both sequence and structure place the single domain pancreatic carboxypeptidases family between domains for a different family causing a disagreement of the trees with scop families. in this case the classification of a domain into a new family of its own was likely based on a functional signal, however the tree based on function places the domain in a similar way to that of structure and sequence suggesting the domain should probably belong to the surrounding family. our method classes 'nested families' as inconsistent with evolution , whereby one family grows from another in the tree. in some sense this is more a reflection of the limited number of levels in the hierarchy, suggesting that there are some families that actually represent a 'sub' family of another. we also find a small number of other artefacts, where is a family classification based on the source species. this is can happen with proteins found in viruses. we also see cases such as duplications of domains grouped within the same family, an illustration of this is shown in example  <dig> 
 <cit> .

a potential factor which contributes to the disagreements seen in trees calculated from sequence data compared to those from the other data sources is also worth noting. diverse superfamilies with very low sequence identity between member domains may provide an unreliable multiple sequence alignment thereby creating a result tree with limited accuracy. anomalies introduced from this effect are more likely to be seen in very large superfamilies with a great deal of structural variation.

structure
the trees built from automatically generated structural distances largely agree, but are not always consistent with scop’s hand annotated groupings. the hand classification of structures in scop at the superfamily and fold levels is often referred to as the gold standard in the field, and clearly surpasses any fully automatic method. since detectable structural similarity remains long after sequences have diverged beyond the point of recognition, the structurally-derived trees are able to resolve deeper edges of the tree with higher confidence than the sequence-based ones . that the trees are largely in agreement with the family classification indicates that scop is also evolutionarily consistent at greater divergence distances. the differences we see could either be cases where scop has grouped domains based on some criterion other than evolution , or may be due to geometric structural distance being in some cases a poor measure of divergence. for some proteins, changes to the structure of a binding site may be the best indication of evolutionary divergence, but these changes make a relatively small contribution to the automatic superposition of the whole body. conversely, movements of secondary structures relative to each other, e.g. a change of angle between beta-sheets
 <cit> , can cause dramatic changes in superposable structural distance which mask the true relationships. in this way structural geometric distance does not always equate to evolutionary distance.

examining high ranking disagreements between the scop family classification and structural trees can mostly be explained by the above, however one exception is shown in example  <dig> from figure
 <dig>  this example shows a sequence tree but we see the same disagreement when we look at the structural tree, and so in this case it suggests the possibility of a mis-classification.

function
the lines for ec numbers and go terms shown in figure
 <dig> are smaller and less smooth than the others. this is because confidence values are generated using the total number of independent features that support a particular edge of the tree. there are not very many go features per tree and barely any for ec number. this is partly due to a lack of richness in the ontological hierarchy but also due to the incompleteness of the annotation of the domains with terms. trees derived from both go and ec functional data are less consistent with the family level than trees derived from structure or sequence, though the majority still agree with the classification. this may be due to the low quality of the derived functional dataset, most commonly the lack of functional annotation for a particular domain. functions are also appended to the protein chain rather than individual domains, therefore terms may be uninformative for two domains found within the same protein. the fact that the correlation with function is so much weaker than sequence and structure suggests that although function may guide the choice of granularity or level of grouping of families in scop , it is not a primary source of information for determining relationships.

dustbin families
in scop all domains must belong to a family, so a superfamily with a single member must also have a single family. as more structures are added to a superfamily over time, there may be new additions that have enough in common to group them apart from the rest and a second family is created to hold them. if this happens successively the result is that some families contain domains with something in common, but any leftovers lacking common features with each other may remain in the original family that contained the first member of the superfamily. these non-specific families are referred to here as 'dustbin families'. the 'dustbin families' line in figure
 <dig> is derived from the same trees as for the standard domain sequences line, but the rules by which edges are defined as conflicting are adjusted to not penalise for the presence of a single dustbin family in each superfamily. remarkably, despite expectations, the results show that they are not a major feature of the scop classification.

sequence identity
figure
 <dig> shows the maximum sequence divergence between any two members of a family or superfamily, i.e. a measure of the divergence within the family or superfamily. the analysis of sequence distances shows that the maximum sequence diversity for domains grouped within a family is on average 22% with the majority of families having a maximum sequence distance of 10-30%. superfamilies on the other hand have a sequence diversity spread of 8% and below, with the average being close to zero. while it is well known that remote homology detection at the superfamily level is a difficult problem, the data show that about half  of the  <dig> families  contain members with no less than 20% sequence identity.

figure
 <dig> shows the maximum structural distance found between two members of the same superfamily or family. the distribution shows that the maximum structural distances are greater between two members of the same superfamily than to two domains grouped in the same family.

it is clear from the distribution in the graph in figure
 <dig> that scop families are not selected by simply choosing a random sequence identity cutoff, and that the process of curation is much more elaborate.

distribution of go terms
figure
 <dig> shows the distribution of go terms annotated to single domains across scop. we see that approximately 1/ <dig> of go and ec annotation applies directly to one family, another 1/ <dig> to a subset of a family, and the remaining 1/ <dig> scattered across multiple superfamilies, with strikingly few terms that apply at the superfamily level. one would expect that the terms in the sub-family would be lower down the go hierarchy and those spanning multiple superfamilies would be broader terms found higher up the hierarchy, but the distribution across the go hierarchy is quite similar in each of the three major segments of the pie chart shown in figure
 <dig>  this distribution does not change significantly when looking at each of the three ontologies of go  separately. a more detailed view is shown in additional file
1: table s <dig> in additional files.

despite the weak link between scop family classification and the edges of trees representing functional data, we see a very large proportion of functional terms corresponding to exactly one family, and almost none close to the superfamily level. this suggests that the relationships between members of a superfamily and their distance apart is evolutionary, having been based on evidence from structure and sequence , but the granularity at which to divide the members of a superfamily is decided by function. i.e. domains are not grouped based on their function, but the number of groups relates to the number of functions.

CONCLUSIONS
sequence information contributes to the classification of domains into families, but alone is not enough. to classify a family evolutionarily: it must be consistent with sequence phylogenetics, will likely draw on structural distance, and will often coincide with a particular function. sequence diversity between families  is considerably greater than within a family. sequence phylogenetics do not give a strong enough signal at the superfamily level to classify families, but where there is a signal it is consistent with the scop classification. structural information is necessary for identifying evolutionary relationships of families in a superfamily where sequence identity is low. we see that although function does not determine the relationships, i.e. edges, it is used to guide the level at which the tree is cut to make a family, i.e. the choice of node from which to derive a clade .

the families in scop represent a level at which sequence, structure, function plus other information on a shared peculiarity must all be taken into account. a balance of the strengths of signals available is used to establish the evolutionary relationships and resolve the groupings.

