BACKGROUND
polyploid speciation, characterized by a heritable increase in the copy number of the nuclear genome, has played a key role in plant evolution  <cit> . indeed, recent analyses estimated that all seed plants trace their origins to a few polyplodization events  <cit>  and that 15% of speciation events involved polyplodization  <cit> . occurring either between  or within the same species , polyploidization often involves hybridization between genetically differentiated populations, also in the latter case  <cit> . polyploids can form repeatedly from different populations of the same progenitor species , a pattern that further contributes to the increase of genetic variability typical of polyploids, as compared to relatives at lower ploidy levels  <cit> . additionally, the higher genetic variability and the epigenetic alterations usually associated with polyploids have been invoked to explain their wider ecological tolerance and adaptive success  <cit> .

the effects of pleistocene glacial cycles on alpine and arctic regions presumably played a key role in promoting polyploid speciation. according to the secondary contact model  <cit> , glacial advancement during glacial maxima fragmented once continuous populations that then differentiated in isolation. upon glacial retreat, these partially differentiated populations may have come into contact again, occasionally giving origin to hybrids that were then stabilized by polyploidization. the higher genetic variability and adaptive potential of the polyploids would have increased their ability to become established in newly available areas following glacial retreat, thus explaining the higher frequency of polyploids at higher altitudes and latitudes  <cit> . molecular investigations have since provided evidence supporting speciation via secondary contact in several alpine/arctic species .

polyploidization within the context of the pleistocene glacial cycles has been proposed as the main evolutionary process driving the diversification of at least two sections in the alpine/arctic genus primula  <cit> : primula sect. aleuritia  <cit>  and primula sect. auricula  <cit> . the latter section includes p. marginata curtis, endemic to the south-western alps  <cit> . populations at both the hexaploid  and dodecaploid  levels have been reported in p. marginata , the former occurring primarily in the western  and the latter in the eastern part of its range . recently, new disjoint populations of undetermined ploidy level were described in the northern apennines  <cit> .

both allo- and auto-polyploid hypotheses have been suggested to explain the origin of the 12x populations of p. marginata. favarger  <cit>  proposed that the dodecaploid populations derived from hybridization between hexaploid individuals of p. marginata and p. latifolia lapeyr., probably owing to the frequent co-occurrence of the two species. on the contrary, kress  <cit>  favored an autopolyploid origin, owing to the absence of any morphological and ecological differences distinguishing the two ploidy races. in nature, p. marginata is known to hybridize with p. latifolia  <cit>  and p. allionii loisel.  <cit> , both co-occurring species of sect. auricula . in cultivation, p. marginata has also occasionally formed hybrids with p. hirsuta all., another co-occurring species of sect. auricula, but natural hybrids between these two species are unknown  <cit> .

the present study is aimed at clarifying the geographic distribution of p. marginata cytotypes and their evolutionary history by determining the ploidy levels of multiple populations across the entire species range and investigating their phylogenetic relationships with increased infra-specific sampling. more specifically, we are asking the following questions: 1) what is the variation of ploidy levels in p. marginata? are there any intermediate cytotypes? 2) do hexaploid and dodecaploid populations of p. marginata occupy distinct areas of the species range, as suggested by published cytological investigations  <cit> ? 3) do hexaploid and dodecaploid populations form reciprocally monophyletic groups? 4) are the dodecaploid populations of allopolyploid or autopolyploid origin, as proposed by favarger  <cit>  and kress  <cit> , respectively? the results of our study have broader implications to elucidate the role of polyploidization in areas affected by pleistocene glacial cycles.

RESULTS
ploidy level survey
flow cytometry analyses identified two groups of populations based on relative fluorescence intensity : one ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  and the other ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> . the analysis yielded high-resolution histograms, with average cv of  <dig> %  for hexaploids and  <dig> %  for dodecaploids. the investigation of  <dig> individuals revealed no intermediate ploidy levels. in addition, we found no variation of ploidy levels within the same population.

populations codes , numbers of individual analyzed , coefficient of variation in percentage and relative fluorescence intensity, with standard deviation in parentheses, are reported.

cpdna phylogeny
the aligned cpdna data matrix consisted of  <dig> characters , of which  <dig> were variable  and  <dig> parsimony informative . the mp yielded  <dig> most parsimonious trees, with a consistency index  of  <dig> , a retention index  of  <dig>  and a rescaled consistency index  of  <dig> . in both bi and mp majority-rule consensus trees, all p. marginata accessions formed a strongly supported clade with p. latifolia accessions . the clade was divided into two parts . clade  <dig>  comprised both hexaploid  and dodecaploid  populations of p. marginata, located in the south-eastern part of its range, and two populations of p. latifolia . in clade  <dig> of the bayesian phylogeny , the two individuals representing populations mar <dig> and mar <dig>  located on the eastern border of the range, were sister to each other . clade  <dig>  comprised only hexaploid populations of p. marginata , geographically located in the north-western part of its range , together with two individuals of a population of p. latifolia .

the three accessions of p. allionii formed a monophyletic group , subtended by a long branch, that was sister to p. palinuri in the bayesian tree  and formed polytomy with the same species and the p. marginata/p. latifolia clade in the mp tree . all analyses supported a clade formed by p. allionii, p. palinuri, p. latifolia and p. marginata . the two samples of p. hirsuta, the fourth species that geographically co-occurs with p. marginata, were not sister to each other: hir <dig> formed a well-supported clade with p. villosa and p. pedemontana ; hir <dig> was included in a statistically strong clade with p. auricula and p. daonensis .

nrdna variation
between seven and  <dig> ribotypes per individual of p. marginata were detected, for a total of  <dig> nrdna sequences. the matrix included a total of  <dig> characters . we found a total of  <dig> substitutions and two single-nucleotide gaps in the  <dig> s region;  <dig> substitutions and nine gaps, of which five were apomorphic, in the its <dig> region; and  <dig> substitutions and four gaps, of which two were apomorphic, in the its <dig> region. the average g-c content was  <dig> %. only one  of the seven methods implemented in the analysis of recombination using rdp <dig> detected one statistically significant recombination event , indicating that recombinant its clones did not affect our analyses.

two hundred and ninety-seven of the  <dig> characters were variable, of which  <dig> were parsimony informative, corresponding to  <dig> % of the aligned length. mp analyses of the nrdna matrix yielded  <dig> most parsimonious trees, with a ci of  <dig> , ri of  <dig>  and a rc of  <dig> . the consensus trees resulting from both bi and mp analyses of all cloned ribotypes were largely unresolved, with the following main exceptions : i) a clade formed by all sequences of all populations of p. latifolia ; ii) a clade comprising all sequences from the all <dig> population of p. allionii ; iii) a clade formed by sequences from four dodecaploid, western populations of p. marginata ; in the bi tree this clade additionally clusters with two sequences from one population of p. allionii  and one sequence from one hexaploid eastern population of p. marginata ; iv) a small clade including two sequences from the hexaploid mar <dig> population and one sequence from the all <dig> population .

the matrix of cloned its sequences included a total of  <dig> additive polymorphisms in seven sites:  <dig>  occurred in the dodecaploid accessions of p. marginata, whereas only six  belonged to p. marginata hexaploids and three  to p. allionii . conversely, p. latifolia sequences did not display any additive polymorphisms .

summary of additive polymorphisms  detected in the seven sites of the its <dig> and its <dig> regions of p. marginata, p. allionii and p. latifolia: ploidy levels, species names, population codes , and positions of the seven sites in the aligned sequences are reported; ambiguity symbols according to iupac . dashes indicate a gap.

the three first principal coordinates of the pcoa explained  <dig> % of the total molecular variation of the its clones. the results were consistent with the general structure of the its tree , for all sequences of p. latifolia, some sequences of p. allionii, and some sequences from p. marginata 12x samples formed three well to relatively well defined clusters, respectively; conversely, most other sequences from p. allionii and p. marginata hexaploids and dodecaploids clustered together.

the results of amova  indicated that most variation of the its clones is partitioned within individuals , regardless of how the its sequences are grouped. among groups, more variation is partitioned according to taxonomic classification, with  or without  cytological groupings in p. marginata, than according to the clades supported by the cpdna phylogeny .

amova was used to test whether variation was partitioned among groups that corresponded to: h1) the clades of the cpdna phylogeny ; h2) current taxonomical classification ; h3) taxonomical classification with the subdivision of p. marginata in two cytotypes . * = p value <  <dig> ; ns = not significant.

the total nucleotide diversity of cloned its sequences was twice as high in p. marginata dodecaploids than in hexaploids . the kendall tau statistic did not show any significant correlation between the nucleotide diversity of all p. marginata individuals and the number of clones per individuals  nor number of individuals per population .

discussion
pleistocene glacial cycles have been recognized as one of the major drivers of polyploid speciation in several alpine/arctic genera, including cerastiumdrabaparnassiasaxifraga and vaccinium [19; as reviewed in  <cit> . polyploidization involving differentiated progenitors might have occurred in glacial refugia, where several species survived glacial maxima , or via secondary contact between populations that became isolated during glacial maxima and reconnected during interglacials  <cit> , as proposed for primula sect. aleuritia  <cit> .

the pleistocene time frame for the evolution of primula sect. auricula inferred from both a section-wide its phylogeny  <cit>  and a primula-wide cpdna phylogeny  suggests that glacial cycles likely influenced the origin of p. marginata. in the present study, we use multiple lines of evidence to reconstruct the likely evolutionary history of p. marginata in relation to pleistocene climate-dynamics. our combined results allow us to propose possible superimposed processes that left distinctive signatures on the distribution of cytotypes and phylogenetic structure of the p. marginata chloroplast and nuclear genomes, suggesting events that might have occurred at different points in the evolution of the lineage. the complementarity of information between cytotype variation and nuclear and organellar genomes has proven indispensible to elucidate complex evolutionary histories in other boreal taxa, e.g. vaccinium  <cit> , artemisia  <cit> , and nymphaea  <cit> .

flow cytometric analyses  allowed us to expand the relatively limited, available information on cytotype variation  to a survey of  <dig> individuals from  <dig> populations of p. marginata. failure to detect any intermediate cytotypes nor any variation of ploidy levels within populations  are congruent with the preliminary results of crossing experiments suggesting reproductive incompatibilities between the two cytotypes . our investigations also enable us to confirm that the hexaploid and dodecaploid populations of p. marginata occur primarily in the western and eastern parts, respectively, of the species’ distributional range .

both adaptive and non-adaptive processes can explain the infra-population uniformity of cytotypes and their geographic separation. in the adaptive scenario, novel genetic combinations in the polyploids may allow them to adapt to different environmental conditions corresponding to specific geographic areas  <cit> . in the non-adaptive scenario, hybridization between cytotypes is thought to be either non-viable or produce plants with lower fitness, gradually leading to the elimination of the minority cytotype through frequency-dependent mechanisms . these non-adaptive processes, while producing cytological uniformity, promote differentiation in a stochastic manner that does not usually produce distinct morphological and ecological characteristics  <cit> . in p. marginata the lack of morphological distinctiveness of the two cytotypes  <cit>  and the absence of any obvious new ecological preferences in the dodecaploids  <cit>  all fit the predictions of the non-adaptive scenario.

the two cytotypes of p. marginata do not form distinct clades either in the cpdna or in the nrdna phylogenies , a pattern that seems more congruent with the stochastic nature of non-adaptive processes than with a scenario implying divergence between cytotypes adapted to distinct ecological conditions in different parts of the species range  <cit> . despite the lack of reciprocal monophyly between the western, hexaploid and the eastern, dodecaploid populations, respectively, a signal of some geographic structure is detectable in the cpdna topology. in this tree, the sequences of five hexaploid populations from the western part of the p. marginata range form a clade with a population of p. latifolia located further to the east , and a mixture of sequences from hexaploid and dodecaploid p. marginata populations eastward of the previously mentioned ones form a clade with two other samples of p. latifolia . the sharing of cpdna haplotypes between p. marginata and p. latifolia might be explained by reticulation or incomplete lineage sorting from a polymorphic ancestor  <cit> . these processes are not necessarily mutually exclusive and are difficult to disentangle. however, assuming that the dna sequences under exam are not under selection, a geographical pattern, as observed in our case, more likely results from introgression than lineage sorting  <cit> .

in light of the non-adaptive scenario invoked above to explain the spatial separation between hexaploid and dodecaploid populations of p. marginata and the pleistocene time frame for the evolution of primula sect. auricula , it is plausible to propose that abiotic processes, likely involving range fragmentation and/or shift during glacial maxima, contributed to the geographic signature in the cpdna tree. more specifically, the clustering of all sampled dodecaploid populations of p. marginata with hexaploid populations from the southern portion of its distribution , located in the glacial refugium of the maritime alps  <cit> , might indicate that refugial populations from this area likely played a role in the origin of the dodecaploids. this explanation of geographic structure in the cpdna phylogeny is consistent with the general interpretation of refugia on the southern side of the alps as reservoirs of evolutionary potential during the climatic oscillations of the pleistocene  <cit> . to summarize, the cpdna tree indicates that, among the species of sect. auricula that co-occur in the western alps and are known to form hybrids with p. marginata either in nature or in cultivation  <cit> , the latter shares a more recent common ancestor with p. latifolia than with p. allionii or p. hirsuta, while it excludes a close relationship with the allopatric p. auricula  <cit> .

the nrdna tree does not corroborate the common ancestry between p. marginata and p. latifolia supported by the cpdna topology. the greater partitioning of its variation according to taxonomic groups  than to the clades supported by the cpdna phylogeny  provides a further indication of the topological conflict between the two phylogenies. in the nuclear phylogeny, all sequences from three populations of p. latifolia are included in a monophyletic group, while those of p. marginata and p. allionii are unresolved. some sequences from a southern population of p. allionii  share more recent common ancestors with sequences from hexaploid or dodecaploid populations of p. marginata  than with sequences from a northern population of p. allionii , which form a well-supported clade . the non-monophyly of ribotypes from the same species may result from introgression between p. marginata-like and p. allionii-like ancestors, eventually leading to the homogenization of all <dig> sequences towards the p. marginata ribotypes. the interdigitation of nrdna sequences in the phylogeny is reflected in the lack of distinct species clusters in the corresponding pcoa scatterplot . congruently, most its variation is allocated within individuals  rather than between groups in the amova . our results also contradict the sister relationship between p. marginata and p. latifolia supported by one of  <dig> equally parsimonious trees derived from direct sequencing of its amplicons in a previous study, where no cloning was performed  <cit> . in summary, nuclear ribotypes from different individuals of a p. allionii population located in the southern refugium of the roya valley in the maritime alps  <cit>  and some hexaploid and dodecaploid populations of p. marginata coalesced more recently than haplotypes within the respective species, indicating a close and complex evolutionary history for their nuclear genomes.

discrepancies between the phylogenetic signal of chloroplast and nuclear genomes have been found in several other polyploid complexes of the northern hemisphere . explanations for cytonuclear conflicts range from differential substitution rates between the two genomes, hybridization/introgression, paralogy and incomplete homogenization or lineage sorting, especially of the nuclear sequences, or a combination of various processes  <cit> . reciprocal illumination between different lines of evidence may help to favour some explanations over others. for instance, the neutral theory of molecular evolution  <cit>  predicts that nuclear sequences should take longer to coalesce than organellar sequences, due to the larger, genetically effective population size of the former, especially in polyploid species  <cit> . conversely, concerted evolution is supposed to speed the homogenization of multiple copies, as in the nrdna region  <cit> . another observation relevant to the interpretation of discrepancies between cpdna and nrdna phylogenies is that cpdna sequences tend to evolve more slowly than its sequences, thus the former might be more suitable to track deeper evolutionary events, while the latter might better capture the phylogenetic signature of more recent events . therefore, our phylogenetic results, taken together, seem compatible with the hypothesis of an initial homoploid introgression of the chloroplast genome between a p. latifolia-like ancestor and a p. marginata lineage, resulting in the persistence of cpdna sequences that are more closely related to heterospecific than conspecific sequences . the initial episode of chloroplast capture was probably followed by the separation between western and eastern populations of p. marginata, possibly driven by advancement of glaciers during glacial maxima, and the subsequent origin of the dodecaploids . the occurrence of its clones from the all <dig> population of p. allionii in clades with dodecaploid and hexaploid individuals of p. marginata suggests that an ancestral southern population located in the roya valley, which was ice free in the last glacial maximum  <cit> , might have played a crucial role in the origin of p. marginata dodecaploids . however, the lack of intermediate cytotypes in p. marginata  and of any admixed individuals in an aflp survey of p. marginata and p. latifolia  <cit>  implies that the three species might have been evolutionarily isolated more recently, an interpretation also proposed by kadereit et al.  <cit> .

the higher proportion of its additive polymorphisms in dodecaploid than in hexaploid accessions of p. marginata  and higher total nucleotide diversity of its clones in the sequences of dodecaploid vs. hexaploid individuals  are congruent with an allopolyploid explanation for the origin of the dodecaploid populations of this primrose  <cit> . at the same time, the occurrence of shared additivity between p. allionii and p. marginata suggests a role of the former in the evolutionary history of the latter. the allopolyploid interpretation for the origin of p. marginata dodecaploids might appear to conflict with their lack of morphological differentiation . our case study might represent an example where the allopolyploids resemble one of the putative parental lineages, a situation that has been found also in mimulus  <cit>  and centaurea toletana  <cit> ; as reviewed in  <cit>  and is compatible with the non-adaptive scenario  <cit>  proposed above to explain the geographic separation between hexaploid and dodecaploid populations.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our results suggest that the dodecaploids of p. marginata are most likely of allopolyploid origin, as already proposed by favarger  <cit> , and that their origin is probably best interpreted within the context of glacial cycles during the pleistocene, as proposed for the evolution of polyploids in primula sect. aleuritia  <cit> . while cpdna introgression from a p. latifolia-like to a p. marginata-like lineage might have occurred earlier, subsequent hybridization events between southern refugial populations of hexaploid p. allionii-like and p. marginata-like ancestors were probably responsible for the origin of dodecaploid populations in the latter. our study thus further underscores the important role of southern refugia, specifically in the maritime alps, as cradles of new biological diversity during the pleistocene glaciations, as suggested also for other plant groups .

the adaptive vs. non-adaptive nature of the processes leading to the establishment of polyploids has different taxonomic consequences. in the adaptive scenario, the newly formed polyploids are adapted to specific ecological conditions and often display correspondingly distinct morphological characteristics, thus justifying the assignment of the different cytotypes to separate taxonomic units. conversely, in the non-adaptive scenario, the frequent lack of any distinctive ecological or morphological features between cytotypes does not allow for any clear taxonomic differentiation. therefore, the current evolutionary state of the hexaploid and dodecaploid cytotypes in p. marginata does not warrant taxonomic distinction, as already observed in other species . however, if the dodecaploids of p. marginata continue to remain reproductively isolated from the hexaploids of the same species and from p. allionii, as implied by the absence of intermediate cytotypes in their populations, over time they might differentiate from their relatives also morphologically, eventually leading to the origin of a taxonomically diagnosable species.

