BACKGROUND
mycoplasmas are the simplest and smallest living prokaryotes , and although phylogenetically related to gram-positive bacteria, lack a cell wall
 <cit> . they also have the smallest recorded genomes  –  <dig>  mb) for bacterial species that can replicate autonomously, and have colonized a wide range of hosts including, humans and animals
 <cit> . however, efforts to manipulate mycoplasma genomes are fraught with difficulties owing to the lack of genetic tools available for these organisms
 <cit> . this has made understanding the biology and elucidating the host-pathogen mechanism for any potential therapeutics, including vaccine development, challenging.

one of the early genetic tools that were developed for understanding mycoplasma biology was the generation of oric plasmids that could replicate in mycoplasma cells
. although heterologous gene expression and targeted gene disruption by single-crossover recombination were demonstrated in mycoplasma mycoides subspecies capri  and m. capricolum subspecies capricolum , no recombination events were observed in the closely related m. mycoides subspecies mycoides 
 <cit> . in addition, maintaining stable mutants using oric plasmids turned out to be difficult and laborious
 <cit> . thus, alternate strategies were designed, including a transposon-based method to generate mutants with low passage numbers that were free of antibiotic-resistance genes
 <cit> . transposon-based mutagenesis has been prevalently used as a genetic tool in mycoplasmas to generate mutants of interest as well as to define essential genes required for survival
. furthermore, a double-crossover homologous recombination method using a suicide plasmid has been described for m. genitalium, albeit at a very low frequency
, but this method did not address seamless deletion and removal of markers
 <cit> . therefore, to overcome stability and marker recycling issues, we turned to yeast genetics and synthetic biology to extend the genetic toolbox of mycoplasmas. with recent advancements in synthetic genomics including, cloning of the mmc genome in yeast, manipulation of the mycoplasma genome using yeast genetic tools, transplantation of the engineered mycoplasma genome from yeast to a bacterial recipient cell, and creation of the synthetic cell, expression of the engineered genome became possible
. mycoplasma genomes including m. genitalium , m. pneumoniae , and mmc  were first cloned into yeast with the idea of implementing yeast genetics tools to engineer genetically intractable organisms
.

once cloned in yeast, bacterial genomes can be theoretically manipulated by yeast genetic tools. the ura <dig> marker/5-foa counter-selection is a common technique in which the marker can be recycled to create seamless gene deletions, replacements, or gene knock-ins. however, we have previously shown that this conventional two-step method was very inefficient in engineering a mycoplasma genome cloned in yeast due to instability of the genome where high background of 5-foa resistant colonies resulted from non-specific removal of the ura <dig> marker
 <cit> . development of the tandem repeat coupled with endonuclease cleavage  method has greatly improved the efficiency of seamless gene deletions
 <cit> . trec can be also applied in gene knock-in via a single step transformation where the knock-in sequence is placed outside the cassette and immediately next to the repeated sequence . the removal of the cassette leaves the knock-in sequence in the target site seamlessly. although trec method is currently the best tool that can seamlessly engineer a genome cloned in yeast
 <cit> , the process is sometimes inefficient with a high background of transformation, arising possibly due to illegitimate recombination . to overcome this limitation of trec-mediated gene insertion, we developed a modified method, called trec assisted gene knock-in  that significantly improves the efficiency of gene knock-in and vastly reduces screening effort. this method relies on the split marker system whereby the gene is delivered by a non-functional truncated antibiotic resistant gene module kanmx, and a site-specific gene insertion is selected by functional restoration of the full length kanmx gene. here, we demonstrate the feasibility of trec-in in the mmc genome using two examples a) replacement of an endogenous gene with an orthologous one, and b) essential gene complementation in a genome reduction study.figure  <dig> 
brief outline of trec and background formation. the gene to be inserted , indicated by a purple arrow can be seamlessly inserted into a target site  via trec. the knock-in sequence  is placed immediately downstream of the repeat sequence   in the core cassette . after integration, induction of double strand break can promote homologous recombination between the two repeat sequences, leading to removal of the core cassette, as shown on the left. however, a fraction of transforming dna may circularize itself through illegitimate recombination or non-homologous end joining, where broken dna ends join. the resulting dna may be maintained as a non-integrated plasmid if the knock-in sequence contains ars activity, as shown on the right. uhr, indicates upstream homology region, and dhr, downstream homology region.



RESULTS
design of the trec-in
the design of trec-in is based on the previous trec strategy and incorporates a split marker approach with an additional step for a gene knock-in that is mediated by a functional restoration of the kanamycin resistance gene module, kanmx. the procedure involves three steps: first, insertion of a core <dig> cassette to the target locus; second, site-specific gene integration; and third, seamless cassette recycling . in the first step, the core <dig> cassette, which consists of the  <dig> bp i-scei binding site, the i-scei endonuclease encoding gene under the control of the yeast gal <dig> promoter, the klura <dig> gene and a 5′ truncated kanmx gene component, is introduced to the target site. similar to the trec method, two sequences of about  <dig> bp that are homologous to the target site are added into the core <dig> cassette by pcr on 5′ and 3′ ends of the cassette so that they flank the core <dig> cassette . transformation of the core <dig> cassette into yeast and homologous recombination at the target site results in the replacement of the target site by the core <dig> cassette. transformed yeast colonies are selected for uracil prototrophs, and further analyzed by pcr screening to confirm that the homologous recombination has occurred at the correct target site . the second step of trec-in involves construction and transformation of the knock-in module containing a 3′ truncated kanmx gene component and the knock-in sequence. the kanamycin resistance gene and the knock-in sequence are separated by a repeat sequence of about  <dig> bp in length, which is identical to upstream sequences of the target site in the core <dig> cassette . this knock-in module is flanked at the 5′ end by a region of the kanamycin resistance gene to allow for homologous recombination at the 3′ end of the core <dig> cassette. on its 3′ end, the knock-in module is flanked by the same homologous region that is also present on the 3′ end of the core <dig> cassette to allow for recombination at the target site . upon transformation, the knock-in module integrates into the target site, resulting in an insertion containing two repeat sequences encompassing three genes  and the knock-in sequence. transformed yeast colonies are selected for resistance against the antibiotic geneticin, and then analyzed by pcr screening to confirm correct insertion. in the third step of trec-in, the whole cassette flanked by the two repeat sequences is removed via homologous recombination between the two repeat sequences. the efficiency of the recombination is enhanced by the double strand break  generated by the cleavage of the endonuclease i-scei at the  <dig> bp recognition site in the cassette after galactose induction. the removal of the klura <dig>  i-scei, and the kanmx module counter-selected by 5-foa would leave no scar. only the knock-in sequence remains at the target site. yeast cells that are resistant to 5-foa are screened by pcr for the precise insertion of the replacement sequence .figure  <dig> 
schematic representation of trec-in.  outline of the trec-in method. step 1: the target region  is replaced with a core <dig> cassette by homologous recombination via two 50-bp homology sequences . transformed cells were selected for uracil prototrophy. the cassette includes the reconstituted i-scei binding site , and the i-sce <dig> gene under the control of the gal <dig> promoter, a uracil marker, and 5’ kanmx gene componenet. step 2: the knock-in module  is transformed and selected on geneticin resistance for full complementation of the kanmx gene component. step 3: yeast colonies are grown in presence of galactose to express i-scei, which produces a double-strand break at the i-scei site, and enhances homologous recombination  between the two rs, resulting in excision of the core <dig> and knock-in modules. colonies are grown on 5-foa for uracil counter selection. primers to confirm correct insertions are shown by dashed arrows, and synthetic primers are represented by kinked arrows.  core <dig> cassette construction. the core <dig> cassette is amplified from pcore <dig> to add four nucleotides  for full reconstitution of the i-scei binding site .  <dig> bp uhr and  <dig> bp dhr, specific to the target site, are also included in the construction.  knock-in module construction. the knock-in module is constructed by a pcr-based fusion method. the two amplicons are the 3’ kanmx gene component carrying the 3’ region of kanamycin gene , the rs, and a homology region to the 5’ region of the kanamycin gene in core <dig> , and the replacement gene  flanked by the rs and dhr.



replacement of the mccorthologous dnaagene in the mmcgenome
to demonstrate precise replacement of an orthologous gene in the mmc genome, trec-in was applied to replace the mmc dnaa gene, which is essential for chromosomal replication and viability
 <cit> , with the orthologous dnaa gene from mcc. the mmc  and mcc dnaa genes  share 95% sequence identity at both the nucleotide and protein levels . as described in methods, the first step of trec-in resulted in the precise replacement of the endogenous dnaa gene by the core <dig> cassette . the promoter and 3′ region of the mmc dnaa gene were left unaltered. in the second step of trec-in, the orthologous mcc dnaa gene was integrated downstream of the core <dig> cassette under geneticin selection . in the third step, dsb at the i-scei site promoted homologous recombination between the two repeat sequences, followed by precise and seamless insertion of the mcc dnaa gene in the mmc genome . each step of the deletion and replacement procedure was evaluated by pcr screening to confirm the correct insertions and junctions .

upon transformation, seven colonies were screened by pcr and all the colonies were found to be positive for core <dig> replacement [figure 
3b ]. in the second step, we pcr-screened  <dig> geneticin-resistant colonies for multiple junctions and found that 33/ <dig>  of the colonies were positive for the precise insertion of the cassette at the targeted locus [figure 
3b ]. in the third step, i-scei-mediated dsb resulted in 27/ <dig>  of the colonies showing precise removal of the cassette, resulting in a clean insertion [figure 
3b ]. of note, pcr-screening [figure 
3b  and
3b ] indicated that while majority of the colonies obtained resulted in seamless replacement of the knock-in gene, the remaining 9% and 25% colonies respectively, were positive for only one or two of the junctions tested, suggesting non-specific recombination. thus, trec-in proves to be a valuable genetic tool to overcome background issues and facilitate gene knock-in experiments with increased efficiency.figure  <dig> 
replacement of mcc dnaa gene in the mycoplasma genome.  schematic representation of replacement of the mmc dnaa gene with an orthologous gene from mcc. here, the dnaa gene in the mmc genome  was replaced by the mcc orthologue  using trec-in. diagnostic primers to confirm correct insertion of the cassettes and seamless replacement of the endogenous dnaa gene are indicated by dashed arrows .  pcr screening to confirm replacement of the mmc dnaa gene with an orthologous gene from mcc.  dna from yeast colonies after selection on sd-his-ura were amplified using primers dg1f/dg1r  and dg2f/dg2r .  dna from yeast colonies after selection on geneticin were amplified using primers dg2f/dg4r , dg6f/dg5r  and dg3f/dg2r .  dna from yeast colonies after selection on 5-foa were amplified using primers dg1f/dg5r  and dg3f/dg2r . a representative of  <dig> colonies is shown for each transformation and for each junction.



both, the dnaa gene-deleted and dnaa gene-complemented mmc genomes were transplanted to generate the mutant mmc strains, as described previously
 <cit> . as expected, genome transplantation of the dnaa gene-deleted genome resulted in non-viability. however, replacement of the orthologous mcc dnaa gene resulted in a viable cell. the resulting colonies were of similar size to those of the control wild-type mmc colonies . genomic dna from the dnaa-replaced mmc cells was isolated and analyzed by sequencing to confirm the precise and scar-less insertion of the mcc dnaa gene.

application of trec-in for genome reduction in the mmcgenome
global transposon random mutagenesis has been widely used to identify non-essential genes in minimal genome studies in prokaryotes
. therefore, using transposons, we generated a high-resolution map of non-essential gene candidates on a synthetic mmc genome . to carry out a top-down genome reduction strategy, consecutive non-essential genes were grouped into multigene deletion targets and were labeled non-essential gene clusters . in some cases, several negcs were interspersed by single or a few tn5-defined essential genes. to achieve genome reduction more efficiently, the trec-in approach was tested to remove multiple negcs simultaneously, and then add back the essential genes to the genome that were interspersed between them. to demonstrate this application, we chose a  <dig> kb region of the synthetic mmc genome  covering two negcs consisting of  <dig> genes, separated by a tn5-denfined essential gene  for deletion . in the first step of trec-in, the integration of the core <dig> cassette at the target site resulted in the deletion of the two negcs  along with the intervening essential gene ssra  from the mmc syn <dig> genome. in the second step of trec-in, transformation of the knock-in module resulted in the precise insertion of the mmc ssra gene back into the synthetic mmc genome. the precise cluster deletion followed by insertion of the ssra gene was verified by pcr screening . the phenotypes of both cluster-deleted and ssra gene-complemented mmc strains were determined by genome transplantation. we found that the whole  <dig> kb deletion comprising  <dig> genes resulted in a non-functional genome as observed by the lack of viable cells. however, cis-complementation of the ssra gene rescued the lethal phenotype. transplantation colonies from the ssra complemented synthetic mmc genome were viable, and showed similar colony size to those of the control synthetic mmc cells . genomic dna from the ssra complemented mmc cells was isolated and analyzed. sequencing of the complemented ssra region in the isolated modified synthetic mmc genome confirmed the precise and seamless insertion of the essential mmc ssra gene and deletion of the two negcs.figure  <dig> 
cluster deletion and replacement of an essential gene using trec-in.  schematic of replacement of the intervening ssra essential gene  upon cluster deletion in mmc syn <dig>  in step  <dig>  the target region  containing the ssra gene and two adjacent non-essential clusters  were replaced with the core <dig> cassette. in step  <dig>  a knock-in module was integrated into the target site by co-transforming two pcr products. one of the amplicons contained the ssra gene,  <dig> bp rs, and  <dig> bp dhr. the other amplicon included the 3’ region of the kanmx split marker gene component,  <dig> bp rs, and  <dig> bp homology region to the 5’ kanmx gene component in the core <dig> cassette. homologous recombination resulted in full complementation of the kanmx gene component. yeast colonies were selected for geneticin resistance and then grown on galactose. in step  <dig>  galactose induces i-scei expression, which produces double-strand break at the i-scei site and enhances intra-molecular homologous recombination  between the two rs, resulting in excision of the core <dig> cassette. colonies were grown on 5-foa for uracil counter selection.  pcr screening to confirm cluster deletion and replacement of the ssra essential gene.  dna from four yeast colonies after selection on 5-foa were amplified using diagnostic primers  d0152/162-dgf and 0158-dgr , and  d0152/162-dgf and d0152/162-dgr .



discussion
mycoplasmas infect a wide range of hosts, including humans and animals, and in some cases, even contribute towards economic havoc
 <cit> . therefore, developing better genetic tools to study and contain these pathogens has become a priority. mmc, with its relatively small genome, and ease of manipulation
 <cit>  is not only being probed as a model to study pathogenesis, but also as a model organism to test the concept of a minimal cell, where essential genes and functions are being determined. additionally, mmc is also being modeled as a platform to develop tools towards vaccine development that can be applied to other mycoplasma species. however, the existing genetic tool box makes it difficult to study this bacterial species.

with recent advancements in synthetic genomics, it is now possible to engineer the mmc genome using yeast genetic tools, including trec
. development of trec is based on a modified yeast system where generation of seamless deletions
 <cit>  and point mutations  in the mycoplasma genome is now made possible by using the yeast dna repair machinery. in principle, the trec method can be employed to insert genes of interest into the mmc genome. however, several attempts to knock-in an mmc gene into the mmc genome were inefficient with a high background of transformation. since yeast arss are a-t rich, and the mycoplasma genome is relatively a-t rich, it is reasonable to speculate that gene knock-ins containing a-t rich sequences of mycoplasma genomes likely contain ars activity
 <cit> . akada and colleagues reported that a gene containing an ars performs inefficient chromosomal integration
 <cit> . thus, a portion of the transforming dna can circularize through illegitimate recombination or nhej
 <cit> , and be maintained as a non-integrated free plasmid in the yeast cell . to circumvent this problem, we developed trec-in, which can efficiently produce gene knock-ins without leaving any scars. since the trec-in method encompasses elements of the trec method and a split marker system for seamless replacement of nucleotide sequences at any given location on the genome, background issues arising from unwanted ars activity and a-t rich content are greatly reduced. in the example of dnaa gene replacement  trec-in was employed to replace the a-t rich mmc gene with an orthologous gene from mcc. however in this case, direct comparison with trec was not possible because the orthologous genes share a high degree of homology  and the trec design would not be able to resolve partial recombination occurring between the two genes, as expected. therefore by using trec-in, efficiency of replacement is vastly improved with frequencies of obtaining a positive clone nearing 75% , thus circumventing the cumbersome screening process of trec which would be labor and time intensive. of note, comparing efficiencies between trec and trec-in proves to be complicated as it varies on a case-case basis where a-t content and secondary structure has to be taken into consideration.

furthermore, trec-in can also been extended to delete genes with possible ars-like activity from the mmc genome, which are very difficult to achieve by the trec method. for example, we made several attempts to delete the glycerol facilitator  gene from the mmc genome using trec . we found transformations yielded increased levels of background colonies growing on selective media, without the correct replacement. yet, when the trec-in strategy was applied to delete the mmc glpf gene, all colonies obtained contained the precise and seamless deletion of the glpf gene . in contrast to the trec method, no background colonies were observed. while trec-in depends upon integration of the core cassette to the target site, there is some flexibility in choosing the integration sites. depending on the case, the design can be modified to target sequences that may reside in upstream or downstream adjacent genes if the original target sites prove to be difficult. the adjacent genes can then be restored by including the deleted sequence in the knock-in fragment. the glpf deletion described above provides such an example. in this case, the design for the downstream homologous region  was modified to include part of the neighboring glpk gene, in order to bypass a specificity issue at the 3′ end of the glpf gene. the missing mmc glpk region was complemented in the second step of the trec-in method.

trec has been employed to delete target sites of greater than  <dig> kb seamlessly in mmc , and since trec-in utilizes elements of the trec, it can be speculated that trec-in can also be used to seamlessly delete similarly large nucleotide tracts. although analysis of knock-in sequences larger than  <dig> kb has not been carried out, it is theoretically possible that trec-in would be able to handle larger fragments, possibly with lower efficiency in trying to complete homologous recombination. in summary, trec-in proved to be useful in modifying regions of the genome that tend to be difficult to engineer either due to high a-t content or ars activity, where trec or other conventional yeast genetic tools maybe limiting.

CONCLUSIONS
the trec-in method proves to be a powerful genetic tool for manipulating mycoplasma genome. in addition to finding applications in our top-down genome minimization of mmc , this method can be employed to explore homologous complementation studies in other related organisms, including m. leachii, and m. putrefaciens efficiently without the cumbersome screening process that would be required by trec alone. by using trec-in to manipulate metabolic pathways, pathogenic and virulence factors may be studied with relative ease; thereby facilitating better vaccine design against some of the economically devastating livestock diseases such as contagious bovine pleuropneumonia caused by mycoplasmas
 <cit> . in our studies of mycoplasma biology, trec and trec-in dramatically increased our ability to manipulate the genomes of genetically intractable bacteria. as synthetic genomics techniques are extended to other bacteria that are difficult to manipulate genetically, trec and trec-in will become even more valuable as tools for engineering bacterial genomes cloned as yeast centromeric plasmids.

