BACKGROUND
the olive fly, bactrocera oleae  , is the major insect pest of olives. females typically lay a single egg per olive  <cit> , injected into the fruit through the female's ovipositor. the developing larva tunnels through the olive, feeding on the fleshy mesocarp. heavy olive fly infestation can reduce the quality and therefore the value of the olive oil by up to 80%, and cause the rejection of entire harvests of table olives  <cit> . control currently relies overwhelmingly on the use of chemical insecticides, and because of the high economic and environmental costs of chemical control, together with the appearance of insecticide-resistant populations  <cit> , there is an urgent need for improved control methods.

the sterile insect technique  is an environmentally friendly and species-specific method of pest control based on the release of large numbers of sterilised insects  <cit> . competition for mating between wild and sterile males results in a decrease in the number of fertile matings, and a decline in the overall population size. sit has been successfully implemented against various pest insect species including several tephritidae. however, despite decades of research aimed at developing an olive fly sit programme using radiation-sterilised flies  <cit> , the consistently poor results led to eventual abandonment of the trials. key issues included low quality of the radiation-sterilised mass-reared flies, economical production of sufficient numbers of sterilised flies, and assortative mating of released and wild populations because of different preferred mating times  <cit> . laboratory-reared wild-type flies were found to mate several hours earlier than wild flies  <cit>  . the proposed solution was male-only release  <cit> . male-only release using a genetic sexing strain has also been shown to give a threefold to fivefold improvement in the performance of released radiation-sterilised ceratitis capitata  males used for sit  <cit> .

the ridl®  system is a transgene-based derivative of sit  <cit> , one version of which involves the mass release of insects carrying a female-specific lethal transgene   <cit> . encouraged by work advancing olive fly mass rearing by the international atomic energy agency  and others, we set out to develop fsridl strains of olive fly to overcome the remaining historic limitations of olive fly sit. we therefore transformed the olive fly with construct ox <dig>  an fsridl system that had previously provided suitable fsridl strains for medfly, incorporating genetic sexing, genetic sterilisation, and a heritable fluorescent marker  <cit> .

we report the development of the first transgenic control strains for the olive fly. the lead strain, ox3097d-bol, provides highly penetrant, dominant, female-specific lethality when reared in the absence of a transgene repressor. using a series of behavioral studies, we found that ox3097d-bol males show fully synchronous and strongly competitive mating behavior with wild olive flies, and display no reduction in their ability to induce refractoriness to wild female re-mating. this is a more stringent test than using laboratory wild-type flies, which may have co-adapted to laboratory rearing conditions. furthermore, we describe results from experiments showing the ability of periodic releases of ox3097d-bol males to suppress large caged wild-type olive fly populations.

RESULTS
olive fly transformation with ox <dig> and phenotypic analysis
six transgenic lines were generated carrying the ox <dig> transgene . of the five lines with single insertions, two showed female-specific lethality that was fully penetrant and efficiently repressed by dietary tetracycline . of these, line ox3097d-bol , which also showed the brightest expression of the dsred <dig> fluorescent marker, was selected for further analysis. consistent with previous observations of the ox <dig> construct in medfly  <cit>  and mexfly , female lethality occurred at the early pupal stage. analysis of transgene-derived transcripts indicated that the alternative splicing pattern of the cctra intron in ox3097d-bol olive fly is equivalent to that in its native context  <cit>  . the ox3097d-bol strain was selected for further development, and made homozygous for the transgene.

mating tests with ox3097d-bol and wild olive flies
caged mating competitiveness tests challenging homozygous ox3097d-bol males to compete with wild males for copulations with wild females were performed based on established guidelines  <cit> , using wild olive flies from infested olives collected in crete. in total,  <dig> experiments were performed, each with  <dig> ox3097d-bol males,  <dig> wild males, and  <dig> wild females, thus more than  <dig> total couples were assessed. wild males outperformed ox3097d-bol males, gaining an average of 56% of total mates  =  <dig>  likelihood ratio test for goodness of fit, n = 406). nonetheless, this near-equal outcome far exceeds established thresholds for sit  <cit> . copulation initiation times were also recorded . no significant difference was seen in mating initiation times for each type of male , suggesting synchronicity in mating activity between ox3097d-bol males and wild flies.

olive fly females typically only mate once  <cit> ; males transfer more sperm than the female needs to fertilise all her eggs, and mating induces long-lasting refractoriness to re-mating, although if the females are held in close proximity to males some re-mating occurs. for medfly, radiation sterilisation not only reduces the ability of male flies to compete for mates but also increases the likelihood that mated females will subsequently re-mate; that is, radiation reduces the ability of the males to induce refractoriness to re-mating in females  <cit> . furthermore, the second mate taken is also preferentially wild rather than sterile. these effects of reduced male mating success, increased female re-mating, and preferential mating to wild  males on re-mating each reduce the efficiency of sit. we therefore investigated the effect of first-male genotype on wild female re-mating propensity and second-mate genotype. wild females who had initially mated either an ox3097d-bol male  or a wild male  were caged with and allowed to mate with equal proportions of ox3097d-bol and wild males over  <dig> days. no significant differences in re-mating rate , or second-mate genotype were seen  .

elimination of caged olive fly populations
we tested the ability of periodic release of ox3097d-bol males to suppress target populations of wild-type olive fly, as published previously  <cit> . wild-type populations totaling approximately  <dig> male and female olive flies were established in each of four large  cages in a greenhouse at the university of crete. at week  <dig> from first establishment, approximately  <dig>  ox3097d-bol male pupae were introduced per week. population density was monitored by measuring egg production  and female mortality . to track mating outcomes, pupae taken from the cage were scored for fluorescence . fluorescent pupae were detected at three weeks post-first release  and the proportion increased rapidly thereafter to 100% by week  <dig> pr. death of fluorescent  female pupae as a result of expression of the lethal phenotype would reduce the number of egg-laying adult females; based on the fluorescence data, no wild-type females emerged  in the treatment cages from week  <dig> pr. egg production was lower in the treatment than in the control cages in week  <dig> pr, and declined rapidly thereafter. the numbers of dead females recovered from treatment cages started to decrease from around week  <dig> to  <dig> pr, presumably due to a decline in overall female numbers. defining extinction as  <dig> weeks of zero egg production  <cit> , both treatment cage populations were extinct by week  <dig> pr.

discussion
an effective non-chemical approach to olive fly management is highly desirable, and sit could provide this if specific technical issues can be overcome. considerable progress has been made by others in respect of olive fly mass-rearing and release, and we set out to overcome the key remaining issues through genetics.

the use of genetic technology in food production has been controversial in some countries, notably within the european union . it is possible that the use of genetically modified arthropods to protect the crop in a sustainable way, which leaves little or no residue in the food product  might be more acceptable in the eu than food products that are produced directly from genetically modified organisms. for comparison, the standing committee on the food chain and animal health stated that foods and feeds produced by fermentation with genetically modified microorganisms that are not present in the final product are "excluded from the scope of regulations"  <cit> . additionally, it is recognized in eu legislation that the presence of technically unavoidable traces of genetically modified organisms in food and feed products should not trigger labeling requirements , as long as appropriate steps to avoid the presence of the materials have been taken. this is also analogous to the situation regarding the presence of wild-type insect parts as contaminants in food products  <cit> .

using modern genetic engineering techniques, we have developed ox3097d-bol, an fsridl olive fly strain that incorporates engineered phenotypes, directly addressing problems encountered in previous unsuccessful olive fly sit trials  <cit> . ox3097d-bol is able to provide 100% male-only release generations when reared in the absence of a dietary transgene repressor. genetic sexing encourages random mating between the wild and the released sterile populations, providing established performance benefits  <cit> . female lethality renders redundant the requirement of performance-reducing and costly sterilisation using ionising radiation. furthermore, the dominant fluorescent marker has the potential to improve field monitoring, and the requirement of tetracycline for female development mitigates risks of accidentally released transgenic populations establishing in the wild. introgression of susceptibility alleles through the female line provides a resistance management option for other control methods used with fsridl in an integrated pest-management programme  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the good mating characteristics of ox3097d-bol males seen in this study, including high sexual competitiveness, photo-period compatibility, and efficient induction of re-mating refractoriness in wild females, suggest a strong potential for application in a sit control programme. although the results presented here need field confirmation, the proof-of-principle suppression and elimination of caged wild-type olive fly populations through ox3097d-bol male releases provides evidence for the fsridl approach as a viable method for olive fly control. independently, significant advances have been achieved in olive fly mass-rearing  <cit>  and release  <cit>  techniques. we therefore propose that the development of ox3097d-bol will help form the basis of more effective and more sustainable control of this ancient and destructive olive pest.

