BACKGROUND
in addition to pesticide resistance, detoxification and stress responses are important adaptations that allow insects to overcome the chemical defenses of the plants and animals they feed on. genes associated with these responses have been identified in many insects, including the mosquitoes anopheles gambiae <cit>  and aedes aegypti <cit> , the fruit fly drosophila melanogaster <cit> , the honey bee apis mellifera <cit> , and the red flour beetle tribolium castaneum <cit> . during pollination activities, bees are exposed to toxic substances in the environment, such as pesticides, phytochemicals, microbial toxins, pollutants and other xenobiotics  <cit> , but genomic analyses of the honey bee, a. mellifera, found fewer detoxification genes than are present in d. melanogaster and a. gambiae <cit> . to determine if this phenomenon is common among bees or unique to the honey bee, we evaluated the expression of detoxification and stress related genes in a common western north american bumble bee, bombus huntii . like a. mellifera, b. huntii is a social insect with a diet based on pollen and nectar from a broad array of plants, so environmental exposures to xenobiotics should be similar. in addition, bumble bee susceptibility to pesticides has been found to be similar to that of a. mellifera <cit> .

generally, stress responses and the detoxification of xenobiotics includes three major and interrelated pathways : oxidation-reduction, conjugation, and hydrolysis  <cit> . oxidation-reduction enzymes include alcohol dehydrogenases, aldehyde dehydrogenases, cytochrome p450s, hydroxylases and peroxidases. many cytochrome p450s are important enzymes for catalyzing oxidation-reduction reactions, and they are probably important for pesticide detoxification in a. mellifera <cit> ; however, reactive oxygen species , such as hydrogen peroxide, hydroxyl radicals, and superoxides, are typical by-products of these reactions. these ros can be toxic in themselves, but are degraded by antioxidants, facilitated by other oxidation/reduction enzymes such as cuzn superoxide dismutases, catalases and peroxidases . in addition to the detoxification of insecticides and other xenobiotics, many of the oxidation/reduction enzymes are also involved in the normal physiological functioning of insects. for example, cytochrome p450s are also involved in the production of pheromones, ecdysteroids and juvenile hormones  <cit> , and many of the enzymes that breakdown ros are associated with breaking down by-products from metabolism.

the products of oxidation/reduction may be further degraded through conjugation. conjugation is the process by which sugars, amino acids, or glutathione are transferred to a carrier compound for movement out of the cell. a host of conjugation enzymes catalyze these reactions  <cit>  . particularly important in insecticide detoxification are members of the glutathione s-transferases enzyme  superfamily which catalyze the conjugation of oxidized lipids and exogenous toxins, such as pyrethroid and organophosphate pesticides  <cit>  . gsts are also involved in other functions, such as intracellular transport and the biosynthesis of hormones  <cit> .

detoxification is also carried out via hydrolysis, which transfers a hydrogen atom from water to the substrate compound, and these reactions are facilitated by hydrolytic enzymes  <cit>  . for example, carboxyl esterases catalyze the hydrolysis of esters into an acid and an alcohol and are important in the degradation of pyrethroids and organophosphate insecticides  <cit> . in addition to these three pathways, other pathways may be invoked, such as those that involve atp-binding cassette transporters   <cit> , cadherins, or heatshock proteins.

like all bumble bees, the life stages and castes of b. huntii vary considerably in morphology, behavior and activity, and so could be expected to differ in their expression of detoxification and stress related genes. as with all hymenoptera, bumble bees have a haplodiploid sex determination, where males are produced from unfertilized, haploid eggs and females from fertilized, diploid eggs  <cit> . bumble bees live in annual, eusocial colonies founded by a single queen whose daughters form a female worker caste that provides foraging, brood care and nest maintenance  <cit> . a colony begins when a solitary overwintering queen emerges from hibernation, finds a suitable nesting site, provisions the nest with pollen and nectar, and commences laying eggs. the eggs hatch and larvae are fed nectar and pollen by the queen. in the fourth instar, the larvae begin to spin silk cocoons in which they pupate. the new adult bees emerge from their cells by chewing out of the cocoon, and these female workers then take over the responsibilities of brood care and foraging as the nest grows. near the end of the summer, the next generation of reproductive adults is produced and the colony senesces. the new queens fly from the colony to mate with males and then diapause as solitary individuals in a suitable location for the winter, whereas workers, males and the colony’s original queen do not survive the winter.

our goal was to construct a transcriptome of the detoxification and stress response genes expressed in b. huntii. however, due to the complex life cycle of bumble bees, it is possible that not all the relevant genes are expressed in a single caste or life stage. to identify a fuller spectrum of genes expressed in b. huntii, messenger rna  was extracted from eggs, early instar larvae, late instar larvae, pupae, adult workers, adult males, an egglaying queen, and a diapausing queen. the corresponding cdna was sequenced using pyrosequencing, and genes associated with detoxification and stress response were identified. we also compared the number of cytochrome p <dig>  gst and carboxylesterase genes found in b. huntii  to those found in the fly d. melanogaster, and those found in other bees where annotated genomes are available, namely b. terrestris, b. impatiens, a. mellifera, and m. rotundata, to evaluate whether the low number of detoxification genes found in a. mellifera <cit>  is unique to that bee, or more common among bees in general.

RESULTS
an overview of detoxification and stress response genes in b. huntii
we developed a cdna database of  <dig>  contigs and singletons using pyrosequencing of mrna extracted from eggs, larvae, pupae, adult workers, adult males, an egglaying queen, and a diapausing queen of b. huntii. gene expression data were examined two ways: the number of different genes detected within a class of detoxification genes , and the number of transcripts of a particular gene or class of genes . the total gene diversity within all the detoxification and stress response-related genes expressed in b. huntii was approximately  <dig> genes , after we removed sequences with high similarity to microorganisms and plants. of the original detoxification and stress-related gene sequences we identified in the samples,  <dig> % were bacterial,  <dig> % were similar to known plant sequences and  <dig> % were similar to known fungal sequences. these were all removed. among the remaining genes, we identified genes associated with oxidation-reduction, conjugation, and hydrolytic enzymes, as well as some other detoxification and stress responses . the genes for enzymes in each of these four groups were expressed differently in the various life stages and castes, with some expressed in multiple stages and others expressed in only one or two .
bombus huntii
, based on the function assigned when the gene was first isolated

bombus huntii 
i-egg, ii-early instar larvae, iii-late instar larvae, iv-pupae, v-adult male, vi-adult worker, vii-diapausing queen, viii-egglaying queen, all-all stages.
bombus huntii


we found  <dig> genes associated with oxioreductases. most of these were expressed across the majority of the life stages, but adult females had the greatest diversity of expressed gene types in this category .

of the  <dig> conjugation-enzyme related genes we identified, gsts, glycosyltransferases, methyltransferases and aminotransferases  were expressed in all life stages. the genes coding for acetyltransferases, acyltransferases, coa transferases, formyltransferases, and phosphotransferases were also expressed in different life stages, but abundantly in adult females . genes encoding sulfotransferases were expressed only in the diapausing queen .

we detected a total of  <dig> genes for hydrolytic enzymes, across all castes and life stages , but the greatest diversity of expressed gene type was again found in the adult females .

in addition to the genes in these three major groups, we found  <dig> other genes encoding proteins that potentially have a detoxification or stress response function, such as abc transporters, cadherins, heat shock proteins, isomerases and lyases . late instar larvae, pupae and adult males had the lowest diversity of these genes .

gene expression among the different life stages of b. huntii
the goal of this project was to survey detoxification and stress related genes in b. huntii. to do this, we used about  <dig> eggs, 20– <dig> bees for the immature stages , and one or two bees for the adult stages, and then pooled samples within each life stage for the  <dig> sequencing. our sampling, which was not truly replicated within each life stage, provides some preliminary information on the expression levels among the different life stages and castes, but no statistical comparisons could be made. among the immatures, the oxidoreductases were well expressed in the larvae, especially the late instar larvae . within the conjugation enzyme group, the gsts were highly expressed in the immatures, especially the pupae, but not the eggs . genes associated with hydrolytic enzymes were also highly expressed in the immatures, especially the nitrilases, and again, particularly in the late instar larvae sample .

genes associated with oxidation and reduction were well expressed in all the adult stages. the egglaying queen had quite high expression levels of these genes, although not for all the genes . as with the immatures, gsts were the most well expressed genes in the conjugation enzyme group. in contrast to the high gst expression in the immatures, the glycosidases in adults were the most expressed of the hydrolytic enzymes, particularly in the adult workers and the egglaying queen . heat shock protein genes were well expressed in the eggs, the diapausing queen and the egglaying queen, while expression levels in the males was fairly low .

comparison of detoxification genes in b. huntii with other insects
gene diversity for detoxification and stress related genes in b. huntii was similar to, or lower than, that for the other bees , and generally a much lower gene diversity than d. melanogaster . drosophila melanogaster has many more p450s, acyltransferases, gsts, and most of the hydrolases, than any of the bees. one exception is the nitrilases, for which we found a high diversity in b. huntii. the high nitrilase gene diversity does not occur in the other bees . our data was based on a transcriptome and may underrepresent the number of genes, relative to the number identified in the genomes of the other species included in this analysis.
bombus huntii
, in other bees, and in 
drosophila melanogaster


bombus huntii
bombus terrestris
bombus impatiens
apis mellifera
megachile rotundata
drosophila melanogaster
note: the numbers of b. huntii and m. rotundata genes are transcriptome data from  <dig> pyrosequencing, except for p <dig> of m. rotundata which is genomic data. the numbers of b. terrestris, b. impatiens, a. mellifera, and d. melanogaster genes are from genomic data from the ncbi genbank database , and the numbers in brackets below p <dig> or gsts are subgroups of p <dig> or gsts.

we also compared some subgroups within the cytochrome p450s and gsts. within the cytochrome p450s, the cyp <dig> and mitochondrial p <dig> enzymes tend to have endogenous functions, while the cyp <dig> and cyp <dig> enzymes have detoxification functions. we found a similar number of cyp <dig> related genes among the six insects, however a greatly reduced number of cyp <dig> related genes in the bees, relative to d. melanogaster . the gsts are composed of several sub-groups, but the sigma-gsts and epsilon-gsts comprise the main sub-groups with detoxification functions. we found very few sigma-gsts occurred in any of these insects; however, fewer epsilon-gsts occurred in the bees than d. melanogaster .

discussion
female adults  had the greatest diversity and gene expression levels among the detoxification and stress related genes we identified in b. huntii. female adults expressed high levels of putative detoxification genes, while adult males and pupae had relatively lower expression levels of these genes. the low diversity and expression levels in males may in part be associated with haploidy, as was demonstrated in the stingless bee melipona quadrifasciata <cit> . behaviors associated with the different bumble bee castes may also affect gene expression. male activities are all related to feeding themselves and mating; whereas, both workers and queens have more complex behaviors, often with high energy demands . increases in foraging and feeding activity directly increase the risk of exposure to environmental pollutants; furthermore, increased energy demands have been shown to increase consumption rates and the formation of metabolic by-products in a. mellifera <cit> . an actively laying queen may not forage after the first batch of brood matures, but she does have high metabolic demands for egglaying, policing the nest to keep workers from becoming egg layers, and incubating the brood. and, indeed, the diversity and expression of potential detoxification genes is relatively high in queens and workers.

additionally, detoxification activity could be affected by variations in hormone levels and the complex morphological changes that occur in holometabolous insects. changes of hormone levels during insect development are well quantified in drosophila, with the steroid hormone ecdysone showing peaks during the transition from larva to pupa  <cit> . metabolic activity also varies between life stages; most notably it declines during diapause, a dormant state during which respiration is very low. thus, the fact that detoxification genes are more highly expressed in an egglaying than a diapausing queen is not entirely surprising. non-diapausing adults are more active than pupae, but pupae undergo a major metamorphosis, so the relative expression of detoxification and stress related genes is more difficult to predict, but is more likely to be the result of metabolic processes and not a result of xenobiotic exposure.

some detoxification mechanisms may be required more during certain developmental stages, and some genes that we classified as potential detoxification genes may serve non-detoxification functions. for example, glycosidases are more highly expressed in queens and workers than in other stages. glucosidase catalyzes the cleavage of individual glucosyl residues from various glyco-conjugates, a process involved in the breakdown of sugar-containing compounds during the digestion of pollen and nectar. gsts also break down a variety of compounds produced during metabolism and digestion, such as partially digested lipids, in addition to their involvement in the detoxification of environmental toxins, plant allelochemicals, and organochlorine and organophosphate insecticides  <cit> . gst genes are expressed at high levels in b. huntii adults, pupae, and larvae, but at low levels in eggs, which may be related to either differences in metabolism or exposure to environmental toxins. for example, late instar bee larvae accumulate high levels of lipids  <cit>  and the high expression of gsts in pupae may be related to the metabolism of these lipids during pupation. similar results have been reported in other insects such as a. aegypti, lucilia cuprina, and tenebrio molitor, where the enzyme activities of gsts were particularly high in the pupal stage  <cit> . in addition, some cytochrome p450s are involved in lipid metabolism, perhaps explaining why late instar larvae had higher expression levels of cytochrome p450s than early instar larvae.

our gene analysis was based on a transcriptome, and as such, might underrepresent the number of detoxification genes found in the genome. however, we found similar numbers of genes to those found in the genomes of other bees. in addition, we used a large number of individuals for our transcriptome, and from across all the life stages of the bee. thus, our transcriptome is probably a good library of the detoxification and stress related genes found in b. huntii. the fact that our bees were produced in culture on sugar syrup, rather than flower nectar, may have reduced the expression of some detoxification genes, such as has been found with honey bees  <cit> . however, we also fed our bees pollen collected by honey bees, and this likely provided a source of plant based phenolics and perhaps even traces of pesticides.

due to the importance of detoxification capabilities during a bumble bee’s life, one might expect b. huntii to have a genome rich in detoxification genes; however, like other bees such as a. mellifera, b. terrestris and b. impatiens, we found b. huntii to have relatively few p450s, gsts and carboxylesterases/esterases, as compared to d. melanogaster. for example, the number of p <dig> cyp <dig> genes is quite high in d. melanogaster, relative to what we found in b. huntii. bombus huntii also has fewer epsilon-gsts genes in comparison to d. melanogaster, although we found a slightly higher number of sigma-gsts in b. huntii and a. mellifera. epsilon-gsts are known to be involved in ddt  resistance and the detoxification of xenobiotics. the high number of epsilon-gsts in d. melanogaster must reflect either a greater evolutionary diversification of these genes in the fruit fly, a loss of some genes in the bees, or a combination of both. in any case, this could arise if flies tend to have a greater exposure to environmental toxins than do the bees. sigma-gsts are associated with the detoxification of lipid peroxidation products, and provide protection from oxidants produced by the aerobic metabolism of honey, pollen and nectar in the bees  <cit> . thus, the slightly greater number of sigma-gsts in bees also appears to reflect their ecological niche.

we found here that the low number of detoxification genes found in the a. mellifera genome  <cit>  is a phenomenon common to many bees. we hypothesize that this phenomenon may have arose as a result of the symbiotic relationship between bees and flowering plants. flowering plants often produce rewards  to attract bees and other pollinators. furthermore, at least some plants have lower levels of plant defensive compounds in the pollen and nectar  <cit> , and adding plant alkaloids to the nectar reduces pollinator activity on those flowers  <cit> . thus, the detoxification abilities of bees may be less than the flies  due to a lower level of exposure to plant defensive compounds, compounds that plants produce to defend themselves against herbivores not pollinators.

CONCLUSIONS
using transcriptome analysis of all life stages, we found the hunt bumble bee, b. huntii, to have the genetic potential to produce a large number of detoxification and stress related proteins, including oxidation and reduction enzymes, conjugation enzymes, hydrolytic enzymes, abc transporters, cadherins, and heat shock proteins. the number of genes in these pathways was fewer than found in flies, such as d. melanogaster, and slightly lower than that found in the bumble bees b. terrestris and b. impatiens, the honey bee a. mellifera, and the solitary bee m. rotundata. however, a transcriptome may underestimate gene diversity, as compared to studies based on a genome. we also found that, in general, low levels of detoxification and stress related genes are expressed in pupae, adult males and larvae than in adult females. workers and queens express high levels of p450s and glycosidases.

