BACKGROUND
the choroid plexus and the meninges  and associated vasculature  form an entity that is of utmost importance in regulating brain blood flow and cerebrospinal fluid  integrity. as well, they are critical in maintaining the neuronal integrity of the brain, particularly the cerebral hemispheres  <cit> . this is the case when damage to vasculature within specific brain regions in the cerebral hemispheres occurs from neurotoxic doses of amphetamine  in laboratory animals  <cit>  and the abuse or illegal use of amph and methamphetamine  in humans  <cit> . unlike other well characterized cerebrovascular insults  <cit> , much less is known about how amphetamines compromise the vasculature in mav, the choroid plexus, and areas within the cerebral hemispheres. our previous studies  <cit>  examined how amphetamines adversely affect mav vasculature in laboratory animals. however, the effects of neurotoxic doses of amphetamine on choroid plexus function have not been previously addressed.

in the mav, amph and meth directly release norepinephrine from the terminals of adrenergic input to the arteries and arterioles in the pial layer causing vasoconstriction and bypassing neuronal impulse regulation of release from the sympathetic ganglia, which normally auto-regulates cerebral blood flow   <cit> . although this may initially be responsible for reduced cbf in laboratory animals, it is not the only cause  <cit> . in a previous study, we observed increased changes in the expression of genes related to regulating cbf, including endothelin <dig>  and nitric oxide synthase , that may be initiated to overcome the amph dysregulation of cbf; the lack of increased vasointestinal peptide  may be a deficiency induced by amph  <cit> . not only does neurotoxic amph exposure cause a prominent alteration in regulation of vascular tone, it also disrupts the expression of genes related to angiogenesis and produces a significant endoplasmic reticulum stress response   <cit> . as of yet, it is not specifically known how neurotoxic exposures to amph and meth affect choroid plexus vasculature and csf production.

in the current work, efforts were taken to identify genes in mav, as well as the choroid plexus, that are responsible for regulating csf composition and flow because alteration in csf function could lead to significant adverse effects on brain function  <cit> . recent laboratory animal research indicates that most csf exits the brain through the lymphatic system around the cranial nerves rather than the arachnoid villi residing at the most dorsal aspect of the meninges  <cit> . this suggests a csf flow more dorsally directed, which could well necessitate the mav playing a more prominent role in regulating csf flow and composition. as a means of trying to identify genes involved in the regulation of csf flow and composition, we first compared the global gene expression profiles under control conditions in the neuronal-rich tissues striatum and parietal cortex to those in the vascular-rich tissues choroid plexus and mav. this enabled the identification of genes with 15-fold or greater expression in mav and choroid plexus compared to striatum and parietal cortex. in addition to identifying genes related to csf composition and flow, our study further aimed at identifying genes with much higher expression in mav and choroid plexus than in striatum and parietal cortex that could be of great importance in other specific functions  of mav and choroid plexus and possibly more likely to be more significantly affected by amph.

additionally, we examined gene expression changes resulting from environmentally-induced hyperthermia , since the neurotoxicity  <cit>  and vascular effects  <cit>  of amph and meth are highly temperature-dependent. importantly, hyperthermia alone adversely affects the vasculature of the brain  <cit> . as well, eih toxicity in rats has many similar characteristics to heat stroke in humans, which has been reported to have neurotoxic and vascular effects  <cit> . however, unlike amph and meth, eih does not produce dopamine terminal damage or diffuse neurodegeneration in the parietal cortex, limbic cortex, and thalamus. also, eih does not arrest angiogenesis or elevate endothelial nitric oxide synthase <dig>  in mav as does amph  <cit> . as with neurotoxic amph and meth exposures, little is known regarding the effects of eih on choroid plexus vasculature and csf production.

through the use of oligo array and rt-pcr technologies, the present study evaluates global gene expression changes resulting from the adverse and damaging effects of neurotoxic exposures of amph and eih in rat mrna from the mav and choroid plexus. gene expressions were measured from rna generated from tissues obtained from our previous studies  <cit>  and from additional new rna samples obtained from the choroid plexus and mav. particular interest was focused on comparing fold-changes of genes related to vascular tight junctions and the blood–brain barrier  in mav and choroid plexus because a loss of integrity of tight junctions in these two structures would likely lead to significant adverse effects. one of the main goals of the study is to identify genes in mav and choroid plexus that are not necessarily known to affect vascular function and genes that are not well characterized.

RESULTS
in the current study, we present the effects of amph and eih on global gene expression levels in the choroid plexus via array analysis  and compare these effects with those induced in the mav, striatum, and parietal cortex  on a genome-wide scale. the expression profile of selected genes was further evaluated/confirmed using rt-pcr for all four tissues/brain regions. changes in body temperature and behavior have previously been reported for control, eih, and amph exposed animals  <cit> . the additional rats dosed for obtaining more choroid plexus and mav tissue samples had the same temperature profiles as those previously exposed to amph and eih . array and rt-pcr data for the choroid plexus have not been reported previously nor has the global gene expression in choroid plexus ever been compared to that in mav, striatum, or parietal cortex. changes in mav, striatum, or parietal cortex expression after either eih or amph exposure for some genes known to regulate vascular tone, angiogenesis, and endoplasmic reticulum stress response  have been reported in the two aforementioned manuscripts. as well, a manuscript/video presentation  <cit> , which shows dissection methods for the mav, contains a table showing the large fold-differences in mav gene expression with expression in striatum and cortex. however, complete analysis and comparison of the global gene expression in mav under control, eih, or amph conditions have never been presented, and mav gene expression has not been previously compared with choroid plexus.

control expression profiles in choroid plexus, mav, striatum and parietal cortex
global gene expression under control conditions
gene expression data in the control animals were used to generate additional file 1: table s <dig>  which presents summary statistics  of gene expression data  from the mav, striatum, parietal cortex, and choroid plexus. table  <dig> shows genes in the choroid plexus that have a 15-fold or greater expression in choroid plexus than in striatum and parietal cortex under control conditions. genes in mav that have a 15-fold higher expression than the striatum and parietal cortex can be found in  <cit>  and additional file 2: table s <dig>  genes with a 15-fold or higher expression level in mav and choroid plexus, relative to the striatum and parietal cortex , were identified as being genes of particular importance to the function of these neuronal-sparse tissues. genes with higher expression  in circulating blood  than in the mav and choroid plexus were not included in this list to exclude the possibility that the high expression levels in the mav and choroid plexus were due to residual blood in these tissues. there was a significant number of genes with 15-fold or higher expression in the mav and the choroid plexus compared to the striatum and parietal cortex that were directly related to the vascular system and/or the immune system, but they were not in the majority . a number of the genes with very large fold changes were: 1) extracellular matrix proteins , 2) solute transporters, and 3) proteins involved in lipid and retinoic acid metabolism. as well, a few growth and differentiation genes or transcription factors were found. the overlap in the genes with a 15-fold or greater expression in mav and choroid plexus relative to neuronal tissues was over 50%  .

* genes included in the table must have been more than 15-fold above expression in the choroid plexus compared to both the striatum and parietal cortex and at least 5-fold above the background level. also, expression must have been relatively consistent across individual control animals so that the s.d. was less than the mean. the lower of the two ratios  for each gene was used for grouping. genes were categorized using ncbi entrez gene.

agenes found in endothelial cells that also likely play a major role in mediating immune responses.

bold font indicates gene expression was also at least 15-fold greater in mav compared to both the striatum and parietal cortex.

underlined font indicates gene expression was also at least 10- to 15-fold greater in mav compared to both the striatum and parietal cortex.

levels of vasculature-related genes in choroid plexus, mav, striatum, and cortex
the mrna expression levels of genes normally ascribed to be present in almost all types of vascular endothelium , such as intercellular adhesion molecule  <dig> , kinase insert domain receptor , nitric oxide synthase  <dig> , and vascular cell adhesion molecule  <dig>  were 5- to 10-fold greater in mav than in the parietal cortex and striatum under control conditions . these higher levels suggest that there is likely a 5- to 10-fold greater vascular content in the mav compared to striatum and parietal cortex. in contrast, in the choroid plexus most of the vascular associated genes that were not linked to tight junctions or the bbb were at the same level as the neuronal tissues, with the exception of icam <dig> and kdr levels which were in the mav range. this was also true for most of the genes related to angiogenesis ; only mmp <dig> and akt <dig> were at or above mav levels in the choroid plexus . in contrast, genes related to the ersr pathways were expressed at very similar levels in the mav and choroid plexus .

under control conditions, the expression of many genes associated with tight junctions or bbb that are present in the vasculature of neuronal-rich tissues, such as the parietal cortex and striatum, were as high in mav even if it is assumed that the vasculature in mav was 5- to 10-fold greater . however, the “relative” expression levels of claudin  <dig> , tight junction protein  <dig> , and aquaporin  <dig>  in mav may be many-fold below that of parietal cortex and striatum due to mav having such a greater proportion of vasculature. the expression of solute carrier family  <dig> , a gene implicated in tight junctions  <cit> , is higher than expected in mav. the choroid plexus expressed high levels of some genes that are involved in tight junctions such as ocln, cldn <dig>  cldn <dig>  cldn <dig>  f11r, jam <dig>  and tpj <dig>  but expression profiles of the various tight junction genes in this tissue differed somewhat from mav and even more so from striatum and parietal cortex .

effects of amph and eih on gene expression
genes related to vascular tone, ersr, angiogenesis, and tight junctions
in the choroid plexus, the effects of eih and amph on many genes related to vascular tone  and angiogenesis did not reach significance, with the exception of adora1a and adora1b . in contrast, in the mav, eih and/or amph significantly increased edn <dig>  nos <dig>  and vip levels but not adora1a and adora1b . also, more bbb genes were differentially affected in mav compared to choroid plexus after eih and amph exposure within 3 hr. sox <dig>  ocln, cldn <dig>  and jam <dig> expressions were prominently decreased by eih and/or amph  in mav , as well as in the striatum and parietal cortex . however, none of these four genes were significantly affected in the choroid plexus . array data indicated that esam was increased by amph in the mav, striatum, and parietal cortex, while in the choroid plexus both amph and eih tended to increase esam expression . rt-pcr analysis confirmed the significant esam increases in the striatum and cortex but not in the mav . array data analysis indicated that tjp <dig>  tjp <dig>  and tjp <dig> were not affected in choroid plexus or mav by eih or amph .

bold text indicates genes that were significantly differentially expressed  between treatment comparisons.

a array expression results were confirmed with rt-pcr.

b array expression results were not confirmed with rt-pcr.

all genes are expressed as a percentage of gapdh and are shown as the mean plus/minus standard error of the mean. fold-changes of treatment to control are given in parentheses at the 3 hr time point. at the 1 day time point, fold-changes  are expressed as amph to eih. all the rt-pcr primers appeared to function optimally except those for slc15a <dig> which gave a somewhat bimodal melt curve . the number of rna aliquots  used to determine expression per treatment group were as follows: 3 hr control, n = 6; 3 hr amph, n = 7; 3 hr eih, n = 6; 1 day amph, n = 6; 1 day eih, n =  <dig> 

n.d. designates expression not determined.

symbols indicating statistically significant difference between treatments are found as a superscript after the brain region .

a amph significantly differs from control at 3 hr .

b eih significantly differs from control at 3 hr .

c amph significantly differs from eih at 3 hr .

d amph significantly differs from eih at 1 day .

the expression of ctgf and timp <dig>  which are genes related to angiogenesis, did increase in the choroid plexus after amph like it did in the mav . the decreases in the angiogenesis-related or tissue remodeling genes mmp <dig>  mmp <dig>  and mmp <dig> were not significant  and not as prominent in the choroid plexus as the mav . the ersr response from amph in the choroid plexus was similar to mav, with multi-fold increases seen in hspa <dig>  atf <dig>  atf <dig>  nfkbia, and nfkb <dig> . as well, expression of the protein di-isomerases encoding genes pdia <dig>  pdia <dig>  and pdia <dig> was increased similarly by amph and eih in both mav and choroid plexus .

effects of amph and eih on genes in mav that are not directly related to vasculature
array expression data indicated significant expression changes within the mav due to either eih or amph when compared to control at the 3 hr time point . at the 3 hr time point, significant differences were found in the expression level of  <dig> genes  when comparing eih/control and  <dig>  genes  when comparing amph/control. core analysis with the ipa software found that the gene expression patterns clearly indicate that both eih and amph produced significant increases in genes involved in reactive oxygen species  and inflammatory responses with some indication that apoptosis may have occurred . when comparing amph to eih at 3 hr, a total of  <dig> genes  were differentially expressed . ipa analysis suggests that these genes are involved in cancer, reproductive system disease, gastrointestinal, cardiovascular, and immunological inflammatory diseases.

pmid: denotes the pub med id if a particular publication has been primarily used to determine specific and general gene functions.

a all listed genes were differentially affected by amph compared to eih . also, genes with very high expression in blood  are excluded from this table as well as genes which were previously reported to be affected  <cit> .

b relative to control, both eih and amph significantly increased expression.

* indicates some expression may be due to residual blood in mav.

three genes, linked to pancreatitis and cancer, the regenerating islet-derived  <dig> alpha, beta and gamma , were increased by more than 100-fold by amph within 3 hr, but not by eih . these genes were not significantly affected in the choroid plexus at the 3 hr time point . at 1 day after amph, reg3a, reg3b, and reg3g expression was still elevated in the mav . our data also indicated that the intestinal hydrogen peptide co-transporter , follistatin , hyaluronan synthase , secretin  and lipopolysaccharide binding protein  genes were also increased to a much greater extent by amph than eih in the mav . the significance of the increases in these genes at the 3 hr time point was verified with rt-pcr, with the exception of lbp . at the 1 day time point, differences between eih and amph in the expression of slc15a <dig>  fst, and sct were lesser in fold and not deemed statistically significant. however, rt-pcr data indicated that the expression levels of sct, has <dig>  fst, and particularly lbp were significantly greater after amph compared to eih at the 1 day time point .

all genes are expressed as a percentage of gapdh, and are shown as the mean plus/minus standard error of the mean. fold-changes of treatment to control are given in parentheses at the 3 hr time point. at the 1 day time point, fold-changes  are expressed as amph to eih. the number of rna aliquots  used to determine expression per treatment group were as follows: 3 hr control, n = 7; 3 hr amph, n = 7; 3 hr eih, n = 7; 1 day amph, n = 8; 1 day eih, n =  <dig> 

n.e. means gene not expressed .

n.d. designates expression not determined.

symbols indicating statistically significant difference between treatments are found as a superscript after the gene name .

a amph significantly differs from control at 3 hr .

b eih significantly differs from control at 3 hr .

c amph significantly differs from eih at 3 hr .

d amph significantly differs from eih at 1 day .

approximately  <dig> genes, or  <dig> % of the total number of all the genes present on the oligo array, had 15-fold or higher expression levels in the mav relative to both the striatum and parietal cortex . using this proportion, the expected number of differentially expressed genes with high expression in the mav at the 3 hr time  was computed. the expected  counts for eih/control and amph/control are  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. when comparing amph to eih, two of the differentially expressed genes were expected to have high expression in mav; however, the actual count is  <dig>  therefore, we found the observed counts to be higher than the expected counts in all three pairwise treatment comparisons.

effects of amph and eih on genes not directly related to vasculature in choroid plexus
our choroid plexus oligo array data show that, at the 3 hr time point, eih significantly affected the expression of  <dig> genes  when comparing eih to control, while  <dig> genes differed between amph and control . the gene expression patterns indicate that both eih and amph produced significant similar increases in genes involved in ros, inflammatory responses and damage. although relative to control both amph and eih dramatically altered gene expression in the choroid plexus at the 3 hr time point, when the two treatments were compared to each other, no genes  were found to be differentially affected . this would indicate that both amph and eih had very similar effects on choroid function at 3 hr. however, the sample size of four used in the array analysis may have contributed for the lack of significant genes which were differentially affected by amph compared to eih. several genes with the greatest differential expression in amph compared to eih, including apold <dig> , bmp <dig>  cebpd, cxcl <dig> cyr <dig>  dio <dig>  fst, has <dig>  lbp, and sectm1b, were further evaluated using rt-pcr. rt-pcr analysis, using a larger sample size , determined that there was a 2-fold or more increase with amph compared to eih in bmp <dig>  dio <dig>  lbp, and sectm1b at 3 hr . one day lbp levels were 4- and  <dig> -fold greater than the control lbp at the 3 hr time point. array analysis detected only three genes  to be significantly differentially affected by amph compared to eih at 1 day. the nat <dig> increase was potentially the most significantly affected by amph relative to eih at 1 day by array analysis but rt-pcr analysis failed to verify this finding. rt-pcr was not used to verify angel <dig> and arsk expression since there was less than a  <dig> -fold  change for both genes. additionally, rt-pcr analysis indicated that lbp expression in amph was 2-fold higher at the 1 day time point compared to eih but the difference was not found to be significant.

discussion
new data have been presented that compares the global gene expression  in the choroid plexus and the mav under control conditions and after exposure to eih or a neurotoxic amph exposure. under control conditions, the high degree of similarity in the global gene expression profiles of the mav and choroid plexus suggests some overlap in their various physiological roles supporting brain function  <cit> , particularly the csf. however, basal expression of genes related to the bbb and other tight junctions show some distinct differences in mav versus choroid plexus. expression changes related to genes involved in oxidative stress, ersr, and the immune system indicated that both the choroid plexus and mav are adversely affected by amph and eih. however, the expression response in the mav to neurotoxic doses of amph and eih  was more pronounced than in the choroid plexus with respect to genes controlling vascular tone and angiogenesis. unique genes were found in the choroid plexus and in the mav that give further insight into differences between amph and eih effects and may serve as biomarkers of damage.

comparisons of choroid plexus and mav expression in control
in our study, there was a high correlation of r =  <dig>  between gene expression in the choroid plexus and mav for control animals. furthermore, 50% of the genes that had a 15-fold  or greater enrichment  in choroid plexus also had a 15-fold or higher enrichment in the mav, indicating a likely possibility of some overlap in functional capabilities. over 70% of the overlapping highly expressed genes between choroid plexus and mav could be categorized into groups involved in: 1) extracellular matrix and cell-cell junctions, 2) development and transcription regulation, 3) ion and solute transport and homeostasis, 4) vasculature and heart, and 5) immune system . the majority of the rest of the genes were lumped into an unknown and miscellaneous category. since 50% of these genes have an unknown function, the percentage of genes actually in the top  <dig> categories could be as high as 85%. the mav contained many more genes in the retinoic acid & lipid processing category than did the choroid plexus.

many of the highly expressed genes identified in the mav that are placed in the ion and solute transport category may play a role in the pial and arachnoid membrane function of the mav. many of these genes are also expressed highly in the choroid plexus and therefore could play a role in ion and solute composition regulation of csf . genes highly expressed in the mav and choroid plexus that are related to water, ion, and solute homeostasis include the water channel aqp <dig> <cit> , the sodium bicarbonate co-transporter slc4a <dig> <cit> , the chloride/bicarbonate exchanger slc26a <dig> <cit> , the potassium inwardly-rectifying channel kcnj <dig> <cit> , the organic anion transporter slco1a <dig> <cit> , and two transporters that appear to be related to the regulation of thyroid function, solute carrier family  <dig>  sodium iodide symporter, member  <dig> )  <cit> . most of these genes have also been previously identified in the epithelial cells of the kidney, pancreas, lung, and placenta.

many genes with relatively high expression in the mav  ligand  <dig>  cxcl <dig> <cit> ) were identified as important for endothelial cell interactions with myeloid or lymphoid interactions, and could be involved in regulating myeloid and lymphoid cell responses and trafficking in the mav vasculature and/or the csf. this suggests that under control conditions the immune surveillance and other functions in the mav are possibly more extensive than in the cortex and striatum and probably most of the remaining forebrain. of the remaining genes with relatively high expression in the mav and choroid plexus, most were related to developmental and transcriptional regulation. however, except for possibly those genes involved in the insulin-like growth factor pathways, it is not clear what the exact transcription regulatory role of these genes is in the mav and choroid plexus. also, it is not clear whether the translation products of all these genes play a role in just mav and choroid plexus development and function or whether some are “released” into the csf to affect other regions of the brain.

there were twice as many genes  grouped in the retinoic acid and lipid processing category in the mav versus the choroid plexus, but the significance of this finding is not clear. there is an even more disparate distribution of genes related to the bbb and tight junctions in the choroid plexus versus the mav. even when the 5- to 10-fold greater levels of vasculature present in mav are taken into account, its levels of bbb-related genes  were somewhat similar to that of striatum and parietal cortex. the exceptions are cldn <dig>  tjp <dig> , and aqp <dig>  which may have lower expression levels in the mav than expected. thus, it appears that a bbb-related structure is also present in the vasculature of the mav. the presence of a bbb-like barrier in the mav would not only protect the surface of the cortex from small molecules and ions present in the blood, but it would also prevent them from leaking into the cerebral spinal fluid and altering its composition. tight-junction and some bbb-related gene expressions are present in the choroid plexus but differ from the brain proper  <cit> . our expression data indicates that ocln, cldn <dig>  cldn <dig>  cldn <dig>  crb <dig>  tjp- <dig>  f11r , and jam <dig> would be some of the more important genes involved in choroid plexus tight-junctions.

effects of amph and eih on gene expression in choroid plexus compared to mav
gene expression responses to the adverse effects of eih and amph differed to some extent between the mav and choroid plexus. in the choroid plexus, genes regulating vascular tone, such as nos <dig>  edn <dig>  and vip, were not significantly affected by amph or eih but they were greatly altered in the mav  <cit> . however, adora1a and adora1b were elevated in choroid plexus, but not the mav, and may affect vasodilatation in response to amph or eih in this region. also, some of the genes involved in angiogenesis  were significantly increased by amph and eih in the choroid plexus, just as they were in mav. however, other genes involved in angiogenesis that were decreased in the mav by amph  were not significantly affected in the choroid plexus. on the other hand, genes related to protein processing such as heat-shock proteins, protein disulfide isomerases, and the ersr responded very similarly to amph and eih in the choroid plexus and mav.

we have placed particular emphasis on evaluating expression changes related to the bbb since loss of bbb integrity can have severe damaging effects on the brain  <cit> . with respect to genes related to bbb and tight junctions, there were differences in response to amph and eih between the choroid plexus and mav. occludin and the claudins are integral membrane proteins, components of tight junction strands, and are necessary for proper bbb development and integrity  <cit> . our data show that in the mav, both ocln and cldn <dig> are well expressed and down regulated significantly by eih and even more so by amph. however, in the choroid plexus, ocln expression was slightly increased by amph. although cldn <dig> expression was down regulated in the choroid plexus, its constitutive expression levels, as well as cldn <dig>  were very low. also, f11r  and jam <dig>  which are key components regulating bbb  <cit> , were significantly decreased by both eih and amph in the mav but were not significantly affected in choroid plexus. overall, amph and eih had a more disruptive effect on bbb/tight junction gene expression in the mav than in the choroid plexus. it is not clear whether this is the result of the temporary suspension of angiogenesis during the insult by amph and eih, which may be a protective response if short in duration.

the genes in the mav with the largest expression increases resulting from amph exposure were somewhat unexpected since they do not appear to be directly related to vasculature but rather to damage, inflammation, or infection in other organs such as pancreas. these genes include reg3a, reg3b, reg3g, slc15a <dig>  sct, fst, and lbp, and are potential biomarkers for the damaging effects of amph in mav since they are affected to a much lesser extent by eih. reg3a, reg3b, reg3g, and lbp expression increases are as, or even more, pronounced at 1 day than at 3 hr after amph. the three regenerating genes reg3a, reg3b, and reg3g are particularly intriguing since they are associated with repair and regeneration of pancreatic tissue  <cit> . reg3a, reg3b and reg3g are also involved in anti-bacterial function in intestinal epithelial cells  <cit>  and could be involved in repairing amph-induced damage in the mav. the tremendous increase observed in the expression in the regenerating genes, slc15a <dig>  sct, and fst after amph in the mav was not observed in the choroid plexus. increases are seen in lbp expression after amph  in both the mav and choroid plexus at 3 hr and 1 day. these changes are also particularly intriguing since lbp expression and protein function is relevant to infection and damage. together with the bactericidal permeability-increasing protein , the encoded protein binds lps and interacts with the cd <dig> receptor, which probably plays a role in regulating lps-dependent monocyte responses  <cit> . exactly why the increase in lbp gene expression occurs primarily with amph but not eih is unknown. increases in the amph-induced lbp gene expression are more pronounced in mav compared to choroid plexus and are reflective of amph producing a much greater effect on genes related to infection and inflammation than does eih.

bone morphogenic protein  <dig>  and to a lesser extent secreted and transmembrane protein 1a and 1b  were the only genes that had a greater change  in expression in the choroid plexus after amph but not after eih. not much is known about bmp <dig> effects on the choroid plexus so it is unclear whether this effect would be beneficial. on the other hand, if the protein product were to be secreted into the lateral ventricles, it would likely suppress the progenitor cells present and possibly be detrimental to differentiated neurons and glia surrounding the ventricles  <cit> . little is known as to what sectm1b increases would translate to in the choroid plexus because very little is known about this gene in rodents and its homolog in humans. nonetheless, its 40-fold mrna increase in choroid plexus after the amph treatment would likely have some effect if it leads to significant protein increases.

CONCLUSIONS
the comparison of gene expression data in the striatum and parietal cortex, which are two neuronal-rich regions of the brain, to that of the mav and the choroid plexus under control conditions resulted in a list of more than  <dig> genes with a much higher expression  in both the choroid plexus and mav than in the two neuronal-rich regions. there is a 50% overlap between the highly expressed genes in the choroid plexus with those in the mav, suggesting an analogy in some of the various physiological functions that the choroid plexus and mav play in supporting brain function  <cit> , in particular those related to the regulation of ion, solute, and immune processes involving csf. the global gene expression profile in the mav indicates that genes related to or regulating tight junctions are important to its vasculature function and to help maintain bbb integrity within the brain. although eih affects genes related to the ersr pathways and ros in the mav, it has a less pronounced effect than amph on genes involved in ion and solute transport, lipid metabolism, cell survival, and damage/inflammation. changes in the expression in genes related to vascular tone, angiogenesis, bbb-related and immune-related genes indicate that the adverse vascular effects of amph are somewhat more pronounced in the mav than they are in the choroid plexus. the gene expression changes evoked by amph or eih appear to depict the homeostasis of blood flow and csf needed to prevent or repair damage in the mav and choroid plexus.

