BACKGROUND
celiac disease  is the chronic gastrointestinal  tract disorder where ingestion of gluten from wheat, rye and barley, and their cross related varieties, leads to damage of the small intestinal mucosa by an autoimmune mechanism in genetically susceptible individuals  <cit> . epidemiology of cd is increasing, the prevalence is estimated to be ca. 1% in the european and north american populations  <cit> . cd mainly presents in early childhood with small intestinal villous atrophy and signs of malabsorption  <cit> . nowadays, the gluten-free diet  is the only effective and safe treatment for cd. nevertheless, compliance with this dietary therapy is very complex and patients may suffer of health risks and nutritional deficiencies  <cit> . recently, some reports also suggested that the gi microbiota is somewhat affected during cd pathogenesis and gfd  <cit> .

the human gi tract is a complex ecosystem integrated by up to  <dig> total bacteria. the genomes of all intestinal microbes form the "microbiome", representing more than  <dig> times the human genome. this latter, in association with the microbiome, is considered as the "metagenome"  <cit> . as the consequence, the microbiome provides the human host with additional metabolic functions, described as the "metabolome".

some of the main activities provided by the gut microbiota in human health are:  to provide a barrier for colonization of pathogens;  to exert important metabolic functions such as fermentation of non-digestible fibers, salvage of energy as short chain fatty acids  and synthesis of vitamin k; and  to stimulate the development of the immune system  <cit> . besides, specific strains of the gi microbiota and/or supplied probiotics decrease intestinal inflammations and normalize dysfunctions of the gi mucosa  <cit> . indeed, gi microbiota is also involved in the pathogenesis of chronic inflammatory bowel diseases  and other immune-related disorders  <cit> . overall, ibd patients have altered densities of mucosa-associated bacteria  in comparison to healthy subjects. in particular, cell numbers of protective bifidobacterium and lactobacillus decreased, while harmful bacteroides and escherichia coli increased  <cit> . recently, microbial infections and, especially, imbalances of the composition of the gi microbiota were associated with the presentation of cd also  <cit> . compared to healthy individuals, cd patients seemed to be characterized by higher numbers of gram-negative bacteria and lower numbers gram-positive bacteria  <cit> . overall, gram-negative bacteria could activate pro-inflammatory pathways, while gram-positive bacteria such as lactic acid bacteria and bifidobacteria could inhibit toxic effects induced by other gi species  <cit>  or gluten antigens  <cit> . duodenal and faecal bacterial populations, especially bifidobacteria, significantly varied within individuals, being influenced either by diet or cd  <cit> . the composition of lactobacillus sp. and bifidobacterium species differed between cd patients and healthy children  <cit> . recent studies indicated that cd patients at diagnosis or under gfd had unbalanced serum, faecal and urine metabolites  <cit> . it was hypothesized that qualitative and quantitative differences of the microbiota influenced the level of volatile organic compounds  of cd patients  <cit> . more in depth characterization of the gi microbiota and related metabolites is strongly needed for cd patients and the role of bacteria during cd development and treatment has to be elucidated  <cit> .

this study aimed at comparing the differences of the microbiota and metabolome between cd children under gfd  and non-celiac children . the intestinal and faecal microbiota was characterized by culture-independent and -dependent methods whereas metabolomic studies were carried out using gas-chromatography mass spectrometry/solid-phase microextraction  and 1h nuclear magnetic resonance  spectroscopy.

RESULTS
molecular analysis of the bacterial community of duodenal biopsies and faecal samples
the dominant microbiota and specific subgroups  from stool samples and from duodenal biopsies  were analyzed by pcr -dgge . universal primers targeting v6-v <dig> regions of the 16s rrna gene were used. eubacterial profiles from pcr-dgge analysis of duodenal biopsies of treated celiac disease  children showed high richness with two to eight well resolved and strong bands . only the electrophoretic profile of  <dig> t-cd duodenal biopsy contained one band. profiles of non-celiac children  had only one to three strong bands. banding patterns were processed using the bionumerics software. pearson correlation coefficients ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> %. except for two duodenal biopsies  which showed high similarity to t-cd samples, all hc banding patterns were grouped together with  <dig> % similarity coefficient. the major part of the t-cd samples were grouped together at 95% of the similarity. overall, dgge profiles of the pcr amplicons obtained with primers lac <dig> and lac <dig> had two strong, common and well-resolved bands, and a few bands with low intensity . high similarity was found among samples belonging to t-cd and hc groups. most of the t-cd and hc duodenal biopsies were grouped together at ca. 90% of similarity and all samples at  <dig> %. sequencing of the dgge bands revealed the common presence of l. plantarum . although lac <dig> and lac <dig> primers were commonly used to detect lactobacillus species  <cit> , human dna  was also found. finally, no pcr amplicons were found by using three different sets of primers targeting the bifidobacteria group. this suggested that bifidobacteria were probably absent from duodenal biopsies of both t-cd and hc.

compared to duodenal biopsies, the pcr-dgge profiles of faecal samples were more rich. although fingerprints contained many well-resolved and strong bands, unresolved bands or very weak separate fragments were present in some regions of the gel. the pcr-dgge profiles from universal primers  targeting v6-v <dig> regions of the 16s rrna gene were very rich in bands quite different for each of the  <dig> children . only some common bands were present. the uniqueness of the patterns was confirmed by cluster analysis. the values of pearson similarity were always low. the mean similarity coefficient was  <dig> %. no clustering differentiated t-cd and hc samples. figure 2b shows the pcr-dgge profiles from primers lac <dig> and lac <dig> specific for lactobacillus group. depending on the faecal sample, one to four strong and well-resolved amplicons were detected. nevertheless, the values of pearson similarity coefficient were low and all samples grouped together at ca.  <dig> %. according to pcr-dgge profiles of duodenal biopsies, the upgma clusterization grouped separately t-cd and hc samples with the only exceptions of sample  <dig> t-cd coupled to hc, and samples  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hc which showed high similarity to t-cd. anyway significant differences were present within groups of t-cd or hc children.

v6-v8: f968-gc
g- bifid f
lac1
bif164-f
bif164-gc-f
agc clamp sequence: cgcccgccgcgccccgcgcccggcccgccgcccccgcccc.

blactobacillus group comprises the genera lactobacillus, leuconostoc, pediococcus and weisella.

as shown by pcr-dgge analysis, all faecal samples contained bifidobacterium dna . the level of similarity among faecal samples varied from  <dig>  to 100%. identical profiles were found for some t-cd stool samples . the upgma analysis grouped most of t-cd and hc profiles separately, with similarity pearson coefficients ≥ 48%.

enumeration of cultivable bacteria
selective media were used to enumerate cultivable cells of the main microbial groups . no statistical difference  was found between t-cd and hc for total microbes. the median values of presumptive lactobacilli and enterococci of t-cd was lower  than those of hc. the number of presumptive bifidobacteria significantly  differed between t-cd  and hc . compared to hc, significantly  higher counts of presumptive bacteroides, porphyromonas and prevotella, presumptive staphylococci/micrococci and enterobacteria were found in faecal samples of t-cd. presumptive salmonella, shighella and klesbiella, and clostridium did not significantly  vary between groups. total anaerobes were the highest  in hc.

identification and typing of lactic acid bacteria
colonies of presumptive lactic acid bacteria were randomly isolated from the highest plate dilutions of mrs or blood azide agar and used for further analysis. gram-positive, catalase-negative, non-motile cocci and rods able to acidify mrs or blood azide broth  were identified by sequence analysis of at least  <dig> bp of the 5' region of the 16s rrna gene . discrimination between enterococcus faecalis/e. faecium/enterococcus durans, l. plantarum/lactobacillus pentosus/lactobacillus paraplantarum or lactobacillus paracasei/lactobacillus casei/lactobacillus rhamnosus was allowed by partial sequencing of reca or phes genes. enterococcus was the genus most largely isolated within the lactic acid bacteria group for both t-cd and hc children . e. faecium was the species identified in almost all faecal samples . e. avium , e. faecalis , e. durans  and enterococcus spp.  were variously identified. streptococcus macedonicus , streptococcus pasteurianus , pediococcus acidilactici  and pediococcus pentosaceus  were only isolated in t-cd children. l. plantarum , l. casei  and l. rhamnosus  were the species of lactobacilli which were most largely isolated in both t-cd and hc. on the contrary, lactobacillus salivarius , lactobacillus coryneformis , lactobacillus delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus , lactobacillus fermentum  and l. paracasei  were only identified in faecal samples of t-cd. lactobacillus brevis , lactobacillus pentosus  and lactobacillus mucosae  were only identified in faecal samples of hc.

arandomly amplified polymorphic dna-polymerase chain reaction  analysis was carried out to exclude clonal relatedness. bnumber of cluster in figure 4-5- <dig> a-b).

to exclude clonal relatedness and to characterize lactobacilli and enterococci, three primers , with arbitrarily chosen sequences, were used for rapd-pcr analysis. the number of strains identified for each faecal sample is shown in table  <dig> and figures  <dig>   <dig> and 6a-b. the percentage of strains identified as lactobacilli significantly  differed between t-cd  and hc  groups.

volatile organic compounds 
voc  were identified from faecal and urine samples . voc were grouped according to chemical classes: esters ; sulfur compounds , ketones , hydrocarbons , aldehydes , alcohols , alkane , alkene , aromatic organic compounds , hetpane  and short chain fatty acids  . during sampling, the level of voc of each child did not differ . on the contrary, high variability was found among children. statistical differences  were found between t-cd and hc children. as expected, faecal samples had higher level of voc compared to urines. the median value of esters was higher than in hc children. nevertheless, the levels of ethyl-acetate, octyl-acetate, propyl-butyrate, propyl-propanoate and butyl 2-methylbitanoate were higher than in faecal samples of t-cd. among sulfur compounds, carbon disulfide was at higher level than in faecal samples of hc. dimethyl trisulfide and dimethyl disulfide were at higher level than in the urine samples of hc. with a few exceptions, hydrocarbons were found at higher levels than in urine and, especially, faecal samples of hc. faecal samples of hc contained higher median values of aldehydes compared to t-cd. the level of aldehydes did not differ  between urine samples of t-cd and hc. compared to faecal samples of hc, some alcohols  were present at higher level in t-cd. median values of alkane and alkene did not significantly  differ between t-cd and hc. overall, faecal samples of t-cd showed the lowest levels of aromatic organic compounds. the median value of total short chain fatty acids  was significantly  higher in faecal samples hc compared to t-cd. major differences were found for isocaproic, butyric and propanoic acids . on the contrary, acetic acid was higher in t-cd compared to hc samples. the differences of the metabolomes between faecal or urine samples of t-cd and hc was highlighted through cap analysis which considered only significantly different compounds . variables appearing with negative values represent bins whose values decreased in t-cd compared to hc samples. on the contrary, variables represented with bars pointing to the right indicate bins whose values were the highest in t-cd samples.

data are the means of three independent experiments  for each children.

a-cmeans within a row with different superscript letters are significantly different .

1h nuclear magnetic resonance  metabolite profiling of faeces and urine samples
overall, 1h nmr results confirmed the trends and the major differences found between t-cd and hc samples through gc-ms/spme analysis. besides, other metabolites were found . try, pro, asn, his, met, trimethylamine-n-ox and tyramine were higher in faecal samples of t-cd than hc children. by comparing the spectra of urine samples, median values of lys, arg, creatine and methylamine were higher than in t-cd children. on the contrary, median values of carnosine, glucose, glutamine and 3-methyl-2-oxobutanoic acid were the highest in hc children.

data are the means of three independent experiments  for each children.

a-bmeans within a row with different superscript letters are significantly different .

discussion
this study used culture-independent and culture-dependent methods and metabolomics analyses to investigate the differences in the microbiota and metabolome of  <dig> treated celiac disease  children and  <dig> non-celiac children . the present study showed that the whole eubacterial community significantly changed between the duodenal microbiota of t-cd and hc children. in agreement, other authors  <cit>  reported similar results when faecal samples of cd children were compared to those of hc. this result was surprising since an heterogeneous group like the 'healthy controls' should have more heterogeneity in dgge microbial profiles. however, also schippa et al  <cit>  showed a peculiar microbial ttge profile and a significant higher biodiversity in cd pediatric patients' duodenal mucosa after  <dig> months of gfd compared to healthy control. as determined by pcr-dgge analysis, the population of lactobacilli from duodenal biopsies of children was relatively simple and homogeneous, having only one dominant bacterial band which corresponded to l. plantarum. under the experimental conditions of this study, bifidobacteria were not detected on duodenal biopsies of t-cd and hc children. recently, it was shown that bifidobacteria were present at high levels in duodenal biopsies of cd children at diagnosis and they decreased in t-cd and, especially, in hc  <cit> . bifidobacterium species were demonstrated to have species- and strain-specific influence on immunity, and they might exert various effects on t-helper  <dig> pro-inflammatory response which characterizes cd  <cit> . nevertheless, the association between the prevalence of bifidobacterium species and cd is still debated  <cit> .

compared to duodenal biopsies, the microbial diversity was larger in faecal samples. if some bands seem to be clearly present only in hc or t-cd duodenal biopsies, on the other hand, this is not so evident in faecal samples very likely because of the high number of bands quite different among all samples. with a few exceptions, pcr-dgge profiles of lactobacillus and bifidobacterium differed between faecal samples of t-cd and hc children. overall, the faecal bacterial population is significantly affected by individuals, diet and cd  <cit> .

as determined by culture-dependent methods, cell densities of the main faecal microbial groups differed between t-cd and hc children. in agreement with the previous report  <cit> , the ratio between lactic acid bacteria-bifidobacterium and bacteroides-enterobacteria was lower in t-cd compared to hc children. increased numbers of bacteroides are usually found in faecal samples of children affected by gi inflammatory diseases, including cd  <cit> . in the present study, lactic acid bacteria were identified and subjected to rapd-pcr analysis for determining qualitative and quantitative differences between t-cd and hc. e. faecium was the dominant species of both t-cd and hc children. l. plantarum, l. casei and l. rhamnosus were found on faecal samples of both t-cd and hc. str. macedonicus, str. pasterianus, p. pentosaceus and p. acedilactici were only isolated from t-cd. although the rapd-pcr and 16s rrna gene analyses were successfully applied in this study as well as in others  <cit> , more performing techniques   <cit> , would be desirable for a rapid enumeration of live lactic acid bacteria in the human microbiota. contrarily to the previous study  <cit> , l. fermentum and l. delbrueckii subsp. bulgaricus were only isolated from faecal samples of t-cd. recently, it was shown that the prevalence of amplicons of the species l. fermentum was higher in cd compared to hc children  <cit> . since lactobacilli are routinely present in fermented foods, some of the differences found in this study could be related to cd, but also to dietary differences  <cit> . as showed by rapd-pcr analysis, the percentage of isolation of lactobacillus strains was the lowest in t-cd which agreed with other reports  <cit> .

the qualitative and quantitative differences found for gi microbiota affected the level of volatile organic compounds  and amino acids in faecal and urine samples. a few studies considered the metabolome of faecal or urine samples  <cit> . the concept of human metabolome encompasses the idea of microbial and metabolic cooperation, and it aims to systematically examine changes in numerous low molecular mass metabolites of biological fluids as the response to different stimuli such as drugs or diseases  <cit> . the combination of gc-ms/spme and 1h nmr metabolic profiles together with cap analysis allowed the identification of specific molecules which significantly changes in t-cd children. the largest level of esters was found for hc, whereas ethyl-acetate and octyl-acetate seemed to be over-synthesized in t-cd children. overall, esterification reactions at the colon level are considered as the microbial strategy to remove or detoxify acids or alcohols  <cit> . median values of aldehydes were the highest in hc compared to t-cd children. previously, the highest level of alcohols was found in cd children at diagnosis compared to t-cd and hc  <cit> . in this study, some alcohols such as 1-octen-3-ol, ethanol and 1-propanol were higher in t-cd than hc children. ethanol seems to be an important mediator to develop of non-alcoholic steatohepatitis . it was hypothesized that when intestinal bacteria synthesize alcohol they may induce endotoxemia  <cit> . nash was also associated to occult cd  <cit> . the present study confirmed the higher level of some short chain fatty acids  of hc compared to t-cd children  <cit> . it was suggested that lactobacillus and bifidobacterium modified the metabolism of the large intestine by increasing the synthesis of scfa  <cit> . scfa are some of the most important by-products of anaerobes in the colon. they represent the main fuel for colonocytes and are involved in water and electrolyte absorption by colon mucosa, even under diarrheic conditions  <cit> . the increase of butyric acid is especially significant since it plays a key role in the regulation of cell proliferation and differentiation of colon epithelial cells. it was also shown that faecal and urine samples of t-cd had an altered level of free amino acids compared to hc children. indeed, a large number of free amino acids and related compounds were found at the highest level in t-cd children. another report  <cit> , also showed that serum and urine samples of adult cd patients had altered level of amino acids. peptides enter enterocytes either after preliminary digestion by brush border peptidases into amino acids or as di- and tri-peptides which are split inside the cell by cytoplasmic peptidases. non specific inflammatory alterations of the intestinal mucosa , which are associated with a significant decrease of the absorptive surface and brush border enzyme activity, may cause the decrease of amino acid/peptide absorption which are consequently lost with stools  <cit> . dietary amino acids are the major fuel for the small intestinal mucosa as well as they are important substrates for the synthesis of intestinal proteins such as nitric oxide polyamines and other products with enormous biological activity  <cit> . glutamine was one of the few free amino acid related compounds which was found at the highest level in hc children. a low level of glutamine was also previously found in cd children and adults  <cit> . specific amino acids and related compounds, including glutamine, were shown to possess a therapeutic role in gut diseases  <cit> . this study confirmed the hypothesis that cd is associated with intestinal and faecal dysbiosis, which is related to certain bacterial species. recently, it was shown that potential celiac subjects and overt celiac subjects show differences in the urine metabolites and a very similar serum metabolic profile  <cit> . metabolic alterations may precede the development of small intestinal villous atrophy and provide a further rationale for early institution of gfd in patients with potential cd  <cit> . as shown by both microbiology and metabolome analyses, the gfd lasting at least two years did not completely restore the microbiota and, consequently, the metabolome of cd children. probably, the addition of prebiotics and probiotics to gfd might restore the balance of microbiota and metabolome of cd children.

CONCLUSIONS
as shown by the microbiology and metabolome studies, the gluten-free diet lasting at least two years did not completely restore the microbiota and, consequently, the metabolome of cd children. combining the results of this work with those from previous reports  <cit> , it seems emerge that microbial indeces  and levels of some metabolites  are signatures of cd patients. further studies, using a major number of children and a complete characterization of all microbial groups, are in progress to find a statistical correlation between the microbiota and metabolome of t-cd compared to hc children.

