BACKGROUND
whole-genome duplication  is believed to be one of several major evolutionary events that shaped the genomes of eukaryotes from yeasts and plants to vertebrates  <cit> . wgd, which generates dozens of thousands of duplicate genes, is usually followed by massive gene loss or the acquisition of new roles for the duplicated genes . the evolution of these duplicate genes should occur independently among the lineages that diverged after the wgd. such an event may contribute to the emergence of genomic differences among lineages that have experienced a wgd, and, therefore increase the genetic and phenotypic diversity among the organisms in that group.

jawed vertebrates, which have the most complex body plan and behavioral characteristics, are thought to have experienced two rounds of  wgd events early in their evolution, and teleost fishes experienced one more wgd . this notion is supported by data from several recent genomic analyses  <cit> . since these events  occurred in ancestors shared by major phylogenetic groups such as tetrapods and teleosts, they may have been important for the formation of vertebrate-specific genomic features.

the teleost-specific 3r-wgd may be crucial to understanding certain aspects of teleost diversity; in addition, the event is very interesting given its time of occurrence. the 1r- and 2r-wgds, which contributed to the formation of jawed-vertebrate genomes, including those of mammals, occurred before the split between tetrapods and teleosts; thus, they are very old events  <cit> . probably because of their oldness, the 1r- and 2r-wgds seem to have left few traces in the duplicated genes or tree topology of the gene families within the current genomes  <cit> . on the other hand, the 3r-wgd is estimated to have occurred in an ancestor of teleosts but after the divergence of teleosts and tetrapods  <cit> . thus, it is the relatively recent wgd shared by a large vertebrate group, i.e., teleosts. therefore, we can expect that teleost genomes contain many more wgd-derived duplicate genes and their 'traces' of evolution than tetrapod genomes. in addition, in teleosts, whole-genome sequence data from multiple species  <cit> , reliable phylogenetic frameworks, and estimated divergence times between lineages  <cit>  are now available. thus, we can systematically analyze the evolution of wgd-derived duplicate genes and their lineage-specific actions by focusing on teleosts, which experienced 3r-wgd. this will provide valuable insights into the evolution of vertebrates through wgds. 

previous studies have analyzed wgd-derived duplicate genes mainly by pairwise comparisons using the genomes of phylogenetically distant species such as human and pufferfishes  <cit> . studies focusing on a particular gene family have also been performed . studies on the medaka and green spotted puffer fish  genomes suggested that they contain about  <dig>  pairs of duplicate genes derived from the 3r-wgd  <cit> . the analyses based on pairwise comparison, however, are insufficient to address the detailed evolutionary process, e.g., the temporal- and lineage-specific manner of gene loss/persistence, after the wgd. these concerns are still not fully resolved by studies based on whole genome data from a few teleost species  <cit> , and they can be resolved only by ancestral-state inferences by using multiple genome data, and phylogenetic frameworks and divergence time estimations. thus, it is unknown how duplicated genes have been maintained or lost temporarily through lineage diversification after the wgd and how many of them contribute to the current genomes of each species.

to address these concerns, we estimated the evolutionary processes experienced by the duplicated genes after the 3r-wgd by analyzing the whole-genome data of four teleosts  based on teleost phylogeny and their divergence time estimates. in our comparative analyses, we focused on signal transduction pathways involved in learning, memory, and sensory perception, which may have played crucial roles in vertebrate evolution, as well as energy metabolism, which is common to eukaryotes. as representatives of each pathway, we selected four molecular interaction networks: long-term potentiation of synaptic transmission , taste transduction , olfactory transduction , and tricarboxylic acid cycle . first, we sought duplicate genes derived from the 3r-wgd by intensive phylogenetic and conserved synteny analyses of the genes involved in the above networks. next, we estimated the temporal pattern of duplicate gene loss/persistence after the 3r-wgd on the basis of teleost phylogeny and their divergence time framework  <cit> . the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates that have persisted over the course of evolution were analyzed in terms of their function, locations in the network topologies, numbers of interacting partners, and total length of coding sequences.

RESULTS
orthologous gene groups between tetrapods and teleosts
in this study, protein-coding genes involved in ltp, tt, ot, and tca were analyzed to search for duplicate genes derived from the 3r-wgd, and their subsequent loss or retention was inferred. according to the kegg pathway database  <cit> , ltp, tt, ot, and tca  comprise  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> human loci, respectively . among these genes, three, eight, and five were repeatedly involved in ltp and tt; ltp and ot; and ltp, tt, and ot, respectively. after removing these overlaps,  <dig> human genes  were subjected to a comparative genomic analysis with other animal genomes.

putative orthologs of these  <dig> human genes in tetraodon, stickleback, medaka, zebrafish, chicken, clawed frog, ascidian, and fruit fly were obtained through blastn searches against their genomes using human protein-coding sequences as queries . the obtained genes were subjected to a series of phylogenetic analyses, including preliminary and secondary neighbor-joining  analyses and final maximum likelihood  analysis. based on the ml trees , the genes were classified into four categories . as a result,  <dig> of the  <dig> human genes were found to have orthologs in teleost genomes , while no clear orthologs were identified for the remaining  <dig> genes  . among the  <dig> human genes,  <dig> were duplicated specifically in human . accordingly, we identified a total of  <dig> orthologous gene groups between tetrapods and teleosts, corresponding to the  <dig> human genes examined .

1overlaps between genes that were involved in more than one network were controlled.

abbreviations: lpt, long-term potentiation; tt, taste transduction; ot, olfactory transduction; tca, tricarboxylic acid cycle

persistence of the duplicated genes after the 3r-wgd
systematic analysis of the gene phylogenies described above successfully identified the duplicated genes derived from the 3r-wgd. these identifications were ascertained based on previously published information related to doubly conserved synteny in the medaka genome  <cit>  shown in  and the genome-to-genome conserved synteny information presented in . duplicated genes derived from the 3r-wgd were identified in at least one species in  <dig> of the  <dig> orthologous gene groups . this indicates that the genome of the common ancestor of the four teleosts  contained at least  <dig>  loci belonging to the  <dig> orthologous gene groups, meaning that  <dig> %  of the loci in the ancestor were duplicate genes derived from the 3r-wgd.

1overlaps between genes that were involved in more than one network were controlled.

abbreviations: lpt, long-term potentiation; tt, taste transduction; ot, olfactory transduction; tca, tca cycle; 3r-wgd, third-round whole genome duplication; ca, common ancestor of zebrafish, medaka, stickleback, and tetraodon.

the numerals in parentheses indicate the number of loci in which lineage-specific gene duplications were incorporated.

1overlaps between genes that were involved in more than one network were controlled.

abbreviations: lpt, long-term potentiation; tt, taste transduction; ot, olfactory transduction; tca, tricarboxylic acid cycle; ca, common ancestor of tetrapods and teleost fishes; 3r, third-round whole genome duplication; na, not applicable

a few genes were found to have expanded dramatically by repeated duplication independent of wgd. for example, in the ot system, phosphodiesterase 1c  genes were duplicated specifically in the stickleback genome , implying the existence of multiple bypass circuits that regulate the cyclic amp  pathway in the stickleback ot system. other examples include the calmodulin  genes involved in ltp and ot. the cam gene family included diverse members before the split of tetrapods and teleosts, and the differential members have persisted in the tetrapod and teleost genomes, respectively . interestingly, the amino acid sequences of calm <dig> and  <dig> in tetrapods and their closest calms in teleosts are identical in their alignable region.

temporal loss or persistence of the duplicated genes after the 3r-wgd
based on our data concerning the presence or absence of 3r-wgd-derived duplicate loci , we estimated the number of gene loss events on the basis of the teleost phylogeny using parsimony . the inferred gene loss events were then assigned to the phylogenetic tree with branch lengths proportional to the estimated divergence time derived from a molecular clock analysis of mitochondrial genome sequences  <cit>  .

the obtained temporal pattern of gene loss  indicates that many  of the duplicated genes were rapidly lost following the 3r-wgd before the split of zebrafish , whereas on average more than half  of the duplicated genes remaining in the ancestor of the four teleosts  have persisted for about  <dig> million years . least-squares fitting of a neutral model of the loss of gene function to the data points for the 3r-wgd and the common ancestor yielded an exponential decay curve with a slope of - <dig>  . on the other hand, approximation to all data points yielded a moderate curve with slope = - <dig>  , showing that the tempo of gene loss was not constant over the course of evolution after the 3r-wgd . this result was essentially unchanged when we used upper and lower extremes of the 95% confidence intervals of the estimated times of 3r-wgd and lineage divergences in the approximation .

properties of the gene groups that retained 3r-wgd-derived duplicates
we characterized the 3r-wgd-derived duplicate genes on the basis of several properties of the encoded proteins. in terms of their locations in the network topologies of ltp, tt, ot, and tca, we were not able to find a local concentration of 3r-wgd-derived duplicates . in addition, although most of the proteins included in the four systems are of different types, we found no significant difference in the frequency of 3r-wgd-derived duplicates  among the four networks .

we next compared the function, total length, and number of interacting partners of the proteins in the networks. there was no significant difference in the frequency of each type of function  between the 3r-wgd-derived duplicate genes and 1: <dig> orthologous genes . however, there was a significant difference in the length of the protein-coding sequences. the protein peptides encoded by the 3r-wgd-derived duplicate genes tended to be long  rather than short . additionally, the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates were enriched in longer-sized glutamate receptors  compared to the 1: <dig> orthologous genes, although this trend was not statistically significant . the average number of interacting partners was also significantly higher for the 3r-wgd-derived duplicate genes  . within the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates, there were no significant differences in the length of protein-coding sequences and the number of interacting partners among the genes that remain duplicated in one, two, three, and four teleost genomes .

discussion
persistence of the duplicated genes after the wgd event
careful analysis of more than  <dig> orthologous gene groups in the tetrapod and teleost genomes suggested that the genome of a common ancestor of four teleosts  contained a high proportion  of duplicated genes derived from the teleost-specific 3r-wgd . this estimate was produced by extensive data mining of whole-genome databases and reliable ml phylogenetic analyses of the genes involved in ltp, tt, ot, and tca. although these genes represent small fraction of the whole genome, and such transcriptional, signal-transduction, and metabolic networks may have different biases for duplicate gene preservation  <cit> , we found no significant difference in the frequency of 3r-wgd-derived duplicates among the four networks . this may imply that there is no remarkable difference in retention rate of the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates between subcellular networks that would be important in vertebrate evolution, and metabolism networks that are common to eukaryotes. a possible reason for this is the relatively smaller population size of vertebrates, in which the neutral, random genetic drift is more dominant factor in their duplicate gene loss/retention  <cit> . in the monocellular eukaryotes, which have much larger population sizes, on the other hand, natural selection would play a more dominant role in duplicate gene loss/retention. actually, in a ciliate paramecium study, it is suggested that gene dosage constraints  after wgd favoured co-retention of the genes within same metabolic pathways or protein complexes  <cit> .

if the retention ratio of  <dig> % represents a trend in the whole genome, the duplicate genes generated by the 3r-wgd may have occupied more than half of the protein-coding loci in a common ancestor of the four teleosts. this may even underestimate the true proportion of the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates in the common ancestor, since some duplicates may have been lost independently in all  <dig> species. in any case, such a large number of duplicate loci, probably more than ten thousand genes, may have undergone lineage-specific loss or differential functionalization among teleosts after their diversification. such lineage-specific gene evolution would characterize the genome of each teleost lineage, and consequently, contribute to various diversity among modern teleosts, which include more than  <dig>  species,  <dig> families, and  <dig> orders  <cit> .

our results also suggests that many of the 3r-wgd-derived duplicate genes persist in modern teleost genomes. the number of the duplicates identified  suggests that they comprise on average  <dig> % of the protein-coding loci in modern teleosts. this value is higher than those reported in previous studies based on pairwise comparisons of the human and teleost genomes, i.e.,  <dig> %  to  <dig> %   <cit> . these estimations are based on analysis of much larger number of genes compared to those of this study, however, these might be underestimations for the retention rate of 3r-wgd-derived duplicates due to the limited sensitivity of semi-automatic blast-based analyses. in our study, we simultaneously analyzed multiple teleost genomes using state-of-the-art methods for phylogenetic inference. thus, we may have more effectively identified the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates, but instead, our analysis covers limited fraction of the genomes .

although teleost genomes may contain large number of 3r-wgd-derived duplicate genes as suggested above, it is reported that teleost and tetrapod genomes have similar number of protein-coding genes in general   <cit> . this may be explained by both an increase of gene number in tetrapods through repeated chromosomal rearrangements and local gene duplications  <cit> , and secondary loss of 1r- and 2r-wgd-derived duplicates in teleosts  <cit> . these issues should be addressed within the broader context of 1r/2r/3r-wgds in early vertebrate evolution based on the emerging genome sequence data of shark , lamprey, lancelet, and sea urchin in the future.

evolution of the duplicate genes derived from the 3r-wgd
the inferred temporal pattern of loss/persistence of the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates  provides new insights into the long-term evolution of duplicate genes after wgd. whereas many  of the duplicated genes are estimated to have been lost during the initial  <dig> my before the divergence of otocephala , on average more than half  of the genes survived until the divergence of otocephala  persisted for  <dig> my . such a temporal pattern of duplicate gene maintenance cannot be solely explained by a complete neutral loss of gene function, which would be expected to lead to an exponential drop in gene number over time . instead, it appears that the genes which persisted for  <dig> my have been maintained by selection. this evolutionary scenario is essentially unchanged if we use both upper and lower extremes of 95% confidence intervals for estimated times of the 3r-wgd and lineage divergences . our results, however, are based on a subset of genes in the genomes of only four teleosts and an approximate divergence times of teleosts with large error intervals of 50– <dig> mya  <cit> . in addition, our results might be affected by incompleteness of the draft genome data of teleosts, especially that of zebrafish. therefore, extrapolating our model proposed here to genome evolution in  <dig>  teleost species over  <dig> mya should be verified in further studies with an increased number of sample genes and genomes.

the long-term maintenance of the duplicates may be attributable to sub-/neo-functionalization of their gene functions  <cit>  in general, although advantageous effect of the increase of gene dosage by duplication may also contribute to the duplicate gene persistence  <cit> . the model of subfunctionalization predicts that, initially after the wgd, many of the duplicated genes were rapidly lost due to the neutral accumulation of degenerative mutations leading to a loss of gene function ; however, a subset of duplicate genes were maintained through subfunctionalization caused by degenerative mutations leading to the loss of a subset of gene functions. such subfunctionalized duplicates can persist for extremely long  periods of time by selection  and thus afford opportunities for the evolution of new genes with novel functions or more adaptive properties . the proposed time course of gene loss/persistence after the 3r-wgd  seems to be well-matched with the model of sub-neofunctionalization.

the above view is supported by the present results of several analyses related to protein multifunctionality. because the initial subfunctionalization occurs primarily through degenerative mutations leading to the loss of a subset of gene functions, it is theoretically possible that the probability of subfunctionalization depends on the degree of multifunctionality of the genes or their encoded proteins  <cit> . this prediction is supported by the observation that the genes included among the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates are significantly longer in terms of their coding sequence  and have a significantly larger total number of interacting partners . these results, which are compatible with the theoretical prediction of the subfunctionalization model, imply that the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates that remain in modern teleosts have maintained initially by subfunctionalization.

the timing of the occurrences of sub-neofunctionalization is important for interpreting our results and understanding long-term genome evolution after wgds. if the sub-neofunctionalization have completed mainly in the initial phase after the 3r-wgd but before the divergence of the four teleosts , this would have contribute little to the differential gene functions among teleost lineages. however, if the neofunctionalization following subfunctionalization occurred mainly after the divergence of the four teleosts, such lineage-specific sub-neofunctionalization of many 3r-wgd-derived duplicates would have contributed to various aspects of teleost diversity. we propose that the latter is the case in general, because neofunctionalization depends on rare beneficial mutations  <cit>  and, thus, this process will proceed gradually over long evolutionary periods of time  <cit> . these issues, however, should be addressed by further analyses on the spatio-temporal patterns of gene expression and/or repertoires of protein function of the respective 3r-wgd-derived duplicates in the future.

genome and gene duplication and teleost evolution
the present study clearly shows that a few gene groups among those analyzed here have expanded dramatically by repeated gene duplications independent of wgd. one representative of them is the well known or  gene family. in vertebrates, this family is constituted by about ten subfamilies  <cit> , and the different subfamily has expanded dramatically in each genome of tetrapods and teleosts, respectively  <cit> . furthermore, in the ot system, pde1c genes were found to have been duplicated specifically in stickleback genome . pde is a key enzyme in the cyclic amp pathway, as it regulates the localization, duration, and amplitude of intracellular camp signaling  <cit> . sticklebacks, therefore, may have multiple bypass circuits to regulate the camp pathway possibly in the ot system via sub-/neo-functionalization of these highly duplicated pde1c genes. these multiple occurrences of the pde1c genes may be a genetic basis for some adaptive traits of sticklebacks. recent analysis on the stickleback pde1c genes has favoured the notion that these multiple duplicates have been retained, not by sub-/neo-functionalization in their gene functions, but rather through their effect of increased gene dosage within the ot system, which is possibly correlated with the territorial behaviour of stickleback  <cit> . in summary, the above results suggest that both of wgd and lineage-specific expansion of particular genes generated genomic characteristics of each species.

it has been suggested that the 3r-wgd promoted speciation and thus led to an increase in species diversity among teleosts  <cit> ; however, the association between wgd and species richness in teleosts remains controversial  <cit> . even if the 3r-wgd is less directly associated with species richness, we propose that the lineage-specific evolution of many 3r-wgd-derived duplicates, that is, the differential sub-neofunctionalization or secondary loss between lineages, contributed to various aspects of genomic diversity that exists among teleosts. such diversity may underlie the adaptive radiation of teleosts that inhabit a broad range of ecological zones – from marine to fresh water, from deep to shallow sea environments, and from equatorial to polar regions. to understand the diversity and evolution of teleosts, as well as vertebrates in general, it will be particularly valuable to characterize the differences between teleosts and the basal non-teleost fishes, which have not experienced the 3r-wgd  <cit> , in relation to the genetic impact of the 3r-wgd.

CONCLUSIONS
more than  <dig> genes was systematically analyzed based on whole-genome sequences of multiple teleost fish species  and state-of-art methods of phylogenetic inference. this revealed that, while many of the duplicate genes derived from the teleost-specific 3r-wgd has been rapidly lost after the 3r-wgd within about  <dig> my, the remaining duplicates may have occupied more than half  of the protein-coding loci in a common ancestor of the four teleosts. the following temporal pattern of loss/persistence of these duplicates is understood by sub-neofunctionalization model of duplicate gene evolution, and this view is supported by analysis of length of protein-coding sequences and numbers of interaction partner of proteins, which are likely associated with gene multifunctionality. based on these results, derived from the first systematic assessment of evolutionary fate of more than  <dig> genes after the 3r-wgd, we propose that many of the 3r-wgd-derived duplicates, probably more than ten thousand of genes, have undergone lineage-specific evolution or secondary loss, and contributed to teleost diversity. lineage-specific expansion of some portion of gene families also appears to have contributed to genomic characteristics of each lineages.

