BACKGROUND
micrornas  are endogenous 18- <dig> nucleotides  long noncoding rnas  that control gene expression by targeting mrnas and triggering either translation repression or degradation. the degree of complementarity between a mirna and its mrna target determines, at least in part, the regulatory mechanism  <cit> . recently, a third less understood mechanism of small rnas interference on gene expression involves heterochromatin silencing  <cit> . many mirnas are highly conserved among animals and plants  <cit>  and it is estimated that up to 33% of all mrna coding genes are negatively regulated by mirnas  <cit> . mirnas exhibit temporally and spatially regulated expression patterns during diverse developmental and physiological processes and clearly animals cannot survive without mirnas  <cit> . most of the mirnas that have been characterized so far in animals seem to regulate developmental processes, including larval stage transitions and neuronal development in c. elegans  <cit> , growth control and apoptosis in drosophila melanogaster  <cit>  or haematopoietic differentiation in mammals. many mirnas have been found to display unique tissue  <cit> , developmental stage  <cit>  or disease-specific patterns  <cit> . these observations imply that each tissue is characterized by a specific set of mirnas that contribute to the definition of the features of that tissue. hundreds of novel conserved and non-conserved micrornas have been identified by bioinformatic analyses, suggesting that the total number of human mirnas could reach  <dig>   <cit> . according to recent computational predictions, as many as  <dig> mrnas can be regulated by a single mirna, which implies that over one third of protein-coding genes in humans are regulated by mirna  <cit> .

so, the ability to monitor changes in mirnas expression is important for understanding gene regulation both in physiological and pathological conditions. several methodologies have been adapted for profiling mirna expression: northern blotting with radiolabeled probes  <cit> , cloning  <cit> , massive parallel signature sequencing   <cit> , quantitative pcr-based amplification of precursor  <cit>  or mature mirnas  <cit> , sage-based techniques  <cit> , bead-based profiling methods  <cit>  and oligonucleotide microarray  <cit> . microarray technology has been successfully used for evaluating variations of mirna expression during development  <cit> , differentiation  <cit> , oncogenesis  <cit> , disease progression  <cit>  and for the primary identification of new mirnas that were predicted by bioinformatic approaches  <cit> . however, at present, no standard methodology exists for hybridization-based profiling of mirnas and, as a consequence, comparison of expression data from different experiments can be difficult. to solve these problems it will be necessary to develop quality procedures for mirna microarrays. furthermore, mirna expression obtained from high throughput arrays has to be validated with alternative technologies. quantitative real-time pcr  has become the golden standard of mirna quantification because it offers the highest sensitivity from small amounts of starting material and it is able to detect as less as 1-nt difference between mirnas. another interesting method is the luminex® xmap™ system that is a multiplexed microsphere-based suspension array platform capable of performing and reporting up to  <dig> different analyses in a single reaction vessel  <cit> . in particular, oligonucleotide-capturing probes complementary to mirnas of interest are coupled to carboxilated 5-micron polystirene beads impregnated with variable mixtures of two fluorescent dyes, each representing a single mirna. using this technique lu and colleagues  <cit>  were able to differentiate tumours that were instead inaccurately classified by mrna profiles. recently, a study performed with luminex mirna platform, identified new markers of human breast cancer subtype  <cit> . when compared to glass-slide microarrays, the bead-based mirna arrays show many advantages such as easy of use, low cost, superior statistical performance, faster hybridization kinetics  and higher flexibility in array preparation. furthermore, the luminex bead array system has been used in a wide range of multianalyte applications throughout the drug discovery and diagnostics fields and it is also widely adopted for quantitative multiplexed protein expression analysis  <cit> .

in this study we have applied the luminex® xmap™ technology in a novel approach to validate expression data of differentially expressed mirnas obtained from high throughput arrays. we have developed an innovative system for labeling of small rna molecules  optimizing the sensitive cloning method for mirnas, termed mrap, developed by takada and mano to define mouse mirna transcriptional signature  <cit> . the expression patterns of three mirnas  measured by our luminex approach in seven different cell lines were validated by taqman mirna assay. in all cases, the two technologies gave super imposable results. our data demonstrate that bead-based detection of individual mirna is a feasible approach, associated to high speed and low cost. the luminex® xmap™ technology is also feasible for multiplexing, since several beads prepared to capture different mirnas can be added in the same reaction allowing the validation of many differentially expressed mirnas obtained from large-scale approaches in a single experiment.

RESULTS
mirna expression in rhabdomyosarcoma cell lines
rhabdomyosarcomas  are rare but very aggressive tumours of childhood that arise as a consequence of regulatory disruption of the growth and differentiation pathways of myogenic precursor cells  <cit> . based on morphology, two major rms subtypes can be identified: embryonal rms  and alveolar . to better understand the global function of mirna in rms, we analyzed the expression profile of  <dig> different rms cell lines  using the mirvana mirna probe set v <dig>  that is a collection of about  <dig> amino-modified dna oligonucleotides  <cit> . briefly, the mirna population from a single cell line was compared to a reference sample consisting of a pool of the seven small rna samples  mixed in equal amounts. the mirna microarray platform was able to distinguish pax3-fkhr positive  and negative rms  cell lines through the expression pattern of about  <dig> mirnas . since the translocation positive rms patients fared worse than the negative counterpart  <cit>  our results demonstrated the potential of mirna expression profiling to classify different rms subtypes, in agreement to previous gene expression studies  <cit> , and set the basis for a further functional characterization of selected mirnas implicated in rms pathogenesis and in the different clinical behaviour and aggressiveness of the two rms subtypes. we decided to study mirnas with the greatest difference in expression between pax3-fkhr positive and negative rms. so expression levels for three discriminant mirnas  were validated by xmap™ technology and taqman qrt-pcr.

testing the hybridization specificity and sensitivity between targets and capture probes coupled to microspheres
to prepare the capture probes, 21- <dig> bases-long oligonucleotides with sequence complementary to each of the three differentially expressed mirnas  in rms cell lines, were synthesized and coupled to different color-coded microspheres in separate reaction tubes and then mixed for multiplexed assays. the targets were oligonucleotides complementary to capture probes and tagged with biotin at their 5'-end. capture probes  were mixed in the same tube with targets at various amounts ranging from  <dig> amol to  <dig> fmol. phycoerythrin -coniugated streptavidin was added to the reaction mixture to detect bound targets that were biotynilated. the signal of each target hybridized to its specific capture probe coupled to microspheres was determined by the fluorescence intensity of phycoerytrin. at least  <dig> microspheres of each set were analyzed by the bio-plex™ system to obtain a median fluorescence intensity value  that was representative of the whole population of each set of beads. as shown in figure 1a, the hybridization signal for mir-199a with capture probe varied with the amounts of added target in a logarithmic trend, reaching a plateau when the targets were present at the highest concentrations. furthermore, the specificity of hybridization did not change while increasing from  <dig> to  <dig> the number of different microspheres in the reaction. we have evaluated the stability of conjugated microspheres at regular intervals during  <dig> days after conjugation. the hybridization signal is stable up to  <dig> days. as shown in figure 1a, the hybridization signal for the mir-199a slightly decreased with the distance from conjugation, but the hybridization between the capture probe and the corresponding target remained specific and proportional. furthermore, our data show that it is better to use microspheres conjugated in the same day to correctly detect mirna expression values. we have also represented the curve in a log-scale  highlighting the linearity range of our technique: the lower limit of sensitivity is  <dig>  fmol and the upper is  <dig>  fmol. we have obtained comparable results with either mir-23a or mir-27a. we measured the specificity of our technique by testing the variation in hybridization signal intensity when mir-27a and mir-199a are captured with probes that contain one or two mismatches in their complementary sequences . we have evaluated the signal of each target  hybridized to the correspondent capture probes with perfect match, one or two mismatches. as described above, capture probes were mixed in the same tube with targets at various amounts . figure  <dig> shows that for both mirnas we obtain a significant decrease of hybridization fluorescence intensity with capture probes containing a single mismatch. the signal drop is even greater with two mismatches: 62% for mir-27a and 85% for mir-199a.

nucleotide sequence of capture probes synthesized with 5'-amino linker and a c <dig> spacer. basepair mismatches  are in bold and underlined

we have also determined the expression levels of above cited mirnas, using the capture probes with perfect match, one or two mismatches in complex rna populations obtained from seven rms cell lines  in comparison to a reference sample . as shown in figure  <dig>  we observe a decreasing trend in fluorescence signal for the capture probes with two mismatches. these experiments show that the specificity of a capture probe is proportional to the number of mismatches present in its sequence and that this specificity guarantee the correct quantification of mirna expression levels in complex rna populations.

a new application of mrap method for mirna labeling
we have developed a new sensitive mirna labeling method based on the mrap strategy recently developed by mano and takada for mirna cloning  <cit> . this new procedure is described schematically in figure  <dig>  small rna molecules  purified by purelink™ mirna isolation kit  were polyadenylated with poly polymerase . complementary dnas corresponding to the mirnas were then synthesized with the use of reverse transcriptase and a rt primer, named oligo-dt15-t <dig>  complementary to the poly sequences added to the mirna. this rt reaction was allowed for  <dig> minutes in order to synthesize cdna molecules of about  <dig> nt. we have used a degenerated oligo to reduce the length of the neo-synthesized poly tails to  <dig> nucleotides. given that some reverse transcriptases possess terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase activity, the synthesized cdna strands frequently result with small poly overhangs at their 3' ends. after annealing a long 5'-adptor, named smart-16attb1-t <dig>  to such poly overhangs, pcr was used to amplify the mirna-derived cdnas. using a t3-biotinylated forward primer, we have obtained biotinylated cdna that was detected with phycoerythrin -coniugated streptavidin after hybridization reaction. every step of this protocol was quality checked by agilent bioanalyzer  <dig> and the resulting electropherograms are represented in figure  <dig>  electropherogram analysis of the rt products have revealed two major bands of ~ <dig> and ~ <dig> nt that correspond to the 5'-adaptor  and the oligo-dt15-t <dig> primer respectively. the electropherograms also evidence the action of degenerated oligo that reduces the length of neo-synthesized cdnas to 100- <dig> nucleotides by shortening the poly to  <dig> nt .

we have decided to block pcr reaction during the exponential phase at  <dig> cycles, to avoid distortion of the actual concentration of mirnas in the sample under consideration. we have demonstrated that pcr cycles between  <dig> and  <dig> are sufficient to achieve a good level of amplification without reaching the plateau phase in which the expression differences would be invalidated .

finally, to verify the presence of mirnas within the labeled cdna population we have identified, by pcr, three specific mirnas  using the sequence of each mirna as forward primer, and the sequence for t <dig> promoter, which is common to all labeled molecules, as reverse primer. the result of pcr amplification of the three mirnas is shown in figure 5b.

validation of differentially expressed mirnas by luminex® xmap™ technology
using the xmap™ assay described above we have determined the expression levels of mir-23a, mir-27a and mir-199a in seven rms cell lines  in comparison to a reference sample consisting of a pool of small rna from each cell line mixed in equal amounts.

to evaluate the validity and feasibility of an assay, it is necessary to compare data with that obtained by other established technologies such as, in this case, microarray and qrt-pcr. as shown in figure  <dig>  the trends of expression levels measured for all the mirnas by the three technologies  were very similar. although the actual values of the relative mirna hybridization signals in the seven rms cell lines were not exactly the same for the three technologies, up-regulated mirnas  in pax3-fkhr positive rms samples  detected originally by microarray were also up-regulated as detected by xmap™ and qrt-pcr, and signals for mirnas down-regulated in pax3-fkhr negative rms samples  resulted consistently low by all three independent technologies. to better understand which are the techniques that provide the most similar results we have applied non-parametric spearman correlation to the following paired comparisons for each tested mirnas: xmaptm vs. microarray, xmaptm vs. qrt-pcr and qrt-pcr vs. microarray. it is interesting to note that data obtained with xmap™ technology seem to be more similar to those defined by microarray  respect to qrt-pcr . from this comparison we could observe that the pcr amplification step introduced in xmap™ labeling method does not affect mirna expression levels whereas mirna expression data obtained from < 200-nt rna molecules  differ slightly from those obtained from total rna . this is particularly evident by non-parametric spearman correlation for qrt-pcr vs. microarray  with the exception of mir-199a.

CONCLUSIONS
we have described a new method that makes use of xmap™ technology for the quantitative determination of single mirnas. this approach quantifies mirna expression levels based on hybridization of small rna populations to the probes designed for mirnas of interest that are coupled to different color-coded microspheres. a flow-cytometer is used to simultaneously measure the hybridization signal associated with the surface of the microspheres and to categorize the color-coded microspheres. the method allows to obtain up to  <dig> independent measures. this xmap™ method offers affordable cost, speed, and high flexibility with capability for multiplexed assays that are increasingly needed. it is valuable for applications such as diagnostic detection of disease mirnas from clinical samples and validation of differentially expressed mirnas obtained from microarray analysis.

we have evaluated the stability of conjugated microspheres demonstrating that they are stable for about one month. we have also tested the specificity of hybridization between targets and capture probes showing that the introduction of a single mismatch in the sequence of capture probes significantly hampers its hybridization capacity . these data have demonstrated the specificity of our capture probes to correctly identify and quantify the expression levels of mirnas. we have developed a new sensitive small rnas labeling protocol introducing some changes on mrap strategy for mirna cloning. this protocol has been applied successfully to validate the expression levels of three mirnas that were found differentially expressed in positive and negative pax3/fkhr alveolar rhabomyosarcomas by microarray experiments. to demonstrate the reliability of this method, the transcriptional levels of these mirnas were also determined by qrt-pcr with taqman probes. the most significant information which emerges comparing the data obtained by the three different technologies  is represented by the general overlapping of the expression profiles obtained. it is interesting to note that small differences in mirnas expression data could depend on the approaches used for total rna purification rather than on different labeling protocols. in fact, microarray and xmap™ data obtained from labeling < 200-nt rna molecules, are more similar compared to qrt-pcr data obtained from labeling total rna, as demonstrated by the spearman non parametric correlation.

we think that the xmap™ technology associated with our new labeling protocol could become an alternative and equally reliable method in the study of expression of a limited number of mirnas respect to qrt-pcr with taqman probes. the comparison of the two experimental approaches  shows that the xmap™ technique is less expensive and more flexible allowing the simultaneous analysis of a larger number of mirnas from the same sample. in addition, xmap™ does not need for specific reverse transcription reactions for each mirna and provides at least  <dig> independent measures for each mirna, improving the statistical power. moreover, xmap™ expression data can be normalized respect to a spike fluorescence signal added in known quantities in the early stages of the labeling reaction, allowing the control over all stages of the reaction. in this way there is no need of an endogenous control, like in qrt-pcr, whose representativeness is sample-dependent.

probably, a negative aspect of xmap™ technology is represented by the use of enriched total rna  that requires higher amounts of starting material respect to qrt-pcr. to avoid the enrichment step of <  <dig> nt rna molecules, we propose the use of lna capture-probe oligonucleotides that increase the affinity of the oligonucleotide for its complementary rna target leading to a significant enhance in stability and specificity of the duplex.

we think that the technology we have developed could be an alternative method to qrt-pcr for validating mirnas expression data obtained with a large scale technology such as microarray and it could have a wide application in clinical, pharmaceutical, agricultural and environmental studies.

