BACKGROUND
cell therapy or cell-based gene therapy with adult pluripotent mesenchymal stem cells is thought to revolutionize the treatment of a large variety of diseases of various organ systems in the future . to further explore the therapeutic potential of regenerative treatment protocols, appropriate animal models are necessary that allow tracing the fate of individual donor or manipulated cells in the host organism.

tracing of cells requires labeling, and one standard approach to label cells is to introduce marker genes into the genome of the cells under investigation. marker genes can either be permanently integrated into the genome of transgenic animals so that all or at least some somatic cells are permanently labeled, or wild-type cells can be transduced with vectors containing the marker gene. a stable genetic marker is especially useful for cell lineage experiments, because the marker is expressed in whole progeny of a specific cell.

recent work from our laboratory has shown that human placental alkaline phosphatase  is a highly suitable marker enzyme for studies involving genetically labeled cells in all tissues, including hard tissues, because it survives not only paraffin but also modified methylmethacrylate  embedding  <cit> . hplap is a heat-stable enzyme that is developmentally neutral in transgenic rats and mice  <cit> . in addition, endogenous alkaline phosphatase activity can be totally blocked by heat inactivation. thus, this marker enzyme provides superb detection quality of labeled cells in the total absence of background staining.

the present experiments employ r26-hplap transgenic inbred fischer  <dig>  rats. the r <dig> promoter represents a  <dig>  kb fragment of the rosa βgeo  <dig>  promoter sequence which has been found to be especially useful to direct ubiquitous expression of marker genes in mice and rats  <cit> . transgenic mice and rats expressing hplap under the control of the r <dig> promoter show ubiquitous, uniform, and stable expression of this genetic marker  <cit> . therefore, hplap-tg f <dig> rats were expected to be a highly useful model for labeling donor cells in syngeneic transplantation studies  <cit> .

however, during recent years, it has become increasingly clear that membrane or even intracellular expression of any foreign protein, and, thus, of any marker protein, will elicit immune-mediated rejection of transplanted cells carrying the marker gene in the recipients  <cit> . therefore, immune-mediated rejection of genetically altered cells is a general and very significant problem in transplantation studies using cells labeled with any marker gene, and also in gene therapy protocols. this problem has severely hampered the utility of animal models aimed at testing the usefulness of cell and gene therapy, especially in long-term studies. here we describe a novel in vivo technology for studying labeled cells in the complete absence of immune-mediated rejection in immunocompetent hosts.

RESULTS
immune response of wild-type rats after syngeneic transplantation of cells from hplap-tg rats
in order to test whether peripheral blood cells and bone marrow cells from transgenic donors would survive and proliferate in normal wild-type rats of the same inbred strain, we intravenously injected peripheral blood leukocytes  or bone marrow cells  from hplap-tg donor rats daily for  <dig> week into wild-type f <dig> rats. however, histological analysis of lung, liver, spleen, lymph nodes, and bone failed to show any evidence of hplap-expressing cells from transgenic donors in the wild-type recipients, suggesting that it was not possible to syngeneically transplant cells from transgenic donors into wild-type rats . this finding prompted us to ask the question whether expression of the transgene, and especially membrane expression of hplap, would induce the formation of antibodies to hplap in the wild-type recipients. facs  analysis revealed that almost all pbl and bmc showed membrane expression of the hplap enzyme in hplap-tg rats . immunization phenomena against hplap could result in immune-mediated destruction of any hplap-expressing cells in wild-type recipients, because the hplap enzyme represents a foreign protein to the rat immune system.

to test whether wild-type recipients develop antibodies against hplap after injection of cells from transgenic donor rats of the same strain, we intraperitoneally or subcutaneously injected wild-type f <dig> rats with pbl from hplap-tg rats three times with an 11-day interval between the injections. subsequently, serum from naïve wild-type f <dig> rats or from wild-type f <dig> rats that had received injections of pbl from hplap-tg rats was incubated with pbl from transgenic rats, and the presence of antibody-labeled cells was examined by facs analysis. as expected, serum from naïve wild-type rats that had never been in contact with transgenic cells did not react with pbl from transgenic rats . however, as shown in fig. 2c, repeated intraperitoneal injection of transgenic pbl induced an antibody response in wild-type rats. identical results were obtained with subcutaneous injection . to test a cellular immune response to hplap in wild-type rats, we performed mixed lymphocyte reaction protocols. when spleen cells from naïve wild-type rats were co-cultured with transgenic spleen cells, we did not observe increased cell proliferation . however, cell proliferation was induced when spleen cells from wild-type rats that had previously been exposed to hplap-expressing cells were co-cultured with transgenic cells. these data demonstrate that exposure to hplap-tg cells induces immunization phenomena in wild-type rats, explaining the abovementioned failure of the experiments aimed at the syngeneic transplantation of transgenic cells into normal wild-type recipients. to verify this hypothesis, we transplanted skin from hplap-tg f <dig> rats into naïve, 3-month-old wild-type f <dig> recipients . all recipients rejected the transgenic transplants within  <dig> weeks.

induction of tolerance by bone marrow transplantation
so far, our results indicated that hplap-tg rats could serve as a very attractive model for regenerative therapies because of ubiquitous and strong expression of the transgene, and excellent preservation of the marker enzyme in paraffin and mma sections. however, immune-mediated rejection of hplap-tg cells by wild-type rats exposed to cells from transgenic donors made it impossible to use this model for cell tracking. therefore, we thought of a way to overcome these problems. previous studies have shown that tolerance against intracellular xenogeneic genes  can be induced by busulfan treatment of wild-type c57bl/ <dig> mice, and subsequent transplantation of bone marrow from gfp transgenic c57bl/ <dig> mice  <cit> , or by transplantation of autologous hematopoietic stem cells transduced with a neo marker gene in monkeys after total body irradiation  <cit> . based on these results, our idea was to combine established methods of tolerance induction to a specific marker with subsequent transplantation of otherwise syngeneic cells labeled with the same marker in order to avoid immune-mediated rejection of the labeled cells.

to test the idea of employing marker tolerant animals as a model for regenerative therapies, we initially used lethal irradiation and transplantation of bone marrow from hplap-tg f <dig> rats into wild-type f <dig> rats as proof-of-principle to prevent the immune response after injection of transgenic cells into wild-type rats. because the rats are of the same inbred strain, graft-versus-host reactions can be ruled out a priori. fig. 3a–c shows that in irradiated wild-type rats transplanted with hplap-tg bone marrow  all hematopoietic cells are of donor origin, and stably express hplap,  <dig> weeks post-transplantation. the superb histological detection quality of hplap permits a clear distinction between wild-type cells of recipient origin and hplap-expressing cells of donor origin . we found that a significant portion of capillary endothelial cells, but not epithelial or mesenchymal cells such as muscle cells, were of donor origin in heart, kidney, and lung of irradiated wt  rats .

utility of marker tolerant rats for cell tracking in regenerative medicine
an example of the usefulness of marker tolerant animals for cell therapeutic studies is shown in fig. 4a and 4b. in this experiment, bmc from hplap-tg rats were injected into the knee joint of irradiated wt  rats. one week post-injection, the transgenic bmc had formed a dense,  <dig> –  <dig> cells wide, layer on the intact articular cartilage surface. this finding suggests that these cells underwent proliferation on the cartilage surface earlier. after  <dig> weeks, the genetically labeled cells displayed a more differentiated fibroblast- or chondrocyte-like phenotype and appeared to have become integrated into the surrounding cartilage tissue of wild-type origin. this experiment underscores the potential usefulness and strengths of this technology, and clearly demonstrates that mesenchymal precursors present in native bone marrow can adhere to the articular cartilage surface and can, subsequently, differentiate into a fibroblastic or chondrocytic phenotype. although potentially marred by immune-mediated rejection, similar findings have been reported in a goat model of osteoarthritis, in which injection of autologous mesenchymal stem cells harvested from bone marrow, expanded in culture, and transduced with gfp stimulated regeneration of meniscal tissue and retarded progressive joint destruction  <cit> .

it is clear that the background of labeled hematopoietic cells is an important shortcoming of irradiated wt  rats, limiting this model to the study of non-hematopoietic tissues. to test whether neonatal exposure of wild-type f <dig> rats with cells from hplap-tg f <dig> rats results in a sustainable tolerance to transgenic tissue, we subcutaneously injected neonatal f <dig> wild-type rats  with whole blood from hplap-tg rats. four months later, skin of hplap-tg rats was transplanted into these neonatally tolerized rats. the transgenic skin grafts were accepted in  <dig> out of  <dig> rats, while a control littermate not having received transgenic blood promptly rejected the transgenic graft. fig. 5a shows the margin of the transgenic skin transplant in a marker tolerant rat,  <dig> weeks post-transplantation. it is evident that the border between wild-type and transgenic tissue is sharply delineated, and that capillaries from transgenic donor tissue invade the surrounding wild-type skin .

these data clearly demonstrate that sustainable marker tolerance also can be achieved by neonatal exposure of wild-type f <dig> rats to hplap-expressing cells of the same rat strain. thus, any kind of hplap-labeled cell or tissue from f <dig> rats can be transplanted and studied in these marker tolerant f <dig> rats in the absence of immune-mediated rejection, and also in the absence of background labeling. to examine the utility of this model for long-term cell tracking, we intravenously injected neonatally tolerized f <dig> rats with transgenic bmc , and assessed the occurrence of hplap-labeled cells  <dig> months after cell administration in various organs. two months post-injection, we found hplap-labeled cells in lymph nodes, but not in liver, heart, kidney, bone, or cartilage , with the exception of extremely rare hplap-labeled endothelial cells in heart and kidney . hplap-stained cells were totally absent in neonatally tolerized f <dig> controls which had not received transgenic bmc as evidenced by histological and facs analysis, ruling out the possibility of a background of hplap-labeled cells in these rats .

discussion
in this study we have shown 1) that hplap is an excellent marker for histological tracking of genetically labeled cells, 2) that a significant portion of endothelial cells is bone marrow-derived in adult organs, and 3) that by induction of selective tolerance to the marker protein it is possible to track cells in immunocompetent, inbred rats in the total absence of immune-mediated rejection of labeled cells.

in line with previous reports our findings corroborate the notion that hplap is a highly suitable marker enzyme for histological tracking of genetically labeled cells in hard and soft tissues  <cit> , and we believe that the excellent detection quality of hplap will set new standards in histological cell tracking. using this marker, we showed that a significant portion of capillary endothelial cells were of donor origin in heart, kidney, and lung of wt  rats,  <dig> month post-transplantation. there is conflicting evidence whether endothelial cells are of hematopoietic origin in postnatal organisms. some studies with genetically engineered mice revealed no evidence for a hematopoietic origin of endothelial cells  <cit> . on the other hand, in mice transplanted with bone marrow from mice homozygous for the genomic globin/pbr <dig> marker, it has been reported that  <dig>  –  <dig> % of endothelial cells are bone marrow-derived without tissue injury during  <dig> months post-transplantation  <cit> . the much higher portion of labeled endothelial cells found in our study may be due to the higher sensitivity of hplap histochemistry compared with the in situ hybridization technique necessary for visualization of the globin/pbr <dig> genomic marker, or due to species differences. nevertheless, our data strongly suggest that bone marrow is a major source of endothelial precursor cells, in line with the original description of bone marrow-derived endothelial precursor cells and several other reports  <cit> . the reasons why labeled endothelial cells were only very rarely observed  <dig> months after intravenous bmc injection into neonatally tolerized rats may be 1) the presumably low number of endothelial precursors present in bmc preparations, and 2) a high turnover of endothelial cells in many organs. labeled endothelial cells could have been replaced by unlabeled bone marrow-derived host cells within the 2-month observation period. in line with the latter hypothesis, labeled endothelial cells can be found at higher frequency in solid organs of neonatally tolerized rats injected with hplap-tg bmc,  <dig> week post-injection .

hplap-tg rats express hplap mainly in the cell membrane of most cell types as demonstrated by facs analysis in our study. we found that membrane expression of the genetic marker induces strong humoral and cellular immune responses in wild-type recipients that result in the rejection of intravenously infused cells from transgenic donors. it is known from the work of other groups that membrane expression of non-self proteins can elicit immune-mediated rejection involving both b- and t-cell responses in the recipients  <cit> . however, it has become increasingly clear during recent years that immunization phenomena against foreign proteins are not restricted to membrane expression of these proteins. intracellular expression of foreign proteins also can induce strong t cell-mediated immune responses  <cit> . therefore, immune-mediated rejection of genetically altered cells is a general problem in transplantation studies using cells labeled with any marker gene, and also in gene therapy protocols. this shortcoming precludes unequivocal interpretation of results from, especially long-term, transplantation experiments with labeled cells.

here we show that the problem of immune-mediated rejection can be overcome by inducing tolerance to the marker gene by transplantation of hplap-tg f <dig> bone marrow into wild-type f <dig> recipients, or by exposure of neonatal wild-type f <dig> rats to blood cells from hplap-tg f <dig> rats. our experiments have demonstrated that after induction of marker tolerance, transgenic cells and tissues could be successfully engrafted and traced in wild-type rats. as an example of the utility of this concept, we demonstrated hplap-labeled cells in lymph nodes, two months after intravenous injection of hplap-tg bmc into neonatally tolerized wild-type rats. thus, we have established a model in which immunocompetent, inbred animals are first made immunologically tolerant to the marker gene that allows tracing of the transplanted cells. in a second step, regenerative therapies with cells labeled with the same marker gene can be tested in the complete absence of immune-mediated rejection in immunocompetent hosts, avoiding the limitations of experiments with immunodeficient scid  mice or immunosuppressed animals. in immune-privileged compartments such as the central nervous system or in joints, immune-mediated rejection of labeled cells may be delayed. for example, it was reported that mesenchymal cells transduced with gfp survive for up to  <dig> weeks in the knee joint of goats  <cit> . therefore, our finding that hplap-tg bmc could be found  <dig> weeks post-injection in the knee of irradiated wt  rats does necessarily show that marker tolerant rats are superior to conventional models using wild-type animals for regenerative studies in the knee. nevertheless, immune-mediated rejection of marker-expressing cells is a potential confounding factor also in immune-privileged compartments in long-term studies.

we used bone marrow transplantation and neonatal induction of tolerance to the marker gene, but a plethora of other strategies for tolerance induction is conceivable. for example, inducible or tissue-specific promoters could be used to reach this aim. although our experiments were performed using hplap as marker gene, the idea to use marker tolerant animals for tracking of labeled cells is applicable to all immunogenic marker proteins.

CONCLUSIONS
our model is almost fully equivalent to the situation in human patients using autologous adult stem cells for cell and gene therapy, and we believe that hplap tolerant inbred or cloned animals will not only be very useful for the development of regenerative therapeutic protocols in the future, but also for all experiments requiring long-term histological tracking of labeled cells such as cell lineage or stem cell experiments in various tissues. in addition, long-term tracking of transplanted cells is a sine qua non to assess the long-term safety of regenerative therapies. therefore, another strength of this model is its ability to address hitherto unresolved long-term safety issues of cell and gene therapies in immunocompetent animals.

