BACKGROUND
in general, organ development is organized in two parts; the first is related to the generation of positional information across a field of cells and the second to the refinement of mature form   <cit> . the drosophila wing represents a particularly appropriate model to investigate the developmental control of phenotypic variation. it is involved in several functions of ecological and evolutionary importance  and its developmental genetics is extensively understood  <cit> . molecular genetic dissection of drosophila wing development has revealed how the dorsal-ventral and anterior-posterior axes are established and how morphogens emanating from these organizing regions establish the positions of the future veins, hence providing a general description of wing pattern formation . in this process, veins that have been specified may be lost later in development due to unsuccessful maintenance and early-appearing ectopic venation may be lost or reduced by subsequent refinement  <cit> . in this respect, the ancestor of extant drosophila probably had certain mechanisms that specified additional veins . furthermore, drosophila may retain some of this information as the ectopic veins produced after genetic manipulations could eventually imitate aspects of the ancestral pattern  <cit> . therefore, if veins have been fused during evolution, formation of a single drosophila vein may depend on a combination of mechanisms that determined different veins in its ancestors  <cit> . even though vein patterning is highly conserved among drosophila species, researchers have isolated numerous mutations affecting vein formation . many of the mutated loci encode components of known intercellular signaling pathways. there is evidence that five of them contribute to vein position and maintain vein and intervein territories in the wing: hedgehog signaling, bone morphogenetic protein signaling, drosophila epidermal growth factor receptor signaling, signaling mediated by wingless , and notch signaling mediated by its ligands, delta and serrate  <cit> . in addition, components belonging to different signaling pathways seem to interact, forming networks which establish vein and intervein regions  <cit> .

developmental processes such as wing patterning have been mostly investigated following classical mendelian and molecular genetic methodologies  <cit> . however, since it presents a geometric conformation, changes in vein disposition might be studied using geometric morphometrics techniques. this would allow for the analysis of shape modifications at different spatial scales  independent of wing size changes. these morphological differences may be caused by genetic and/or environmental alterations which could be identified using quantitative genetics approaches. previous quantitative and evolutionary genetic analyses have mainly used qtl and linkage disequilibrium mapping to identify candidate genes for these characters, but large-scale screenings using mutagenesis have also been employed. quantitative genetic analysis of the subtle effects of p-element mutations that have been induced in an isogenic background  <cit>  is a highly efficient method for functional genomic studies  <cit> .

many studies have demonstrated that wing shape in d. melanogaster exhibits moderate to high heritability  <cit> . they have also shown that numerous genetic factors affect wing shape variation via small, additive effects  <cit> . these results agree with those obtained by mezey and houle  <cit>  who estimated the minimum number of dimensions  in which there is additive variance as  <dig>  implying that the number of genes with an additive affect on wing shape should be at least  <dig>  according to weber and collaborators  <cit> , even though novel mutations generated in the laboratory may not contribute to evolutionary change as much as natural alleles, the study of their phenotypic effects would help to elucidate the genetic architecture of wing shape . in this sense, their study demonstrated that at least  <dig> of  <dig> random p-element insertion lines had a replicable, significant effect on this trait in an isogenic background  <cit> . these mutations affected  <dig> candidate genes which are involved in different developmental and physiological processes  <cit> . although the method used to examine shape in this study  probably underestimated phenotypic variation, the results obtained by weber and collaborators are consistent with a large mutational target for wing shape. dworkin and gibson  <cit>  then addressed the potential role of genes belonging to signaling pathways mentioned above with respect to wing shape in d. melanogaster. with this aim, they analyzed the wings corresponding to  <dig> p-element insertion lines using more potent techniques derived from geometric morphometrics  <cit> . they showed that most of the mutations had significant effects on wing shape without affecting wing size  <cit> . furthermore, they demonstrated that the effects of mutations do not group according to the signaling pathways to which the genes belong  <cit> , supporting the existence of interactions between pathways  <cit> .

in this study, we analyzed wing shape in males and females from  <dig> p-element insertion lines using geometric morphometrics techniques. since these lines have the same genetic background, they only differ in the exact position of the p-element. therefore, as all lines studied were raised under controlled environmental conditions, the analyses allowed us to associate phenotypic variation primarily to its genetic causes. in particular, we could identify candidate genes that contribute to the expression of wing shape in each sex separately and to compare them to candidate genes affecting wing size which have been previously identified using the same  <dig> lines  <cit> . in addition, we classified the lines according to the spatial scale of geometric changes, which enabled us to study the occurrence of mutants showing global shape changes in comparison with those that presented local phenotypic effects. our results indicate that the genetic architecture of wing shape involves a large fraction of the genome and it is largely sex specific and independent of wing size. functional analysis of the  <dig> candidate genes identified revealed that the regulation of cell adhesion and cell motility, cell communication and signal transduction are important biological processes involved in wing morphogenesis.

RESULTS
identification of divergent lines for wing shape and simultaneous analysis of both components of wing form
the results of the manovas indicate that a large number of transposon-tagged genes affect the expression of wing shape since  <dig> % of the lines  showed significant differences from the control line in at least one sex . nearly half of the lines  showed significant differences from the control for wing shape when data were analyzed for each sex separately . however, only 33% of the lines  showed significant differences in both sexes .

analysis of both components of wing form  indicate that  <dig> out of  <dig> lines analyzed  showed significant differences from the control line for at least one of the traits in either sex . more than half of the lines  showed those differences when sexes were analyzed separately . however, only  <dig> % of the lines  showed the mentioned differences for both traits in one or both sexes . this percentage diminishes by approximately one half  when data were analyzed for each sex separately . the percentage of lines in which the p-element insertion affected only wing shape  was larger than that corresponding to the lines wherein mutations modified only wing size . this relationship was maintained when the data were analyzed for each sex separately . frequency analyses showed that the number of cases in which p-element insertions affected only wing size, only wing shape or both traits are within the expected values according to an independent behaviour of those traits in males  as well as in females . figure  <dig> shows the number of lines showing sex specific effects or similar effects in both sexes which were classified according to the phenotypic effect shown . this classification required the study of each line separately, which allowed us to note that, only in  <dig> cases, mutations caused a similar effect  in both sexes . the rest of the significant lines showed different wing form changes in each sex, with the number of significant lines greater for males than for females .

gene identification and functional analysis
we identified  <dig> candidate genes that affect wing shape based on insertion of the p-element within  <dig> kb from the transcription initiation/finalization site. only the gene nearest to the insertion was selected as candidate gene, except in those cases in which two genes were closer than  <dig> kb to the p-element insertion site and neither disruption occurred in the gene . in  <dig> of the  <dig> significant lines, the p-element insertion was close to two genes .

 <dig> out of the  <dig> genes identified were affected by the p-element insertion in two or more lines . an interesting observation was that different insertion sites  in the same gene caused generally different phenotypic effects , indicating that the precise site of the transposon determines its phenotypic effect, as it was observed previously for body size related traits  <cit>  as well as for other characteristics  <cit> . mutation of laminin a  affected only wing shape in both sexes of line bg <dig> but it changed both components of wing form in males of lines bg <dig> and bg <dig> . the p-element insertion affecting cg <dig> in line bg <dig> changed wing shape in both sexes but it affected only wing shape in the females of line bg <dig> . the p-element insertion affecting smrter  in line bg <dig> changed both components of wing form  in both sexes, while it affected both traits only in the males of line bg <dig> . in general, these phenotypic differences due to different p-element positions near to the same candidate gene might be due to different levels of gene expression or gene product activity.

genes with significant effects on wing shape were automatically distributed in gene ontology  terms corresponding to the categories "biological process", "molecular function" and "cellular component" in a non-exclusive manner  according to their annotations  <cit>  . a large proportion of our candidate genes' products are located in intracellular organelles, display protein binding activity and are related to organ or cell development .

distribution of annotated candidate genes in gene ontology  terms corresponding to the categories "biological process", "molecular function" and "cellular component" using fatigo. genes are distributed in a non-exclusive manner . the percentage of genes related to each go term is shown. r: "regulation of". a: "activity".

the distribution of all genes included in the study in go terms was compared to that of d. melanogaster's genome. important go terms were over-represented exclusively in the list of candidate genes compared to d. melanogaster's genome and did not show an over-representation in the list corresponding to all genes studied  which means that the sample studied was not particularly enriched with those go terms. the terms considered as the most informative are anatomical structure formation, regulation of cell adhesion, regulation of cell motility  and plasma membrane .

so far, when a p-element insertion was near to a gene in a line showing altered wing morphology, we considered that gene as candidate to be involved in normal wing development. another possibility is that p-element insertions outside of the gene's coding sequence might result in ectopic gene expression in the wing causing morphology changes, even though the candidate gene is not normally involved in wing development. however, results of go analyses suggest that the majority of our candidate genes would not be false positives as most of the respective terms seem to be associated with development and/or metabolic functions which might be related to morphogenesis.

classification of significant lines according to the spatial scale of wing shape deformations
dunnett contrasts using the scores of the first three relative warps  corresponding to a value of α = - <dig> and α =  <dig> independently , allowed us to separate the significant lines of each sex among four groups according to the spatial scale of wing shape deformations . as it is explained below, lines of group i showed general deformations; lines of group ii showed localized deformations; lines of group iii showed general as well as localized deformations; and lines of group iv showed intermediate deformations. the frequency distribution of the lines among groups showed significant differences between sexes . the greatest difference between sexes was observed for group iii, which was strongly over-represented in males . also, a large difference was observed for group iv which was slightly under-represented in males and slightly over-represented in females . these results suggest a sexually dimorphic effect of mutations on wing shape. consequently, frequency analysis was performed on each sex separately revealing that the number of lines was not proportionally distributed among groups neither in males  nor in females . the greatest difference between observed and expected values was seen for group ii in both sexes, which was under-represented in both cases . the other case that showed a similar pattern in both sexes corresponds to group i, which was slightly over-represented in both cases . in other words, the number of lines which showed deformations that involved almost the whole wing was greater than expected by chance while the number of lines which showed localized deformations was less than expected.

classification of significant lines according to the spatial scale of wing shape deformations for each sex. group i: lines in which the p-element insertion caused general deformations; group ii: lines which showed localized deformations; group iii: lines in which the mutation caused general deformations as well as localized deformations; group iv: lines which showed intermediate deformations. candidate genes that could be identified are given for each group of lines in males and females.

additionally, in order to investigate the association of specific go terms with any particular group , all significant lines were ranked according to their effects on wing shape in comparison to the control line for each sex independently. for both sexes, lines belonging to group iii showed the strongest wing shape variation compared to the control. in females, genes belonging to this group were enriched in signal transduction and cell communication. however, in males, no functional association was detected.

variance and correlation analyses of landmarks
the mean procrustes coordinates of the significant lines were estimated for each group  and sex separately to study the distribution of the values corresponding to different lines around each landmark. according to our results , no landmark had the largest variance in both x and y dimensions nor did any landmark have the smallest variance in both x and y dimensions. we detected that variances of y <dig>  y <dig> and y <dig> were among the five lowest values considering all groups and both sexes . contrarily, variance associated to x <dig> was one of the largest values in all cases except for males of group iv while variances of x <dig>  x <dig> and x <dig> were among the five largest values in six out of eight cases . these results suggest that the lowest variance was seen for the y component of proximal landmarks whereas the largest variance was seen for the x component of distal landmarks .

variance of values of each coordinate  corresponding to each landmark  estimated using the mean of the values of each line for each group  and sex separately. the five largest values are bold-faced and the five lowest values are underlined.

we also evaluated the significance of the correlation between x and y values corresponding to each landmark in order to determine if each landmark can move in all possible directions. the correlation was significant in  <dig> and  <dig> cases  in males and females respectively; being positive in  <dig> cases in males and  <dig> cases in females . those significant correlations were distributed among groups i, ii and iii in both sexes and only  <dig> of them showed a similar pattern between sexes: x and y values corresponding to landmarks  <dig> and  <dig> showed a positive correlation in groups i and ii respectively; and coordinates related to landmark  <dig> presented a negative correlation in group iii . these results imply that the intersection between longitudinal vein  <dig> and the anterior cross-vein as well as the intersection between longitudinal vein  <dig> and the margin of the wing would move frequently between posterior-proximal to anterior-distal positions in both sexes . these results also suggest that the intersection between longitudinal vein  <dig> and the posterior cross-vein would move mostly between posterior-distal to anterior-proximal positions in both sexes . the percentage of total variance explained by the correlation  ranged from 14%  to 55% . therefore, deformations related to each landmark occurred mostly in all directions , with a few exceptions corresponding to the cases mentioned before which might implicate the existence of preferred shape changes along particular directions.

principal results of the correlation analyses between x and y coordinates of each landmark. a correlation analysis was performed between each pair of coordinates within males and females separately. the mean of the values of each coordinate corresponding to each line for each group  was used in the analysis. r value for each correlation analysis is shown. significant values  are bold-faced and italicized.

visualization of wing shape deformations
one line belonging to each one of the groups mentioned before was selected for each sex separately to show examples of wing shape deformations caused by p-element insertions in different candidate genes. in general, these lines were among those which showed the largest wing shape changes compared to the control in their respective group in at least one sex. therefore, in some of these cases wing deformations are shown for both sexes , while in other cases they are shown only for a single sex .

the p-element insertion in inv  affected practically the whole wing . landmark displacements were similar in magnitude and they were generally intermediate . however, some landmarks showed larger displacements, especially in males . finally, the direction of changes was very different between sexes . mutation of fz  affected some parts of the wing more than others although landmark displacements were relatively small . in this gene that belongs to group ii, landmarks  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> showed larger displacements in males whereas landmarks  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> revealed that pattern in females . the direction of changes was also dissimilar between males and females . the p-element insertion in sd , which corresponds to group iii, affected the entire wing . even though landmark displacements were not similar in magnitude, they were generally large . in particular, landmarks  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> showed the largest displacements in males whereas landmarks  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> showed the largest displacements in females . finally, the direction of changes seemed to be more similar between sexes than in the previous cases . the mutation affecting the group iii gene cg <dig>  also deformed the whole wing with landmark displacements very different in magnitude . in particular, landmarks  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> showed the largest displacements in males whereas landmarks  <dig> and  <dig> revealed that pattern in females . the direction of changes was evidently similar between sexes only with respect to some of the landmarks .

the p-element insertion in l82fd  affected some parts of the wing remarkably more than others in males . for this gene, that belongs to group i, landmarks  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> showed the largest displacements with the most prominent changes in the intermediate region of the wing . mutation of cg <dig>  affected some parts of the wing more than others in females, although landmark displacements were relatively small . displacements of landmarks  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were remarkably larger than the others . the next two examples correspond to genes that belong to group iv. the p-element insertion affecting lana  caused modifications in the entire wing in males . even though landmark displacements were not similar in magnitude; they were generally large . landmarks  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> showed the largest displacements whereas landmarks  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> moved slightly less . finally, the mutation affecting jing  caused significant modifications in some parts of the wing in females . landmarks  <dig>   <dig> and especially landmark  <dig> showed the largest displacements .

discussion
in recent years, numerous studies have been performed to study the genetic basis of wing form in d. melanogaster  <cit> .mutagenesis by p-element insertion has been recently used to analyze wing shape variation in this species  <cit> . the principal difference between those studies and this one is that we used a larger number of mutants. our results represent a substantial contribution to wing shape genetics because there seems to be little overlap between the candidate genes identified in this study and those identified in previous studies. in fact, for most of the candidate genes identified, this is apparently the first record relating them to wing shape variation.

analyses of divergent lines for wing size and shape
although the number of genes affected by p-element insertions in our array of lines only represents  <dig> to  <dig> % of all the genes in the drosophila genome, more than 63% of these induced mutations affected wing shape in one or both sexes. this result suggests that a large number of genes contribute to the expression of this trait which is in line with previous estimates  <cit> . however, an interesting observation was that 67% of the lines showed wing shape changes only in one sex. thus, the genetic basis of wing shape seems largely sex specific, which is contrary to previous findings that showed a sex independent expression of the genes  <cit> . in turn, these results have apparently led some authors to analyze only one sex in their studies  <cit> . other authors found differences between sexes for wing shape,  <cit>  but used only one of them to search for qtls for that trait in a subsequent work  <cit> . lately, dworkin and gibson  <cit>  analyzed both sexes utilizing the same methodology used in this study and found significant differences between sexes but they did not stress that result presumably because it was not their primary objective. our results, that have been obtained analyzing a number of lines/genes that was larger than in previous studies, show that the genetic basis of wing shape depends largely on the sex considered. several microarray studies have indicated that thousands of genes distributed throughout the genome contribute to sexual dimorphism in d. melanogaster  <cit> . further, several analyses of gene expression have investigated the strength and molecular signal of sex-specific evolutionary forces  <cit> . however, these studies were performed using adult flies whereas studies of expression patterns of specific tissues  have not discriminated between sexes  <cit> . therefore, it would be very helpful for future investigations to analyze the expression patterns of wing imaginal discs in males and females separately. in general, the results of the studies mentioned previously indicate that sex-biased genes show a nonrandom genomic distribution which is consistent with the hypothesis that past intralocus sexual conflict at many loci has been at least partially resolved through the evolution of sex-specific levels of gene expression . our data indicate that p-element insertions affecting wing shape mapped more frequently to the x chromosome than expected when males and females were analyzed together . however, distribution of candidate genes between the x chromosome and the autosomes did not depart from the expected distribution  when the sexes were analyzed separately . even though these results are apparently contrary to previous studies  <cit> , other investigations have indicated that the nonrandom distribution of sex-biased genes are due to chromosome inactivation and dosage compensation rather than sexually antagonistic selection  <cit> . moreover, some evidence suggests that the autosomes play an important role in the evolution of sexual dimorphism  <cit> . finally, to our knowledge, only two recent investigations have analyzed sexual dimorphism of wing shape in drosophila  <cit> . those studies suggested that wing shape is under the influence of both natural and sexual selection, reinforcing the idea that the evolution and development of wing morphology should be studied in both sexes.

the joint analysis of wing size  and wing shape indicate that 79% of the lines considered showed significant differences from the control for at least one of the traits in either sex. however, only 19% of the lines showed those differences for both traits in one or both sexes. the percentage of lines in which the p-element insertions affected only wing shape is almost three times the percentage in which the same insertions affected only wing size. further, the results of the frequency analyses suggest that these traits show an independent behaviour with respect to the genes involved in their expression. these results indicate that the genetic basis of wing shape and wing size are largely independent of each other which is consistent with previous observations  <cit> . finally, only a third of the mutations caused similar effects in wing form in both sexes . this value is similar to that associated with males but it is larger than the value corresponding to female specific lines. these results suggest that the expression of wing size and wing shape involve a large part of the genome although many of the genes are likely trait and sex specific. our results highlight that the genetic architecture of wing size differs from that of wing shape, as has been observed by other authors in natural populations of d. melanogaster  <cit> .

analyses of wing deformations and associated genes
the results of the correlation analyses showed that deformations related to each landmark generally occurred in all directions which indicates the general absence of preferred  shape changes along any particular direction. however, analyses of variance of the values related to each landmark revealed that the intersection between veins showed the smallest displacements in the proximal region of the wing. this suggests that development of the proximal region is canalized compared to other parts of the wing which might be due to its proximity to the intersection of the wing and the body.

the analyses performed to classify the significant lines according to the spatial scale of wing shape deformations revealed that mutations causing global changes were more common than expected in both sexes. this suggests that a large proportion of the genes identified are involved in early wing morphogenesis   <cit> . these analyses also revealed that mutations causing localized wing deformations were less common than expected in both sexes. this implies that only a small number of the genes identified are involved in wing formation during late development   <cit> . therefore, global wing shape changes might be due to altered vein positioning whereas localized deformations might be due to local changes in growth which may not significantly affect other regions of the wing. future investigations could deal with this issue by analyzing the expression patterns of the respective tissue during different stages of pupal development.

we observed little overlap between the candidate genes identified in this study and those found in previous studies. in fact, for most of our candidate genes, this is the first record relating them to wing shape variation .among the other genes which have been previously associated with wing development and/or vein patterning are a few that should be analysed in greater detail. invected  encodes a transcription factor involved in the determination of the anterior-posterior identity of the wing  <cit> . this might explain the pronounced effect that its mutation produced on wing shape in both sexes. moreover, the global effects observed are consistent with early expression during wing organogenesis. interestingly, many fitness related traits, including wing size  <cit>  and developmental time  <cit>  are also affected by this mutant.

scalloped  has been largely related to wing morphogenesis as part of the wg signaling pathway . scalloped and vestigial  constitute a dimeric functional transcription factor in which vg provides the transcription activator function while sd binds dna  <cit> . this might explain the effect that a mutation of this gene  had on wing shape in both sexes, which also caused a significant increase in wing size in males and females  <cit> . however, it must be mentioned that another mutation of the same gene , only caused an increase in wing size in males  <cit> . the mutations might have affected certain sites of sd in such a way that the resultant product  can not bind adequately to dna and/or vg.

laminin a  encodes one of the chains that forms a heterotrimer belonging to the extracellular matrix that binds to position-specific integrins  <cit> . adhesion between the two surfaces of the wing fails when integrin function is reduced  <cit> . thus, mutation of lana might interfere with the normal function of these integrins causing developmental modifications. as a result, this may produce dissimilar wing form changes, as was seen in different mutant lines . again, the mutations might have affected certain sites of lana in a way such that the resultant product can not bind adequately to the respective integrins. further investigation of sd and lana  may help to elucidate the cause of the differential phenotypic effects associated to different mutations of the same gene.

the functional analysis of the  <dig> candidate genes that have been identified for wing shape revealed that a large proportion of the annotated genes are involved in development and/or metabolic processes, which is in line with previous observations  <cit> . furthermore, the results showed that the products of most of them are located in intracellular organelles and present protein binding activity. the functional enrichment analysis revealed that some go terms were over-represented in our list of candidate genes compared to d. melanogaster's genome. some of the terms are suggestive because they are very similar to those that have already been related to organ development . for instance, in pupae, wing cells reconstitute their contacts generating a highly ordered hexagonal cover by a mechanism implicating several components of the planar cell polarity pathway  <cit> . such a process is influenced by cell surface mechanics and by local cell division rates  <cit> . tissue growth is also affected by cell intercalation, a mechanism that has been observed during the evagination of the pupal imaginal wing disc  <cit> , in which cells change position by reconstructing their adhesive contacts  <cit> . these examples illustrate processes in which some candidate genes related to go terms such as regulation of cell adhesion, regulation of cell motility and plasma membrane might be involved. moreover, in females, mutations showing the strongest effects on wing shape variation were associated with the go terms of cell communication and signal transduction in agreement with the idea that an organ's shape results from local cell interactions rather than from cells' response to global controls  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results support the idea that the genetic architecture of wing shape is complex with many different genes contributing to the trait in a sexually dimorphic manner. its largely polygenic basis, which is relatively independent from that corresponding to wing size, is composed of genes generally involved in development and/or metabolic functions, especially those related to the regulation of different cellular processes such as motility, adhesion, communication and signal transduction. our results suggest that understanding the genetic basis of wing shape requires merging the regulation of vein patterning by signalling pathways with processes that occur during wing development at the cellular level. further studies might help to elucidate the role of our candidate genes in wing patterning by relating them to known or novel signaling pathways. this will help to improve our knowledge of drosophila wing development.

