BACKGROUND
subjective tinnitus is characterized by the perception of sound or noise in the absence of any internal or external acoustical stimulation. for 1–2% of the general population, this condition causes a considerable amount of distress and interferes seriously with the individual's ability to lead a normal life  <cit> .

the advent of modern neurophysiological and imaging tools has greatly benefited our understanding of the abnormal functioning of the central nervous system as a major cause of chronic tinnitus  <cit> . this is illustrated by a) an enhanced activation of the central auditory system in subjects suffering from tinnitus  <cit> , b) the modulation of tinnitus perception by electrical stimulation of the auditory cortex  <cit>  and c) changes in the tonotopic map of the auditory cortex visualized with magnetic source imaging  <cit> . these results have been complemented by evidence of dysfunctional thalamocortical processing in tinnitus  <cit> . additional support for these findings comes from mri studies demonstrating changes of thalamic structural plasticity in affected subjects  <cit> . tinnitus-related hyperexcitability in specific brain regions along with dysfunctional neuroplasticity in critical cortical circuits have paved the way for addressing auditory phantom perceptions with rtms based protocols: this method uses an electromagnet placed on the scalp that generates magnetic field pulses of very short duration  and approximately  <dig> – <dig>  t in strength. after passing largely undistorted through the scalp and scull, the magnetic field induces an electrical current in superficial cortical neurons, which in turn results in neuronal depolarisation  <cit> . when used in the low-frequency range, rtms modulates brain activity both in directly stimulated regions and in functionally connected brain areas  <cit> . thereby it may modulate neuroplasticity in cortical circuits and thalamocortical networks alike  <cit> . rtms has also been shown to effectively reduce auditory hallucinations in patients with schizophrenia  <cit> . extending these studies to tinnitus, we have demonstrated that pet- and mri-guided neuronavigated low-frequency rtms over the hyperactive auditory cortex can alleviate symptom severity in this phantom sensation  <cit>  as well. a subsequent controlled trial of  <dig> patients with chronic tinnitus confirmed a significant reduction in tinnitus severity scores after five days of active rtms as compared to sham treatment  <cit> . in the majority of patients these beneficial effects remained stable up to six months post rtms intervention, suggesting the possible induction of long-lasting neuroplastic changes  <cit> .

the objective of the present study was to evaluate whether subjective effects of altered tinnitus sensation after rtms treatment are accompanied by changes in objective data assessing cortical excitability. for this purpose we used transcranial magnetic stimulation  to serially assess multiple parameters of motor cortical excitability in patients who participated in a sham controlled crossover trial of rtms  <cit> . our testing included  motor threshold , which reflects membrane related neuronal excitability;  the cortical silent period , i.e. a correlate of inhibitory function within cortical and subcortical structures;  intracortical inhibition  and  intracortical facilitation , i.e. two tests of intracortical inhibitory and excitatory mechanisms  <cit> .

as has been shown by our group and by other investigators, changes in cortical excitability may serve as a correlate of response to treatment  <cit> . related parameters are sensitive to practice-dependent and deafferentation-induced plastic change in human cortex  <cit>  and hold promise for elucidating the underlying mechanisms  <cit> . dense functional connections between the central auditory system and the sensorimotoric system are well-known  <cit> , and make tinnitus amenable to triggering or modulating by input from sensorimotoric systems  <cit> . to judge by its occurrence in the majority of tinnitus patients  <cit> , somatosensoric modulation seems to represent a fundamental attribute of tinnitus  <cit> . these functional connections may provide the physiological basis for the detection of changes in auditory processing by measuring motor cortex excitability  <cit> .

RESULTS
all patients completed the study and adverse effects were not observed. at baseline, no statistically significant differences between the verum and sham condition could be found. considering the low power for detecting such effects with the given small number of observations, this does not necessarily mean that there are no carry-over effects, but at least in the present context they cannot be detected. the treatment response was variable and ranged from no effect to a marked reduction in tinnitus complaints . after sham treatment, only a slight and transient reduction of tinnitus was observed . separate analysis of variance models for the absolute levels of tinnitus and for the intracortical excitability data over time show no statistically significant effect for any of the measurements. therefore, further statistical analysis is focused on the change of correlation over time. following active stimulation, the multiple correlation of excitability change and reduction of tinnitus strengthened from day  <dig> to day  <dig> . the changes of different parameters of cortical excitability over days are displayed in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  on day  <dig> correlation coefficients of verum and sham treatment differed significantly . exploratory analysis of the influence of different excitability parameters revealed that the reduction in tq was correlated with an increase in ici  with a trend towards increased icf  and increased csp  . in contrast, after sham stimulation, no significant correlation was noted between tinnitus change and altered excitability parameters  .

1age in years at study begin;

 <dig> tinnitus laterality as reported by the patient; l: left r: right;

 <dig> side of hypermetabolic activity in the fdg pet ;

 <dig> duration of tinnitus in months at study begin;

 <dig> the order of stimulation according to randomization: "a, s" stands for active rtms first and sham rtms second and "s, a" for the inverse order;

 <dig> tinnitus scores as revealed by the tinnitus questionnaire of goebel and hiller   <cit> ;

 <dig> Δtq: treatment response, indicated as the difference between tinnitus scores on day  <dig> and day  <dig> for active rtms and sham rtms, respectively.

discussion
the above findings from serial measurements of motor cortex excitability in ten patients suffering from chronic tinnitus confirm the interplay of physiological parameters and a subjective reduction in tinnitus complaints after rtms treatment. this interplay was specific to the verum intervention and has several implications for the etiology and treatment of the condition. however, the results have to be considered with caution, because the small number of subjects increases the danger of overfitting when calculating the multiple correlation coefficients, upon which interpretation is based.

the observed alterations of cortical excitability could be either directly induced by tms treatment or mediated indirectly, e.g. by changes of patients' motor behaviour after tms-induced tinnitus improvement. however, changes in tinnitus complaints occurred both in the active and the sham condition, whereas the correlation between tinnitus improvement and alterations of excitability was present only in the active condition. this favours the notion of a direct relationship between rtms treatment and alterations of cortical excitability. this interpretation is in line with recent studies suggesting that intraindividual changes in cortical excitability may serve as a correlate of response to treatment  <cit> . thus our results give further support to functional connections between the central auditory system and the motor cortex in tinnitus patients as previously described both at the structural level  <cit>  and at the functional level in affected subjects  <cit> . reactivation of the extralemniscal auditory pathway along with the consecutive activation of non-auditory brain areas in some forms of tinnitus  <cit>  may make tinnitus pathophysiology amenable to investigation by measuring motor cortex excitability.

the observed changes in the excitability pattern might reflect neurobiological effects of rtms that are associated with tinnitus improvement and thus may help to identify the underlying mechanism. both tms-induced tinnitus reduction as well as the correlation with cortical excitability were most pronounced six days post active rtms . this delay in clinical and cortical response could reflect the temporal dynamics of rtms-induced neuroplastic changes, as has been suggested previously  <cit> . sustained stimulation effects have already been shown in animal experiments, in which electrical stimulation with  <dig> hz administered daily for two weeks induced long-term-depression that outlasted the treatment by at least two weeks  <cit> . with regard to these delayed stimulation effects, the interval of  <dig> days between stimulation conditions may have been too short to rule out potential carry-over effects. to safeguard against this potentially confounding factor, we included treatment order in the statistical analysis and tested for baseline differences between stimulation conditions. however, it has to be considered that, due to the small number of patients, the ability to detect such effects is limited.

with respect to different parameters of cortical excitability, tinnitus improvement after low frequency rtms was related to an extension of the cortical silent period and an increase in both intracortical inhibition and intracortical facilitation. similar neurophysiological effects have been described after application of gabab agonists  <cit> . in accordance with our findings, prior tms studies have also demonstrated an extension of the cortical silent period after low frequency rtms in healthy controls  <cit> , in patients with writer's cramp  <cit>  and schizophrenic patients with auditory hallucinations  <cit> . prolongation of the cortical silent period is believed to reflect improved inhibitory function within cortical and subcortical structures, including the thalamus  <cit> . in light of this research, the clinical improvement induced by rtms may be related to enhanced gabab inhibitory function at the subcortical level. strong support for the notion that low frequency rtms modulates thalamocortical networks comes from a recent neuroimaging study, which has demonstrated neuroplastic changes in the temporal cortex and in the thalamus after  <dig> hz rtms  <cit> . finally, animal studies testify to the inhibition of relay cells mediated by gabaergic neurons in the reticular nucleus  of the thalamus following electrical stimulation of corticothalamic fibers  <cit> . this inhibition can reach wide parts of the thalamus, including auditory thalamic neurons  <cit> . thus, similar to electrical stimulation, low frequency rtms may reduce cortical excitability by activating inhibitory gabaergic neurons in the thalamic reticular nucleus.

tms-induced modulation of corticothalamic pathways may also explain the alteration of intracortical excitability  observed: stimulation of corticothalamic pathways in animals has been shown to induce long-term depression  within the auditory cortex via activation of type1-metabotropic glutamatergic receptors  <cit> . such induction of ltd entrains moderate activation of n-methyl-d-aspartate -mediated excitatory circuits  <cit> . enhancement of n-methyl-d-aspartate -transmission, in turn, is reflected by increased icf according to pharmacological studies  <cit> .

in this context, the association observed between increased icf and reduced tinnitus after low frequency rtms may reflect nmda-mediated ltd induction. this hypothesis is supported by tms studies in humans, which demonstrated the induction of neuroplasticity by low frequency rtms. when areas of locally increased excitability were stimulated,  <dig> hz rtms had a pronounced down-regulating effect, which outlasted the stimulation period, suggesting long-term depotentiation as the most relevant biological factor behind rtms effects  <cit> .

in the present study, the use of a neuronavigation system ensured that rtms was performed exactly over hypermetabolic brain areas. as metabolic hyperactivity of the primary auditory cortex in tinnitus patients is presumed to reflect enhanced synaptic transmission associated with disinhibition, low frequency rtms may have selectively depotentiated enhanced synaptic weights  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
low frequency rtms over the hyperactive auditory cortex has repeatedly been shown to reduce tinnitus sensations  <cit> , however treatment results have been difficult to predict in individual subjects. in the study presented here, we delineate an association between clinical improvement and alteration of cortical excitability. the changes observed in different parameters of cortical excitability are consistent with the hypothesis that clinical effects of low frequency rtms are dependent on corticothalamic processing  <cit> .

our findings may help to explain the variability in clinical outcome on the basis of an individual response in cortical physiology  <cit> . with regard to future interventions, measurements of cortical excitability with pptms hold promise as a neurophysiological marker of rtms induced neuroplasticity. this should allow tailored treatment strategies to develop that take differences in genetic background and behavioural state into account, both of which affect the induction of neuroplastic changes  <cit> .

we are aware of the limitations of our data, as they result from a pilot study with a relatively low number of subjects. further investigations with longer observation periods and larger collectives including healthy controls will be necessary to replicate our findings.

