BACKGROUND
gene-expression studies provide insights into the regulatory processes of genes that modulate phenotypes of organisms. the two most reliable techniques to date that directly measure and compare the differential response in gene expression are microarray studies and quantitative real-time reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction  analyses. microarrays provide a high-throughput measurement of the transcriptional changes for thousands of genes, within short time, from limited number of rna samples. however, quality of expression data can vary substantially and is often validated by a second method. in contrast to microarrays, qrt-pcr provides precise quantification over a wider dynamic range. because of the higher sensitivity, qrt-pcr is often used to validate microarray data. several variables can still introduce biases in qrt-pcr studies. for example, the amount and quality of template rna, the enzymatic efficiencies and other in vitro artefacts can add technical variability to the data y <cit> . hence, experiments are typically standardized and expression levels need to be normalized  <cit> . normalization is accomplished in several ways; the expression values from target genes of interest can be balanced against the total amount of rna in the reactions, balanced against synthetic rna that is "spiked" in each reaction, or measured against internal reference genes. this last method is generally considered reliable and is frequently applied for quantifying relative gene expression  <cit> . yet, several studies have shown that this approach can introduce large errors when the expression of such "housekeeping genes" varies under different treatments and in different tissues . to improve robustness of the experiment, it is recommended to use more than one reference gene  <cit>  and to verify that their transcriptional activity are stable across conditions and tissue types. because it is difficult to assess the expression stability of a reference gene by itself, current approaches aim to analyze the expression levels of several candidate reference genes with respect to each other. in samples with different amounts of input rna the ratio of two ideal reference genes remains constant.

once suitable reference genes for a certain experiment are selected, a normalization factor , which is the geometric mean of the crossing point  values of the reference genes, is calculated for normalization of the genes under investigation, i.e. to remove nonspecific variation in the data.

selection of reference genes for daphnia pulex
so far, no systematic validation of reference genes in d. pulex has been published. in a recent study, schwarzenberger et al.  <cit>  tested the expression stability of seven genes in a different species, d. magna, and found glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , tata box binding protein , and succinate dehydrogenase  suitable for normalization of gene expression in predator experiments . under low-food quality conditions , tbp, 18s, and alpha tubulin  were suitable reference genes and gapdh and ubiquitin conjugating enzyme  significantly upregulated  <cit> . heckmann et al.  <cit>  investigated the expression stability of several genes also in d. magna, when exposed to ibuprofen. they selected gapdh, an actin gene  and ubc as the most stable reference genes and showed that atub was differentially regulated. rider and leblanc  <cit>  and zeis et al.  <cit>  used beta-actin as a single reference gene for d. magna without prior validation of its suitability for expression normalization. the candidate reference genes chosen for our analysis include three frequently applied housekeeping genes, atub, gapdh, tbp, and three genes with microarray support for stable expression: syntaxin  <dig> , x-box binding protein  <dig>  and capon . xbp <dig> is a transcription factor which is activated through differential splicing. it plays a major role in unfolded protein response in eukaryotes  <cit>  and is critical for larval development of drosophila  <cit> .

abbreviations: e: amplification efficiency; p: number of paralogs in d. pulex genome; l: length of the amplicon

capon is a protein which targets the neuronal nitric-oxide synthase to the presynaptic nerve terminal in mice  <cit> . to test the performance of candidate reference genes in an actual experiment, one gene with expected differential expression levels encoding for a matrix metalloproteinase  was selected on the basis microarray data . mmps are a family of evolutionary conserved extracellular proteases that play important roles in cell-cell signaling processes in most animal species  <cit> . most importantly, they process and degrade extra- and pericellular proteins. a precise function of mmp in d. pulex has not yet been described.

the expression levels of these seven genes were measured by qrt-pcr using d. pulex juveniles that were exposed to water-borne chemical cues  released by chaoborus larvae and manifested the characteristic defence-against-predator phenotype called neckteeth   <cit> . these recorded gene transcript levels were compared to expression levels in unexposed juveniles without neckteeth  that have not been exposed to chaoborus larvae. to date, no single best strategy for the selection of reference genes exists. therefore, the suitability of the genes as reference markers for normalization was assessed using three different algorithms implemented in the programs bestkeeper  <cit> , genorm  <cit>  and normfinder  <cit>  and evaluated by normalizing the expression level of a regulated gene against different sets of the candidate reference genes.

RESULTS
rna quality
rna concentration and purity was measured with the nanodrop nd- <dig> spectrophotometer . the mean  a260/ <dig> ratio of the samples was  <dig>  ±  <dig> , indicating pure  rna quality. rna integrity of samples was further checked by capillary gel electrophoresis on the stdsens chip of the experion rna stdsens analysis kit .

qrt-pcr efficiencies and intra-assay variation
the expression levels of the seven candidate reference genes were measured in triplicates with qrt-pcr in  <dig> biological replicates of each induced and non-induced daphnids . the cp values, which negatively correlate with the concentration of target sequence present at the very beginning of the amplification reaction  <cit> , ranged from  <dig>  cycles for the gene with the highest expression  to  <dig>  cycles for mmp, which showed the lowest expression . the standard deviation  within triplicates ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  cycles with a mean of  <dig>  cycles. mean pcr efficiencies varied from 90% to 94% .

abbreviations: n: number of samples; gm : the geometric mean of cp; am : the arithmetic mean of cp; min  and max : the extreme values of cp; sd : the standard deviation of the cp; cv : the coefficient of variance expressed as a percentage on the cp level; min  and max : the extreme values of expression levels expressed as an absolute x-fold over- or under-regulation coefficient; sd : standard deviation of the absolute regulation coefficients; bk corrc : pearson correlation coefficient, correlation between the bestkeeper index and the contributing gene. bk corr -mmp : pearson correlation coefficient between bestkeeper index without mmp in the analysis and the contributing gene.

descriptive analysis of the reference genes
the expression variation of each candidate reference gene was assessed using bestkeeper v.  <dig>   <cit> . pfaffl et al.  <cit>  recommend to exclude genes with a sd of the mean cp of >  <dig> from the nf , which corresponds to a starting template variation by the factor two. mmp had a sd  of  <dig>  and was therefore excluded for further analyses . the remaining genes showed minor fluctuations in expression levels  and a strong correlation with the bestkeeper index  after the exclusion of mmp, which indicates expression stability. the expression of all genes highly correlated with the nf, which is supported by p-values <  <dig> .

ranking the candidate reference genes
the candidate reference genes were ranked with respect to their suitability as reference genes using the programs genorm v.  <dig>   <cit>  and normfinder v. <dig>   <cit> . genorm utilizes a pairwise comparison approach and calculates a gene-stability measure m, which is the arithmetic mean of the pairwise variations between a particular gene and all other candidate control genes. the least stable genes have the highest m values and are successively excluded. the program also indicates the minimum number of reference genes that should be included in the nf by calculating the pairwise variation v reflecting the effect of the inclusion of an additional control gene on the nf. the authors of genorm suggest the analysis of at least  <dig> samples per group and  <dig> to  <dig> candidate genes. figure 1a shows the stepwise exclusion of the least stable genes and the average expression stability measure m of the remaining genes. the last two genes could not be further ranked because the calculation involves the ratio of expression levels. also in this calculation, mmp was the first gene to be excluded because of the high value for m. the results of genorm suggest tbp and capon as the most stably expressed reference genes. however, vandesompele et al.  <cit>  highly recommended using at least three reference genes and a cut-off value of pairwise variation of  <dig> . starting with tbp and capon we included xbp <dig> as a third reference gene . the pairwise variation for the inclusion of xbp <dig> was  <dig>   and thus lies below the suggested cut-off. pairwise variation even further decreased with the inclusion of stx <dig> , gapdh  and atub  and exceeds the  <dig>  pairwise variation cut-off only after the inclusion of mmp .

the second program utilized was normfinder. it applies a model-based approach, which in contrast to genorm allows the assignment of groups to the samples . inter- and intragroup variations are used for the calculation of a stability value i.e., candidates with minimal combined intra- and intergroup variation are ranked as the most stable genes. this approach has advantages over the pairwise comparison approach of genorm if coregulated genes, inappropriate as reference genes, could bias the results  <cit> .

in a first analysis with normfinder, all seven genes were tested for intra- and intergroup variation by assigning the samples to the two groups .

the intergroup variation was very high for mmp  and lowest for those of capon, tbp and xbp <dig>  which lay between ±  <dig>  and ±  <dig>  . the program indicated xbp <dig> as the best reference gene with a stability value of  <dig>  and tbp and xbp <dig> as the best combination of two genes with an even better combined stability value of  <dig> .

ranking according to expression stability calculated with normfinder 

the normfinder approach attempts to compensate for expression differences between treatment and control by selecting combinations of genes with opposite expression and as little intra- and intergroup variation as possible. therefore, in our second normfinder analysis, those genes with a high intergroup variation  - and thus a high bias on the selection of the best genes for normalization - were excluded . the analyses of these genes in this study revealed that stx <dig> has the lowest, i.e. best stability value in combination with xbp <dig> , although stx <dig> alone had the highest, i.e. worst stability value . the variations in expression levels are opposite and thus compensate for each other.

the three different algorithmic approaches applied in this study yielded mostly concordant results. all programs clearly identified mmp as an unstably expressed gene. bestkeeper, however, did not provide information, which of the remaining genes should best be used to normalize qrt-pcr results. the programs genorm and normfinder both ranked xbp <dig>  tbp, capon and stx <dig> as the genes with the highest expression stability, albeit in a different order. as briefly mentioned above, the use and comparison of both programs is highly recommended, because in principle, results can be strongly biased by the analytical approach selected  <cit> .

because the results of genorm and normfinder are largely concordant, we conclude that there are no significantly coregulated genes in the seven genes studied. thus, there is no need to choose genes with opposite regulation in induced and control samples. it is largely accepted that at least three reference genes should be used for normalization, as every additional gene increases the robustness of the nf. based on the analyses using genorm and normfinder, we consider tbp, capon and xbp <dig> as a good set of internal reference genes for expression analysis of chaoborus-treated daphnids . the results of the normfinder ii analysis  showed that the three highest ranked genes  have a slight tendency towards higher expression in the induced compared to the non-induced samples. it might therefore be advisable to include stx <dig> as a fourth reference gene, because of its opposing expression, as advocated by andersen et al.  <cit> .

st 
nd 
genes are ranked according to figure 1a  and to their stability values in table  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . in bold letters: the recommended optimum combination of genes.

the genes xbp <dig> and capon have not yet been used as normalization genes in any study. however, the systematic validation in this study provides evidence that they are suitable reference genes under these experimental conditions despite comparatively low transcription levels . most importantly, they are much more stably expressed between experimental groups than the classical housekeeping genes atub and gapdh. in general, variation is expected to be inversely proportional to the amplified target amount but low variation despite high cp  values has been observed in other studies as well .

evaluation of the selected reference genes
the choice of reference genes can have a strong impact on the results in relative expression studies  <cit> . to test the impact of reference gene selection and to evaluate the suitability of the reference genes selected in this study, the differential expression of mmp between chaoborus-induced and non-induced daphnids was assessed using three different sets of reference genes -  the most stable genes identified by genorm and normfinder,  the classical housekeeping genes  and  all six candidate reference genes . furthermore, we tested atub and gapdh, which were deemed unstable with high intergroup variation, to determine if this was due to unspecific fluctuations or to a significant differential expression of both genes . in addition, we assessed the effects of using single traditional housekeeping genes  for normalization of expression levels only .

*x-fold change in gene expression in the induced samples compared to the control group.

expression analyses were done using the relative expression software tool rest v.  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> . rest applies the efficiency-corrected comparative cp method  <cit>  and performs randomization tests to estimate a sample's expression ratio and the likelihood of up or down regulation, taking into account several reference genes and the individual amplification efficiency of each gene. the p values obtained from the randomization tests in rest indicate the likelihood of observing differences between sample and control groups due to chance alone. they were calculated by  <dig>  random reallocations of samples and controls between the groups and counting the number of times the relative expression on the randomly assigned group is greater than the sample data .

differential expression measurements of mmp indicated a significant upregulation irrespective of the normalization strategy . similarly, both traditional 'housekeeping' genes atub and gapdh were reported significantly downregulated in induced animals, which supports the finding of a significant downregulation on protein level for atub  <cit>  and differs from the results of schwarzenberger et al.  <cit>  for d. magna.

differential expression levels reported by the rest program depended on the reference genes selected for normalization . for mmp they ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  in the induced samples, whereas for atub  and gapdh  fluctuations were less prominent. since rest uses expression ratios rather than cp raw values for randomization tests and the data visualized in the whisker box plots  often portray lopsided distributions with standard errors.

because atub and gapdh show variations in expression, they are not suitable reference genes for such experiments with d. pulex. even though no strong difference on the regulation of mmp is observed the impact reference genes have on the results become evident when using classical housekeeping genes atub and gapdh as reference genes. when selecting atub as a single reference gene for normalization, rest reports a significant upregulation not only for mmp but also for xbp <dig> and tbp . no differential regulation is then reported for gapdh due to similar  expression. these results highlight the importance of testing for expression stability of reference genes. when selecting gapdh as the only reference , mmp is the only gene with significant differential expression, atub is reported to underlie no significant differential expression. altogether, the false positive report of differential expression for xbp <dig> and tbp and the false negative report of differential expression for gapdh when using atub as reference gene for expression normalization highlights the importance of careful reference gene selection according to the approach outlined in this study.

alpha tubulin paralogs in daphnia pulex
of clear importance for gene expression studies using d. pulex is the large number of duplicated gene families, many comprised of recently derived paralogs. in the genome of d. pulex, at least five atub genes were identified  http://wfleabase.org. interestingly, in microarray experiments, members of this gene family have opposing directionality in their expression. this has been observed also for other genes in other taxon groups . this issue might bias the results of the qrt-pcr when primers interrogate more than one atub gene. in any case, such qrt-pcr markers are avoidable by querying the genome sequence.

functional role of mmp
our finding that mmp is significantly upregulated by qrt-pcr was expected; this gene is noted in a microarray study  to be upregulated in juvenile daphnids exposed to chaoborus kairomone. according to the most recent jgi annotation, the mmp gene found is a meprin a metalloprotease. ncbi blast matches it to genes that are members of the protein family astacin . mmps are known to play an important role in development, in particular in degrading and processing proteins, and are associated with cell-cell signalling pathways  <cit> . although our data clearly identified mmp as a differentially expressed candidate gene, subsequent analyses should now focus on analyzing the function of this gene product in d. pulex to understand its relevance in the context of predator-induced defences.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that xbp <dig>  tbp, capon and stx <dig> are suitable internal reference genes for studying relative gene expression levels in d. pulex that are challenged by chaoborus predation. two traditional housekeeping genes, gapdh and atub, were studied with qrt-pcr and found to have a strong expression variation and were significantly downregulated. one candidate gene with assumed differential expression, mmp, was found to be significantly upregulated. using atub as reference gene leads to a strong bias in reported expression levels emphasizing the importance of thorough reference gene evaluation prior to target gene expression profiling. in particular, for further studies investigating transcriptional responses of daphnia to other treatments we recommend to experimentally verify stable expression of reference genes prior to data acquisition in order to improve accuracy and reliability of qrt-pcr data.

