BACKGROUND
synthetic biology allows for the understanding of biological phenomena through mathematical modeling and simulation  <cit> . in order to control cells optimally, it is important to identify the relationships among cell dynamics in computational experiments and those in living cells. in computational experiments, synthetic genetic circuits are often designed such that they only comprise regulatory genes in synthetic genetic circuits, and do not include downstream genes, such as reporter genes or genes present in natural genetic circuits   <cit> . however, downstream genes, including reporter genes in particular, are essential for monitoring, analyzing, and exploiting synthetic genetic circuits in living cells.

exogenous reporter genes can affect the dynamics of regulatory genes in synthetic genetic circuits in two ways. the first involves increased competition for regulatory proteins among the existing regulatory gene promoters and the additional reporter- gene promoters in synthetic genetic circuits ; binding of a regulatory protein to a decoy site on dna is an example of such competition  <cit> . decoy sites vary and are present in viruses, prokaryotes, and eukaryotes  <cit> . the second effect of introducing reporter genes into synthetic genetic circuits involves effects on protein degradation . protein degradation components, such as the ubiquitin- proteasome system, autophagy , caspase, γ-secretase, and calpain, play a key role in natural regulatory systems  <cit> . the dynamics of synthetic regulatory circuits are modified by altered degradation of regulatory proteins that results from the use of downstream reporter proteins when the same degradation mechanism is involved. together, these two effects of employing downstream genes are important factors to consider in the control of cells through mathematical modeling and simulation.

in this paper, we describe changes in the dynamics of regulatory genes in synthetic genetic circuits when employing downstream genes. here, we evaluated the effect of connecting a synthetic oscillating regulatory circuit with a reporter gene. we found that protein degradation plays a central role, and is as important as protein production  <cit> , because the downstream genes exhibit competition for regulatory proteins among binding sites on the dna and so compete for protein degradation machinery.

RESULTS
mathematical modeling for evaluation of the effects of downstream genes on oscillators
we here describe two oscillator network models for monitoring the effects of downstream genes . one model is a reporter-less model, which has been described previously  <cit> . by addition of a reporter gene, we created the other model, called the reporter-containing model.

these two models share a regulatory gene-based oscillator, called the smolen oscillator  <cit> , which is dependent on protein degradation and feedback from protein synthesis. the smolen oscillator is known to be robust and tunable. in the oscillator, arac and laci form positive and negative feedback loops. arac is a protein that is activated in the presence of arabinose. laci acts as a repressor protein in the absence of isopropyl β-d-1-thiogalactopyranoside . in these models, arac and laci proteins were tagged with the ssra peptide and thus were specifically degraded efficiently by the clpxp protease  <cit> .

the additional gene in the second model is a downstream green fluorescent protein  reporter gene . although downstream genes are very complex in living cells, we, for simplicity's sake, utilized a single reporter gene in this study. moreover, notably, arac proteins and laci proteins bind not only to the promoters driving their own expressions, but also to the gfp promoter. consequently, gfp expression can be activated by arac and be repressed by laci. by means of the ssra tag on gfp, this protein was also specifically degraded efficiently by the clpxp protease. in contrast, in the reporter-less gfp model, the downstream component is absent . detailed mathematical modeling for these two models is shown in the methods section.

addition of downstream genes affects the bifurcation of the oscillator
the reporter-less model exhibited a greater oscillation area in a bifurcation diagram than did the reporter-containing model . to describe the effects of the downstream components, we firstly investigated the bifurcation diagram for deterministic calculations of both models. the bifurcation diagram was defined by arabinose and iptg concentration. furthermore, in order to determine the competition for a regulatory protein, arac or laci, among its binding sites on the promoters of the synthetic regulatory-network genes and the reporter gene, we increased the copy number of gfp gene  in the reporter-containing model . note that the copy number of the regulatory gene is invariable. consequently, the reporter-less model exhibited a wide oscillation area . similarly, for nd =  <dig>  the reporter-containing model also exhibited a wide oscillation area . increase of the copy number of the gfp gene expanded the fixed area , where each oscillation with amplitude gradually decreases to constant . these results suggested that the competition for a regulatory protein among its binding sites on the promoters affects oscillation bifurcation, similar to the effect caused by an increase in the number of decoy sites in a genetic circuit  <cit> .

this and previous studies have analyzed competition for regulatory proteins among binding sites in the promoter regions and other regions of dna. in one study of positive feedback, massive introduction of tandem-repeat "decoy" dna sequences decreased expression in living yeast by binding an activator protein, and also altered the inhibitory effect of a small molecule on the activator  <cit> . another group analyzed circuit dynamics to demonstrate retroactivity, by which an upstream system receives information from downstream systems. in general, retroactivity causes time delay in signal transduction of upstream systems  <cit> . more particularly, it has been shown that a change in the copy number of reporter gene causes a change in the oscillation period  <cit> , as was also demonstrated by our study. our study further revealed that an increase in the copy number of reporter genes causes narrowing of the oscillating area in the bifurcation diagram.

competition for degradation machinery among proteins, including downstream proteins, results in a longer oscillator period
even in the same parameter set, where both models show oscillation, the reporter- containing model demonstrated a longer oscillation period than that of the reporter- less model . for each of the parameter sets, the oscillation area of the reporter-containing model  had a longer period than that seen for the corresponding parameter sets of the reporter-less model .

detailed analysis of the time course of oscillation components in the two models showed that the longer total period in the reporter-containing model was mainly derived from the period where the rate of protein decay exceeded that of protein production. in the arac-dimer time-course, for example, we defined the rising subphase, falling subphase, action phase, and resting phase . the total length of the oscillation period was equal to the sum of the action phase and resting phase. the resting phase was defined as that phase in which fewer than  <dig> arac dimer molecules exist. the action phase was equal to the sum of the rising subphase and falling subphase. in the rising subphase, the rate of protein production exceeded the rate of protein decay, whereas in the falling subphase, the rate of protein decay exceeded that of protein production. the length of the oscillation period, calculated using deterministic simulation in both models, mainly depended on the falling subphase, but not on the rising subphase or resting phase . similarly, the total length of the oscillation period in deterministic simulation of laci concentration oscillation was also dependent on the falling subphase.

these values reflect simulations performed at  <dig> % arabinose and  <dig> mm iptg

the greater length of the falling subphase in the reporter-containing model than that in the reporter-less model mainly derived from a greater probability of degradation. protein production in the reporter-less model was slightly higher than that in the reporter-containing model: the integrated activity of arac mrna, which is the area under the arac mrna oscillation time course divided by the time interval, was  <dig> in the reporter-less model compared to  <dig> in the reporter-containing model . however, the integrated activity of the arac dimer protein in the reporter-containing model was much higher than that in the reporter-less model; the integrated activity of arac dimer was  <dig> in the reporter-less model vs.  <dig> in the reporter-containing model. this difference in the integrated activity of the arac dimer protein suggested reduced degradation in the reporter-containing model compared to the reporter-less model, because the amount of a protein in a cell is affected by both production and degradation. indeed, in these models, three proteins  compete with each other for the protein degradation system. as the reporter-less model does not contain gfp, arac and laci are degraded rapidly by the protein degradation system, and the threshold between the action phase and resting phase is reached early. thus, additional downstream genes cause a longer falling subphase by generating competition for the degradation machinery among proteins. very recently, similar competition for degradation machinery between proteins of two synthetic regulatory networks has been reported to cause oscillation coupling  <cit> .

these values performed at  <dig> % arabinose and  <dig> mm iptg.

design of synthetic genetic circuits by considering output impedance and input impedance
in order to drive large-scale and complex genetic circuits while using restricted resources in a cell, a situation similar to output impedance and input impedance in electric circuits should be considered when designing synthetic genetic circuits. in electric circuits, connection between electronic components may perturb the dynamics of the circuits. similarly, previous modeling studies proposed that connections between regulatory genes and downstream gene perturb oscillation dynamics  <cit> .

our mathematical modeling and simulation also showed that the connection of downstream genes changed the oscillation area in the bifurcation diagram and the oscillation period of regulatory genes . in electric circuits, perturbation by the connection between electric components is indicated by input impedance and output impedance . electric circuits are composed by many components. regulatory component is built constant current source. voltage is defined by output impedance and input impedance of regulatory component. downstream component outputs voltage in proportion to downstream input consumed by input impedance. the dynamics of regulatory component is changed by connection of downstream component, in case of high output impedance of regulatory component or low input impedance of downstream component.

genetic circuits are composed by similar components which the number of regulatory proteins treats as voltage. given this concept of impedance, improved designs of genetic circuits as the same topology as those used in this study, would require low output impedance of the regulatory genes consisting smolen oscillator and high input impedance of downstream reporter genes . in order to reduce the disturbance of regulatory genes by connection to downstream genes, a previous study proposed connection via insulators that do not affect regulatory genes from which downstream genes receive the signal  <cit> . insulator is the device that reduces high output impedance of the regulatory genes and increases low input impedance of downstream genes. however, such a connection causes a time delay. in order to decrease output impedance, reflected by altered regulatory genes, we propose that the copy numbers and expression of the regulatory genes should be increased . in this case, the dynamics of the altered regulatory genes with increased copy numbers should be confirmed in advance, because changing the copy numbers and expression of regulatory genes would alter the dynamics between regulatory genes. in order to increase input impedance, reflected by amended downstream reporter genes, we also propose that the number and affinity of dna-binding sites in downstream genes should be decreased . note that this change would decrease the signal-to-noise ratio of the downstream reporter genes. this decrease in the signal-to- noise ratio corresponds to elevated expression of reporter genes of the editing ribosome-binding site sequence and increased imaging sensitivity of the measuring devices. downstream genes express by the effects of positive correlation of the number of regulatory proteins. downstream coding sequence is conceivable of a reporter gene or a regulatory gene expressing more downstream genes. in the case of latter, downstream component is conceivable of connection to more downstream genes.

CONCLUSIONS
our results showed the effects of downstream reporter genes on regulatory genes of synthetic genetic circuits. our mathematical modeling and simulation suggested that downstream genes exhibit  competition for regulatory proteins among binding sites on the dna and  competition for protein degradation machinery in the living cell. this competition by components of genetic circuit targets not only proteases in the protein degradation machinery, but also rna polymerase, ribosomes, and chaperone proteins  <cit> .

moreover, in synthetic biology, the downstream genes can be endogenous genes in natural genetic circuits   <cit> . through interactions with downstream genes, synthetic genetic circuits sometimes exert unintentional negative effects on cellular viability  <cit> , which can alter the dynamics of the circuits. synthetic genetic circuits are also dependent on growth rate  <cit> . as growth rate increases, in a repressilator circuit, the stable fixed point enlarges, amplitude reduces, and the oscillation period shortens. in other examples  <cit> , growth rate is dependent on synthetic genetic circuits. in modeling symbiosis of a tryptophan auxotroph metabolizing tyrosine and a tyrosine auxotroph metabolizing tryptophan, the synthesis of each amino acid regulates the growth rate of both auxotrophs. furthermore, not only downstream genes, but also components that do not directly regulate each other can compete for some machinery in a cell.

although our modeling dealt effects of competition for regulatory proteins and protein degradation independently, future modelings for the combinatorial effect of them would be evaluated both in vivo and in scilico. competition for regulatory proteins in vivo by chip  was modeled by computational approach  <cit> . protein degradation by microscopy experiments was also evaluated by computational approach  <cit> . because parameter dependency of each effect was measured for in vivo, combinatorial dependency will be also able to be measured in vivo. activity landscape on such parameter space could lead us mathematical modeling for the combinatorial effect.

our results will contribute to improvements in the field of systems and synthetic biology, because they demonstrate that considering the effect of downstream genes on regulatory genes in synthetic circuits is essential for mathematical modeling of genetic circuits.

