BACKGROUND
mycobacterium tuberculosis, the etiological agent of tuberculosis, has the ability to enter human macrophages and survive inside them in a 'latent' or 'non-proliferating' form for a long period of time. this behavior is termed dormancy or latency. during their lifetime, latent bacilli can reactivate giving rise to active tuberculosis, the transmissible form of the disease  <cit> .

the molecular mechanism allowing dormancy is not fully understood due the lack of experimental systems that can closely mimic human latent infections  <cit> . in the granuloma, dormancy is hypothesized to occur in response to low oxygen, stress and lack of nutrients  <cit> .

experimental evidences suggest that, within the granuloma, the in vivo environment where dormant mycobacteria persist, the oxygen concentration is the limiting factor for bacterial growth and the condition that induces dormancy. therefore, during the last few years, various experimental models using microaerobiosis or anaerobiosis, have been developed to reproduce dormancy in vitro  <cit> . there is also evidence that tubercle bacilli suffer nutrient deprivation in lung lesions  <cit> . conditions of nutrient limitation have been used to investigate the ability of m. tuberculosis to persist in a non-growing state for long periods of time  <cit> . importantly, dormancy is a common behavior to both pathogenic and non-pathogenic mycobacteria, in vitro  <cit> , allowing the study of pathogenic species by using non-pathogens as model.

m. smegmatis is a fast growing non pathogenic mycobacterium frequently used as a model system to study its pathogenic counterpart m. tuberculosis. m. smegmatis becomes dormant in low oxygen concentration conditions  <cit>  and remains viable for over  <dig> days when it suffers carbon, nitrogen and phosphorous-starvation  <cit> . based on these observations, we decided to use low oxygen and limiting nutrient conditions to develop an in vitro system. then, we used such system to screen a library of m. smegmatis generated by insertion mutagenesis and look for mutants defective in dormancy  <cit> . this strategy allowed the isolation of two mutants with insertions mapping in the uvra gene. the uvra protein belongs to the nucleotide excision repair system  and is highly conserved among mycobacteria. ner counteracts the deleterious effects of dna lesions acting as an endonuclease enzyme complex including four uvr proteins: uvra, uvrb, uvrc, and uvrd. uvra, togheter with uvrb, plays a key role in the recognition of dna damaged sites  <cit> . uvrc, together with uvrb, perform a single strand incision at both sides of the damaged site and the dna fragment is removed by the action of the uvrd helicase.

while this dna-repair system has been largely analyzed in e. coli  <cit> , it remains poorly characterized in mycobacteria. it has been recently reported that the m. smegmatis genome is predicted to encode two additional uvra proteins, named uvra <dig> and uvra-like protein, whose function are still unknown  <cit> .

here we report that the m. smegmatis uvra protein is essential for the mycobacterial dormancy behavior and survival in hostile growth conditions, such as low oxygen and carbon content, also observed in the granuloma. our results, together with recent analyses  <cit> , suggest that the ner system plays a key role in m. smegmatis dormancy.

RESULTS
m. smegmatis dormancy is induced under conditions of low oxygen and low carbon availability
in order to develop a simple and reliable strategy to screen a m. smegmatis library for mutants unable to grow in conditions of hypoxia and low carbon concentration, we first compared the effects of these conditions on the dormancy behavior of m. smegmatis wt and ppk1- mutant cells . to assess whether low carbon availability represented a limiting factor, we analyzed the effect of different glucose concentrations on m. smegmatis growth rate. to this purpose, wt and ppk <dig> strains were grown at 37°c in minimal medium containing glucose as the only carbon source at the following final concentrations:  <dig> %;  <dig> % or  <dig> % . the growth rate was monitored for  <dig> hours by measuring the od600nm. as shown in figure 1a, when the minimal medium was supplemented with glucose  <dig> % , cultures entered stationary phase at an od600nm of  <dig> , whereas using glucose  <dig> % , stationary phase was entered at  <dig>  od. when an even lower glucose concentration  was added to the medium, cells growth was inhibited, indicating that the arrest of cell growth was due to carbon starvation. similar results were obtained for the ppk mutant . these results indicate that the m. smegmatis growth rate is significantly limited by the amount of carbon source. based on this, we decided to use a glucose concentration of  <dig> % for the further analyses. next, we analyzed the effect of hypoxia on dormancy by following the bacterial cell growth up to  <dig>  od in the presence of  <dig> % gluscose. serial dilutions of wt and ppk1- strains were transferred to agar plates and incubated in either atmosphere oxygen concentration or anaerobic conditions in jar . bacterial cell growth of both wt and ppk <dig> strains, resulted unaffected in aerobic conditions, for as long as 4- <dig> days of incubation. however, the cell growth of the two strains resulted completely inhibited in anaerobic conditions for at least  <dig> days, indicating that low oxygen is an inhibitory factor. after  <dig> days of growth in anaerobic conditions, the same plates containing wt and ppk <dig> cells were incubated in normal oxygen condition for 4- <dig> day. as represented in figure 2a, m. smegmatis wild type cells show restored cell growth without a significant cell loss, when exposed to oxygen. this result indicates that wt cells are able to exit the dormant state and restore cell growth. in contrast, ppk- <dig> cells showed only a 40% of restored cell growth in compared to wt , suggesting that this strain is unable to either enter or exit the dormant state. these results allow us to conclude that our experimental system represents a valuable platform to screen the m. smegmatis transposon library.

library screening and isolation of m. smegmatis mutants with impaired dormancy behavior upon hypoxia and low carbon availability
ten thousand clones of a transposon library containing more than  <dig>  mutants and covering the majority of the m. smegmatis gene pool  <cit>  were screened as described above to isolate mutants unable to survive a prolonged exposure to low oxygen tension and low carbon availability. the screening allowed us to isolate a total of  <dig> insertion mutants unable to survive these conditions. each clone was serially diluted to further confirm the observed phenotype . during individual screening,  <dig> clones sensitive to hypoxia and low carbon availability were isolated and divided in two groups: the first group included  <dig> clones that were completely unable to survive and, therefore, defined as severely affected ; the second group included the remaining  <dig> clones that were only partially affected and, therefore, defined as moderately affected  . most likely, these mutants are unable to either enter or exit the dormant state.

in order to identify the sites of transposon insertions, the genomic dna of all clones was extracted, digested with the sali restriction enzyme and used as template in ligated mediated -pcr reactions  <cit> . using this approach, we were able to map the site of transposon insertion of  <dig> m mutants and  <dig> s mutants . in two independent mutants, here named s <dig> and s <dig>  the transposon insertion mapped in different positions of the uvra gene . the uvra gene encodes the uvra protein that belongs to the nucleotide excision repair system . as the two mutants showed identical phenotypes, s <dig> was chosen for further characterization.

aselected mutants moderately  or severely affected 

bgenes are indicated as annotated by tigr/genebank database 

crelative to the first base of the putative coding sequence

dcut off identity was set at 60%

e not found

uvra is important for mycobacterial dormancy and survival upon hypoxia
to verify whether the severe dormancy defect of the uvra mutants in our in vitro model system was a direct effect of uvra deficiency, we performed complementation analyses. a wild type allele of the uvra gene was pcr-amplified, cloned into the integrative expression vector pnip40-b  <cit>  and electroporated into the s <dig> mutant strain. the resulting strain was analyzed for its phenotype. as shown in figure  <dig>  the reintroduction of a single copy of uvra from m. smegmatis  fully restored the dormancy defect of the parental mutated strain. identical results were obtained for the s <dig> mutant .

as shown in table  <dig>  a blast search performed using uvra of m. smegmatis as a query showed that this gene is highly conserved in m. tuberculosis. the orthology between the m. smegmatis and m. tuberculosis uvra proteins was verified by using the m. tuberculosis uvra gene to complement the m. smegmatis uvra deficient strain . the reintroduction of the m. tuberculosis uvra wt gene  was able to restore the wt phenotype in the m. smegmatis mutated strain. our results demonstrate that uvra is essential for m. smegmatis to enter or exit dormancy upon hypoxia. moreover, we proved that the m. smegmatis and m. tuberculosis gene products are true orthologs.

uvra deficiency does not influence m. smegmatis growth under nutrient limiting conditions
in addition to hypoxia, nutrient starvation is also supposed to affect cell growth. to check whether the ner deficiency had an effect on cell growth in nutrient limitation, we monitored the growth rate of the uvra mutant and the complemented strains in minimal medium supplemented with the following final glucose concentration:  <dig> %;  <dig> % or  <dig> % . as shown in figure 1b, uvra mutant cells grown in  <dig> % glucose entered stationary phase at a lower optical density  in compared to cells of the same strains grown in higher  glucose concentration. moreover, both wt and uvra cell growth arrested at the limiting glucose concentrations . taken together these results indicate that m. smegmatis growth rate is limited by the amount of carbon available and also that absence of uvra does not affect m. smegmatis growth under nutrient-limited conditions.

the mycobacterial ner system is involved in the protection from uv-induced damage of dna
the ner system has been extensively studied in e. coli where the uvr gene products protect bacteria from different types of dna damages including those induced by uv radiations  <cit> . to verify whether the ner system had a similar function in mycobacteria, we measured the effect of uv light exposure on wild type, uvra , the complemented derivatives of this mutant, containing the uvra gene from m. smegmatis  and m. tubercolosis , respectively. as shown in figure 4a, while uvra cells were unable to grow after a  <dig> sec exposure to uv light , the wild type and the complemented strains were unaffected by the treatment. to further verify the importance of uvra in preventing uv-induced dna damages, all strains were exposed to different uv light doses. as shown in figure 4b, the s <dig> strain showed a marked sensitivity to uv irradiation with only 7% survival after exposure to  <dig> mj/cm <dig> uv, whereas the wild type and both complemented strains showed a comparable dose-dependent sensitivity to uv irradiation with more than 60% survival after exposure to the same uv dose. taken together these results suggest that m. smegmatis uvra is involved in the repairing of uv-induced dna damages as reported for other bacteria  <cit> .

the uvra ner system contributes to repair dna oxidative damages
it is hypothesized that inside the granuloma, dormant bacilli are continuously exposed to reactive oxygen species  and reactive nitrogen intermediates   <cit> , lipo-soluble molecules that can enter the mycobacterial waxy cell wall, thus causing dna damages.

to better clarify the role of the ner system in oxidative stress, we determined the effect of oxidative stress on wt, uvra mutant s <dig> and complemented strains s1-uvra-ms and s1-uvra-tb cell growth. to this purpose, cells were incubated in the presence of  <dig> mm h2o <dig> and growth  was monitored at  <dig> hours intervals for  <dig> h. as shown in figure 5a, the uvra mutant strain, in contrast to wild type and complemented strains, stopped growing after three mass doubling time in the presence of hydrogen peroxide. the uvra mutant strain reached a maximal cell density of  <dig> ×  <dig> c.f.u. ml- <dig>  which was approximately 4-fold higher than the density of the initial inoculum  but 1000-fold less than the density of the wild-type and the two complemented strains . interestingly, the growth curve of the two complemented strains shows a lag-phase under normal growth conditions  that it is not observed when bacteria are exposed to oxidative stress . this result is probably due to the fact that, in the complemented strains, the uvra gene is not expressed under the regulation of endogenous promoter region. our results suggest that mycobacteria need a functional ner system to neutralize the damaging effects of oxyradicals, emphasizing once again the importance of the ner system for mycobacterial survival under stress conditions.

discussions
in silico analysis of mycobacterial genomes  <cit>  has shown the presence of genes encoding enzymes involved in different dna repair system such as nucleotide excision repair , base excition repair , recombinational repair, non-homologous end-joining repair and sos repair. surprisingly, even if mycobacteria lack the mutsl-based post-replicative mismatch repair system  <cit> , their mutation rate is similar to those of other bacteria  <cit> . a recent analysis provided evidence that the mycobacterial ner system is able to repair a wider range of dna damages than the corresponding e. coli system, highlighting its involvement in mismatch recognition and suggesting a crucial role of the ner system in preserving the mycobacterial genome integrity  <cit> . although mycobacterial dna repair systems are still not well characterized  <cit> , it is possible that their functions are important for survival of tubercle bacilli during latency. latent mycobacteria, in fact, are continuously exposed to the action of compounds such as reactive oxygen species  and reactive nitrogen intermediates  that induce dna damage  <cit> . the deleterious effects of these intermediates, is probably counteracted by the synergic action of highly efficient and functional dna repair systems. oxidative stress results in different types of non-bulky dna damages such as formation of abasic sites, single and double-stranded breaks, or production of oxidized bases converting guanine to  <dig> -dihydro-8-oxoguanine. although base excision repair  is the main pathway for the removal of this kind of lesion  <cit> , we hypothesized that during dormancy the ber system is overwhelmed by extensive dna damages and that mycobacterial genome integrity might be preserved by a synergic action of different dna repair systems among which ner. earlier studies have shown that a m. tuberculosis ner-deficient strain mutated in uvrb, is markedly attenuated for survival in mice and that uvrb protein is required for resistance of m. tuberculosis to both ros and rni species in vivo  <cit> . it has also been recently reported that a m. smegmatis uvrb mutant is sensitive to stress factors such as hypoxia, a condition under which bacteria are not proliferating thus they can accumulate dna damage over time  <cit> .

in this study we used hypoxia and low carbon availability as a model for dormant state to screen a library of m. smegmatis insertional mutants. this strategy led to the isolation of two strains mutated in the uvra gene and unable to survive such condition. we showed that the m. smegmatis uvra protein is essential to survive the in vitro dormancy condition of growth. moreover, we demonstrated that the uvra protein is needed for cell to neutralize both uv light- and oxyradicals-induced damages.

according to these data, it is possible to hypothesize that the uvra mutant is not able to survive the in vitro dormancy conditions because of sudden oxygen increase following the opening of the jars. the oxidative burst created is probably neutralized by the synergic action of functional dna repair systems, which maintain the genome integrity. a deficiency in one of the dna repair systems during this step may result in the accumulation inside the mycobacterial genome of mutations which are not counteracted by the action of the remaining repair systems, resulting in failure of cells to reactivate.

a future analysis of the m. tuberculosis uvra knock-out mutants using human macrophages and mouse infection as an in vitro and in vivo dormancy model systems will give more insight into mycobacterial survival during latency and will help to better clarify the importance of m. tuberculosis ner system during latency.

CONCLUSIONS
in this report we describe the isolation and subsequent analysis of a m. smegmatis strain mutated in the uvra gene under different stress conditions.

we demonstrate that m. smegmatis uvra deficient strain is more sensitive to hypoxia, uv radiation and oxidative stress than wild type and that the use of m. smegmatis own gene or the corresponding m. tuberculosis homologous gene, fully restore the wild type ability to resist these factors.

based on our data, we can conclude that uvra protein, and thus the ner system, is an importatnt player for adaptation of m. smegmatis to various stress conditions. further analysis are needed to better clarify the role of ner system in the complex phenomenon of mycobacterial dormancy.

