BACKGROUND
cardiomyopathy syndrome  is a severe cardiac disease affecting farmed atlantic salmon  primarily in the second year in seawater close to harvest  <cit> . since the first diagnosis in norway in  <dig>  <cit> , it has later been diagnosed in scotland, the faroe island, denmark and canada  <cit> . pathology associated with cms has also been observed in wild atlantic salmon  <cit> . cms is diagnosed based on cardiac histopathology, characterised by a severe inflammation and necrosis of the spongy myocardium of the atrium and ventricle  <cit> . inflammatory infiltrates consist of mononuclear cells, probably lymphocytes and macrophages. the compact layer of the ventricle is usually less affected, and always occurs later than changes in the spongious layer  <cit> . farmed salmon suffering from cms often lack clinical signs and may die suddenly due to rupture of the atrium or sinus venosus resulting in cardiac tamponade  <cit> . a remarkable feature of cms is the slow development of pathology, which is observed both in the field and under experimental conditions  <cit> .

recently, the causative agent of cms was identified as double-stranded rna virus with the proposed name piscine myocarditis virus   <cit> . the same virus sequence was also identified from high-throughput sequencing of fish with cms  <cit> . pmcv has a genome size of  <dig>  bp with three open reading frames, the second encoding an rna-dependent rna polymerase showing sequence similarities with giardia lamblia virus and infectious myonecrosis virus of penaeid shrimp, suggesting assignment to the totiviridae family  <cit> . following experimental challenge with cell culture-grown virus, histopathological changes were observed in heart tissue from 6 weeks post-infection  with peak severity at 9– <dig> wpi  <cit> . analysis of viral load by quantitative real-time rt-pcr  showed replication of virus in several organs from  <dig> wpi, suggesting a broad tissue tropism. peak of viral load occurred in heart, spleen and kidney and coincided with the peak of cardiac pathology  <cit> . viral load in the hearts from experimental and clinical field cases correlated well the severity of histopathological changes, suggesting that cytopathic effects of infection was a major determinant of the myocardial changes  <cit> . from transcriptome analysis of immune responses in fish, developing the strongest pathology and infection, the temporal and spatial regulation of the different arms of immunity during cms was characterised  <cit> . it was shown that the peak of cardiac pathology and viral load coincided with a cardiac-specific induction of t cell response genes and splenic induction of complement genes. activation of these responses was preceding a reduction in viral load and pathology, suggesting that they were important for viral clearance and recovery.

from the same challenge experiment, a significant proportion of the infected fish did not develop cardiac pathology, providing an opportunity for a comparative study of individuals with different outcomes of disease and characterisation of the underlying molecular mechanisms associated with protection versus pathology. here, we use transcriptome analysis to show that fish developing sustained or increased viral load and severe pathology  have a different character and regulation of immune responses and metabolic pathways compared to fish with viral clearance and absence of pathology . these results provide a novel understanding of individual responses to cms and genomic and immunological correlates of virus clearance, recovery and pathology.

RESULTS
pmcv infection and disease responders
from a challenge trial where fish were infected with intraperitoneal  injection of identical doses of pmcv  <cit> , we observed different outcomes of cardiac pathology between individuals. it was shown that all fish mounted a similar antiviral status  and cardiac viral load  until 6 weeks post infection . at this time point, cardiac pathology associated with cms  was first significant and found positive in 17/ <dig> fish. in the present study, we quantified viral load in an extended number of individuals  and found that in the subsequent course of infection , fish could be divided in two groups according to differences in the development of disease  and infection  . one group, termed high responders , developed sustained or increased pmcv levels in heart together with elevated pathology that further decreased until  <dig> wpi  <cit> . in the other group, termed low responders , viral load declined from 6– <dig> wpi to levels similar as for fish at  <dig> wpi, and no pathology was detected. according to these observations, we compared global gene expression in hearts of hr and lr during infection, in order to characterize potential differences in the host response and to identify gene expression patterns that could explain or predict the different disease outcomes.

overall host responses in high and low responders
as a basis for gene expression analysis, the entire time course of disease was divided into three stages according to the characteristics of infection and pathology for hr and lr : the early stage  with equal viral load and histopathology score , the mid stage  with equal viral load but different histopathology score, and the late stage  where both viral load and histopathology were different between hr and lr. an overview of individual fish that were analysed from each stage is given in additional file  <dig>  microarrays analysis was performed on  <dig> control  fish and  <dig> challenged fish, including  <dig> fish from the early stage and  <dig> hr and  <dig> lr fish from mid and late stages . for initial characterization of overall host responses in hr and lr, differentially expressed genes  were subject to enrichment analysis of gene ontology  classes and kegg pathways per each stage and responder groups . common responses at the early stage included activation of innate immune responses; immune signaling pathways , antigen presentation  and processing , complement and phagocytosis. repressed responses included cellular developmental processes, cytoskeleton organization and cardiac muscle development, possibly reflecting the infection-related stress and initial cellular events of pathological changes. activation of immune responses was maintained through the mid stage for both hr and lr, with a large overlap of immune categories between the two groups . however, three pathways were specifically activated in lr at this stage, namely cytokine-cytokine receptor interaction , natural killer  cell-mediated cytotoxicity  and nod-like receptor  signaling pathway . the two latter pathways were interesting, being important for cell-mediated immune defense  and for the innate cytosolic immune sensing and priming of antigen-specific t cell immunity , yet with limited functional understanding in teleost fish. at the late stage, differences in responses between hr and lr were most prominent. while the number of upregulated immune categories increased significantly in hr, these were completely ablated or leveled off in lr. instead, lr fish showed significant induction of different catabolic and metabolic processes, possibly reflecting responses associated with recovery.

gene markers and predictors of responses and disease outcome
further, we identified genes associated with the early response to infection and genes with expression differences between hr and lr in mid and late stages. differentially expressed genes with contrasting expression between hr and lr  and expression profiles that correlated to the early, mid and late stages of infection were selected . heat maps of selected genes are shown in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> 

markers of early antiviral response
we identified  <dig> genes that showed significant upregulation in the early stage and gradually decreased expression at the mid and late stages . these genes were induced with an average log2-er of + <dig>  at the early stage; expression ratios of  <dig> genes are shown in figure  <dig> . the majority of these genes were previously identified as virus-responsive  <cit> , and they are part of the early antiviral and interferon  response to cms  <cit> . other genes in this group encode proteins important for protein degradation and antigen presentation via mhc.

early pathology and outcome predictors
since viral clearance occurred in lr at the late stage, genes that were differentially induced or repressed in lr versus hr at the preceding mid stage might represent prognostic markers of disease outcome. differentially expressed genes at this stage were of particular interest, since pmcv levels in heart correlated with histopathology score  <cit>  and this was the only stage where hr and lr had different histopathology score levels but equal viral loads. thus, such genes may represent early predictors of pathology or recovery/clearance. we identified nine genes  that were induced at mid stage in hr but not in lr , and seven genes  that were induced in lr but not in hr . genes induced in hr were mainly immune-related by function. probable atp-dependent rna helicase ddx <dig>  encodes a rna helicase regulating many aspects of transcription and shown to interact with hcv replication  <cit> . the other genes were implicated in apoptosis and thus might be a part of cell death mechanisms controlling lymphocyte regulation and survival. tnf decoy receptor , is a member of the tnf receptor superfamily and an important mediator of t cell immunity and biomarker for inflammatory diseases . similarly, gtpase imap <dig> family member  <dig>  is part of a newly discovered family of cell survival regulators expressed in lymphocytes  <cit> . lymphocyte g0/g <dig> switch protein  <dig>  was identified as a novel pro-apoptotic factor induced by tnf-α through nf-κb and shown to antagonize bcl- <dig>  <cit> . interestingly, g0s <dig> expression was particularly high in heart and peripheral blood cells, the latter was also observed during measles virus infection in humans  <cit> . yet another hr-induced pro-apoptotic gene was cell death activator cide- <dig> which was also specifically expressed in heart and intestine  <cit> . its implication in virus infection has also been reported  <cit> .

genes that were induced in lr had no clear functional relation to the disease, except for cd <dig> antigen-like protein a and lectin precursor, presumably involved in immune-cell signaling .

markers of pathology and outcome
to identify genes whose expression patterns were predictive of the outcome of infection, we searched for genes that were induced during declining viral load/pathology at late stage in lr but not in hr , and genes that were upregulated during increased viral load/pathology in hr but not in lr . we identified  <dig> genes that were induced in hr while  <dig> genes were induced in lr . nearly all genes with higher expression in hr were involved in adaptive immune responses , and were included in our previously identified cms profiles for t/b cell responses, mhc class i antigen presentation and apoptosis  <cit> . increased migration of leukocytic cells  was also evident from induced gene expression of several chemokines and cytokines . genes related to t cell responses were overrepresented, which likely reflected increased infiltration and homing of virus-specific t cells to the infected tissue. upregulation of genes encoding components of the t-cell receptor  substantiated this assumption. in addition, an activator of naïve t cells, sh <dig> domain-containing protein 1a was induced. genes with putative roles in the regulation of effector function and controlled cell death of t cells included several tnf-related genes and programmed cell death ligand  <dig> . upregulation of genes encoding rho gtpases was also interesting, since they have been implicated in the regulation of t cell-receptor signaling and cytoskeletal reorganization, cell migration and apoptosis in t cells  <cit> .

genes that were induced during declining viral replication in lr and not in hr encoded for enzymes of metabolic pathways or cell respiration, and can be considered to represent markers for recovery or protection . some of these enzymes are involved in the intermediate pathways of metabolism, e.g. aldolase atriosephosphate isomerase and phosphoglycerate mutase 2– <dig> , malate dehydrogenase  and peroxisomal  <dig> -trans-enoyl-coa isomerase . components of the electron transport chain included atp synthase electron transfer flavoprotein subunit alpha and succinate-coa ligase gdp-forming alpha subunit. three genes are potentially involved in heart muscle regeneration. hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase-like protein  <dig> was induced during myocardial injury following injection of bone marrow mononuclear cells in rats  <cit> . calsequestrin-like protein is important for the ca2+ regulation in muscle cells and a dramatic decrease of protein concentration was observed in a proteomics study of human dystrophic muscle fibers  <cit> . β-parvin  is a integrin-linked protein that is involved in the linkage between integrin and the cytoskeleton and was supposed to be involved in membrane repair mechanisms in human  <cit> .

to substantiate these results, expression of four genes were evaluated by qpcr in an extended number of individuals per group . genes implicated in t cell responses were tested; tnf decoy receptor as marker of early pathology, cd <dig> and tnf-11b as markers of late pathology, and granzyme a  as a marker of cytotoxic t cells and the t cell response to cms  <cit> . as shown in figure  <dig>  all genes had significantly higher relative expression ratios in hr versus lr . in contrast to the other genes, gzma was also upregulated in lr, however significantly lower than in hr. taken together, induced transcription of these genes suggested an increased population and activity of t cells in infected hearts of hr compared to lr. next we analysed differentially expressed go categories between hr and lr that were positively or negatively correlated to the viral load at the late stage . as expected, positively correlated functional groups in hr included immune system process/immune response and more specifically, activation of lymphocytes and leukocytes. negatively correlated groups included a large number of categories related to cardiac and skeletal muscle development . in lr fish, no immune-related go categories showed correlation to viral load. in contrast, metabolic processes, generation of precursor metabolites/energy and oxidation reduction were positively correlated categories, while muscle cell development and skeletal myofibril assembly were negatively correlated.

microarray confirmation by qpcr
to validate microarray data, log2-transformed expression levels of four early antiviral genes by qpcr were compared with the respective expression ratios from microarrays . primers for qpcr  and oligonucleotide probes on the microarray were based on the same cdna sequences. data from eight infected fish showed high correlation between the two methods.

discussion
in this study, we compared the host response in pmcv infected salmon with different outcomes of disease in order to characterize gene expression patterns and responses that could be associated with cardiac pathology versus recovery. assessment of viral load and histopathology from bi-weekly samples of heart over a period of ten weeks suggested that fish exhibited different development of disease from six weeks post-infection. the so called high responders  group developed severe pathology and increased infection level while the low responder  group showed reduced viral load and retained a normal heart with absence of elevated pathology. this could be interpreted as different resistance to the disease since all fish were simultaneously infected using a standardized ip-injection with identical dose of virus. previous analyses of fish from the same challenge trial also showed that all fish  mounted a similar level of early antiviral response  <cit> . the early stage , was characterized by a rapid virus replication with no significant changes in myocardial tissue . however, results of enrichment analysis of go classes and kegg pathways showed repression of many functional groups related to cardiac and general muscle development, suggesting an onset of pathology at the molecular/cellular level. this could also be expected, given the strong antiviral response  in the cells at this stage, possibly leading to compromised cell growth. both pathway analysis and gene expression profiling suggested that the early antiviral response involved genes of the interferon pathway and antigen presentation pathways via mhc, as was observed in our recent study  <cit> . most of these genes were identified as virus-responsive with high correlation to expression of the salmon ifna gene  <cit> . these are typical early responses to viruses and reflect the innate immune response followed by initiation of the adaptive immune response  <cit> . thus, our results show that pmcv-infected cells successfully induced the transcription of many antiviral and ifn-dependent genes, but that this response had little or no direct effect on virus replication and outcome, since their magnitude of expression was negatively correlated with development of infection/disease and their expression remained induced within the whole challenge trial, except for the late stage in lr which had lowest viral loads. the same was observed in a study with viral haemorrhagic septicaemia virus infected rainbow trout, where genes of the interferon system were correlated to the viral load in affected tissue, however strong expression did not reflect a better protection against virus spread  <cit> . nonetheless, these innate antiviral responses play a pivotal role in the activation of downstream adaptive immunity.

the mid stage of the disease was characterized by similar viral loads but different histopathology score in lr and hr. pathway analysis showed a similar activation of most immune categories except for the lr-specific induction of nk cell-mediated cytotoxicity and nlr signaling pathways. these pathways were not induced at the early stage, but were later activated also in hr . despite a limited functional understanding of these responses in fish, they have important roles in the border between innate and adaptive immunity  <cit> . the earlier activation of nlr signaling  in addition to the activation of toll-like receptor pathway , may indicate a broader repertoire of virus-associated molecular pattern recognition in lr. for the analysis of predictor genes, our main hypotheses were that genes with stronger expression in hr than in lr represent predictors of early pathology, and genes with stronger expression in lr than in hr might represent predictors of protection/recovery. the predicted functional role of the majority of genes with significantly higher expression in hr  were interesting in view of the development of pathology in the subsequent late stage, which in our previous study was characterized by an increased inflammation dominated by influx of t cells  <cit> . in mammals, these genes are involved in cell death mechanisms and have been implicated in the control of lymphocyte regulation and survival. induced transcription of these genes at mid stage of cms in hr was likely a result of the initial rise in lymphocyte infiltration to the infected tissue as reflected from histopathology . since predictor genes were identified based on expression differences between hr versus lr, potential genes with equal expression in hr/lr at this stage were not taken into account. in this respect it is necessary to mention that many genes related to the t cell response in cms  <cit>  were upregulated already at the mid stage , however differences between hr and lr appeared later. thus, activation of lymphocytic and inflammatory responses occurred in both responder groups, but different abilities to control or regulate these responses might explain different outcomes in the subsequent stage. the importance of these responses in immunity versus immunopathology is intensively studied in human infections  <cit> , and should deserve more attention in relation to viral infections in fish.

the recent studies on cms showed a high correlation between histopathology score and viral load implying that the cytopathic effect of infection was a major determinant of the myocardial changes  <cit> . results of this study further show that the level of pathology and infection is correlated to the activation of lymphocytes and leukocytes and particularly expression of genes associated with the t cell response at the late stage in hr. this was also expected, assuming that this response reflects the migration of virus-specific lymphocytes to the infected tissue. infiltration of leukocytes/lymphocytes did not occur in lr fish according to histopathology results. this was accompanied by a completely absent expression of a large number of genes mainly related to t and b cell responses in the late stage, which was the most significant difference between hr and lr fish identified in this study. the lack of transcription of many genes involved in the regulation of t cell effector function and cell death/survival was of particular interest. control of these processes is fundamental for regulation of the t cell response and for maintaining homeostasis in the immune system after it has expanded to combat infections  <cit> . as already discussed, many of these genes were also expressed at the mid stage of hr but not in lr. elevated gene expression levels of granzyme a  in lr fish showed that cytotoxic cells were also present in the heart of these fish. gzma is a serine protease and important inducer of antiviral and apoptotic pathways in infected cells, produced by cytotoxic t cells and nk cells  <cit> . this suggests that adaptive cellular immune responses occurred in lr fish as well, however on a lower level compared to hr fish. hence, both different shaping and a lower magnitude of immune responses could explain the different outcome of these groups. in contrast to hr, genes involved in energy metabolism and other catabolic/metabolic processes were induced in lr. in addition, the go enrichment analysis showed that the same processes were correlated to the decline in viral load in lr. thus, in contrast to hr, these fish seemed to cope with the infection by immune responses in the preceding stages and/or by a different composition or regulation of the late response, and managed to activate cardiac energy metabolism for recovery and regeneration of infected tissue in the late stage.

CONCLUSIONS
we have compared the host response and pathogenesis in pmcv infected salmon with different outcome of disease, and described gene expression patterns and predictors and associated functional pathways underlying these differences. the main findings are summarized in figure  <dig>  suggesting that very different composition and regulation of adaptive cellular immunity in the late stage of infection was the most prominent feature associated with pathology versus recovery. in our previous cms study focusing on the most severely diseased fish, we also concluded that the same responses were possibly associated with an observed viral clearance and reduced pathology later on   <cit> . consequently, while having an important role in the clearance of virus in infected heart tissue, virus-specific immune cells such as t and b cells may at the same time lead to increased tissue damage and burden for the host. whether the stronger immune responses observed in hr was reflecting an immunopathology could not be concluded based upon the present data. however, the importance of understanding the balance between immunity and immunopathology is highly acknowledged in human disease  <cit> , and should be subject to further study in viral diseases of atlantic salmon. the basis for the positive outcome of lr fish is also not known. a recent field study with family group indicated a genetic basis for survival against cms . fish used in the present study were from a commercial standard norwegian strain with mixed genetic background. thus, it could not be ruled out that the observed differences in disease response were influenced by genetic background. effects of genetic background on disease development and host responses in controlled infection trials will be subject to future research.

