BACKGROUND
the amyloid precursor protein  is a type- <dig> membrane protein expressed in neurons, which is closely linked to the etiology and pathology of alzheimer’s disease 
 <cit> . app undergoes two mutually exclusive processing pathways resulting in the formation of multiple soluble and membrane-associated fragments from this precursor polypeptide. of particular relevance to ad is the amyloidogenic pathway whereby app is first cleaved by β-secretase and subsequently by γ-secretase to produce the amyloid-β peptide , a  <dig> to  <dig> amino acid fragment derived from part of the extracellular and the transmembrane domains of app. according to the amyloid hypothesis, neurotoxic oligomers and senile plaques formed by aβ cause neuronal dysfunction and cell loss in ad
 <cit> . in the alternative pathway, app is first cleaved by α-secretase, instead of β-secretase, resulting in the destruction of the aβ peptide sequence in app . adding to the complexity of app processing is the distinct trafficking route of the precursor through intracellular compartments where the various secretases reside
 <cit> . thus, newly synthesized app molecules move through the constitutive secretory pathway from the trans-golgi network  to the cell surface where most are subjected to non-amyloidogenic processing by α-secretase. however, approximately 10% of the precursors remain intact and internalize from the cell surface into endosomal compartments where amyloidogenic processing is initiated by β-secretase cleavage.

in recent years, much attention has been focused on the analysis of factors that influence app processing and that may contribute to the elevated aβ levels seen in patients with ad. one such modifier is sorla, a 250-kda type- <dig> membrane glycoprotein widely expressed in neurons in the brain
 <cit> . it is a member of a family of mammalian proteins that share a structural similarity with the vacuolar protein sorting  <dig> protein , a yeast sorting receptor that transports carboxypeptidase y from the tgn to the vacuole
 <cit> . sorla is proposed to act as a retention factor for app in the tgn, preventing the release of precursor molecules into the processing pathways. consequently, over-expression of sorla in neurons prevents the targeting of app from tgn to the cell surface and to endosomes and reduces the production of aβ peptides
 <cit> . the importance of sorla for ad is further supported by low levels of receptor expression seen in patients suffering from the disease
 <cit> .

in a first approach to simulate amyloidogenic processing in ad, schmidt and colleagues
 <cit>  developed a single-compartment model to describe app processing. while this model had been valuable to establish the kinetics of amyloidogenic processing and the quantitative contribution of sorla to this pathway, this single-compartment model fell short of accurately describing the complexity of app processing in cells. it remained unclear to what extent sorla may affect app monomer versus dimer processing and in what compartment of the cell its activity may be most relevant. also, a possible influence of sorla on the dynamics of β-secretase remained unclear. such an effect had been postulated previously based on studies in cultured cells
 <cit> .

to answer these questions, we established a multi-compartment model that represents app processing in both its monomeric and dimeric forms. the formalism of this model is developed to integrate experimental evidences from previous biochemical and cell biological studies
 <cit> . we combined our multi-compartment model with the recent dose–response data of app and soluble app products by schmidt and colleagues
 <cit> . the data were used to estimate the parameter values of our model. using our multi-compartment model, we  established the activity distribution of app in various compartments, and  traced the activity distribution of app, α-secretase, β-secretase and sorla in the monomeric and dimeric processing of app. our simulation results showed that the decrease in total app processing is primarily due to the influence of sorla on app dimer processing. moreover, the simulations of our multi-compartment model demonstrated how sorla alters the dynamical behavior of β-secretase, providing new insights into the mechanism of action of this important ad risk factor.

RESULTS
multi-compartmental modeling of app processing in the presence or absence of sorla
probably more than any other major disease entity, ad is a pathological processes influenced by subtle quantitative changes in protein concentration and activity. thus, common approaches in experimental ad research, using protein overexpression or gene-inactivation, are inadequate to study the effects of incremental changes in target protein levels on risk of neurodegeneration.

in our previous study
 <cit> , we have undertaken the first attempt to approach risk factors in ad through quantitative modeling. to do so, we have simulated the quantitative contribution of sorla to proteolytic processing of app, a central pathway in ad. we have chosen sorla as a target for simulation because it represents one of the major genetic risk factors in ad. more importantly, solid experimental evidence had established the molecular mechanism of sorla action, acting as an intracellular sorting receptor for app that prevents proteolytic breakdown of the precursor protein into neurotoxic aβ peptides. in
 <cit> , we have been able mathematically confirm hypotheses, derived from prior experimental work. in particular, we have confirmed the strict linear relationship between sorla concentrations and efficiency of app processing, and we have uncovered the ability of sorla to prevent dimerization of app, preventing the formation of high-affinity substrates for secretases.

while our initial study has been met with great enthusiasm in the field, it clearly falls short of addressing major aspects of sorla activity in the cell biology of ad. thus, for sake of simplification, our earlier study assumed a single-compartment model for simulation of the affects of sorla levels on app processing rates. accordingly, it ignores the fact that app follows a complex intracellular trafficking pathway whereby this protein moves between the tgn, cell surface, and endosomes where the various interacting proteins reside. in fact, it has the ability to show how sorla affects app transport between various cell compartments in neurons that initially sparked interest in this protein.

for the present work, a single-compartment model, describing the influence of sorla in app processing
 <cit> , was extended into a multi-compartmental model. the extended model addresses the important aspect of the cell biology of sorla by assuming a three-compartment model that is based on experimental data. the biochemical network illustrating this multi-compartmental model can be found in figure
 <dig>  the notation that is used in this network is described in additional file
1: table s <dig> 
 <cit> .

it is likely that there are many other proteins contribute to the processing of app and the generation of neurotoxic aβ peptides. however, unlike many proposed ad risk factors, the mechanism of action for sorla has been established in numerous studies in cell cultures, in animal models, and even in patients providing a solid base for theoretical simulations. in particular, we have specifically addressed the caveat that this model focuses on pathways related to sorla action, and that further studies will be required to sequentially add more risk factors to this model. such approaches will require a profound understanding of the function of such risk factors; - an endeavor that clearly exceeds the scope of the present manuscript.

the choice of the compartments considered in figure
 <dig> was based on the different locations where app was shown to interact with sorla, with α-, and with β-secretases. the corresponding three compartments are the tgn, the cell surface and the endosomes
 <cit> , respectively. note that the transport of app among these compartments indirectly interconnects these three compartments to one another. as sorla affects the initial cleavage of app by α- and β-secretases
 <cit> , the rate limiting steps that determine the extent of amyloidogenic processing, further processing steps involving γ-secretase were not included in this model.

in order to accommodate the monomeric and dimeric forms of app, each compartment was further divided into two subcompartments : a “red” subcompartment for app monomer processing and a “green” one for app dimer processing. notice that the monomeric forms of app, sorla, α-secretase, and β-secretase, within the two subcompartments, were annotated differently: appg <dig>  sorlag <dig>  α <dig>  and β <dig> for monomer processing, and appg <dig>  sorlag <dig>  α <dig>  and β <dig> for dimer processing. even so, the components from the two subcompartments were linked to each other via appinit, αinit, and βinit. moreover, appg <dig>  α <dig>  and β <dig> undergo dimerization before the beginning of app dimer processing. that is, two appg <dig>  α <dig>  and β <dig> monomers dimerize in order to give their corresponding dimeric forms. conversely, these dimers can dissociate to generate their respective monomers. note that subscript ‘1’ was assigned to the reactants and products in monomer processing while subscript ‘2’ for those in dimer processing. in addition, we used subscripts ‘g’, ‘cs’, and ‘e’ for app in tgn, at the cell surface and in the endosomes, respectively.

up to this point, we had described the different forms of app, α-secretase, and β-secretase in the diverse compartments, prior to the beginning of app processing. because sorla interacts with app in a 1: <dig> stochiometric complex
 <cit> , the model described how sorla strictly interacts with app-monomers  to form an app-sorla complex. consequently, this interaction is responsible for the diminished amount of app-monomers  and app-dimers  transported from the tgn to the cell surface. this interaction decreases the amount of app-monomers  and app-dimers  ending up in the endosomes as appe <dig> and appe2d. moreover, in order to determine whether sorla will have a similar influence on the monomer and dimer processing, the binding affinity assigned to appg1sorlag <dig> in monomer processing is different to that of appg2sorlag <dig> in dimer processing.

after the interaction of sorla and app in the tgn, the remaining appg <dig> and appg2d are transported to the cell surface where app processing begins within the non-amyloidogenic pathway. then, a small part of appcs <dig> and appcs2d, which is not cleaved by α-secretase, are further transported from the cell surface to the endosomes, where the amyloidogenic pathway takes over. notably, the interaction of app and α-secretase at the cell surface leads to the formation of non-amyloidogenic products like sappα and c83; whereas the interaction of app and β-secretase in the endosomes yields to the amyloidogenic products such as sappβ and c <dig>  our model was established in such a way that the dimeric form of secretases act only on the dimeric form of app and the monomeric form of secretases act only on the monomeric form of app.

the biochemical network  that we established, was translated into a system of ordinary differential equations , describing temporal changes of molecular numbers for the network components as a function of interaction and cleavage processes. the model equations, their reduction, and a series of steps involved in model simulations are presented in the materials and methods section.

decrease in total amounts of sapp products is mainly due to the influence of sorla in dimer processing
with the multi-compartmental model, we showed in figure
 <dig> the corresponding model simulations for various app products, namely, the products produced in monomer, in dimer, and in both processing pathways. the simulations of the parameterized mathematical model are in good agreement with recent experimental data by schmidt and colleagues
 <cit>  .
 <cit> . the total amount of products  is the sum of the products produced in monomer  and in dimer processing  pathways. in the absence of sorla, the products produced in the dimer processing pathways more closely resemble the total amount of sappα  and sappβ . with sorla, the amounts of sappα and sappβ that are produced in dimer processing are significantly reduced as compared to those in monomer processing .

in the absence of sorla, the sigmoidal curve that is characteristic for products produced in dimer processing  has a strong impact on the sum of the products produced in monomer and in dimer processing pathways . as such, it very well describes the experimental data sets for sappα and sappβ .

surprisingly, in the presence of sorla, one observes from the simulations a significant decrease in the products produced in dimer processing  as compared to those in monomer processing . in particular, the analysis showed that at a high level of sorla activity , there is obviously more app bound to sorla in dimer processing  than in monomer processing .

taken together, our simulations shown in figure
 <dig> and figure
 <dig>  strongly supported the hypothesis whereby sorla prevents oligomerization of app, thereby having a bigger impact on the products produced in dimer processing than in monomer processing.

intermediate levels of sorla
up to this point, we only showed simulations of our model in the two most extreme scenarios: with no  or high levels of sorla activity . however, subtle alterations of sorla concentration are likely to be more relevant for the determination of its influence in app processing pathways. accordingly, we adapted our multi-compartment model to intermediate concentrations of sorla. as shown in figures
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> and
 <dig> the simulations are all in dependence of three intermediate sorla expression levels, namely, 3%, 12%, and 30% of sorlatot.

remarkably, we observed in figure
 <dig> that the simulations in dependence of the three intermediate sorla expression levels are either “spread”  or “clustered”  into the two most extreme scenarios of sorla concentration. this came as a surprised because the dose–response kinetics of total sappα production in dependence of the intermediate sorla expression levels  is expected to be “clustered” like that of sappβ . likewise in the case of the amount of app bound to sorla in monomer  and in dimer processing . we say that the simulations are “clustered” when

 xy≈⋅y+x0% 

where y = {3%, 12%, 30%}, and x denotes the amount of concentration at a given percentage value of sorlatot that is specified by its subscript. otherwise, we say that the simulations are “spread”.

next, we investigated what leads to the observation made in figure
 <dig>  in dependence of the intermediate sorla expression levels.

sorla indirectly affects the dynamical behavior of the β-secretase but not that of α-secretase
first, we analyzed the simulations of the influence of intermediate levels of sorla on app processing on the amount of α-secretase  and β-secretase  concentration. in figure
 <dig>  the term “used” refers to the complex formation of the secretases and app, while the term “free” refers to the secretases that are not bound in a complex.

the total amount of α-secretase and the total amount of β-secretase were assumed to be constant . due to the conservation law assumption, the total amount of each secretase in each subcompartment is conserved . consequently, the total amount of each secretase in the whole system was thus also conserved .

the simulations of the influence of intermediate levels of sorla on app processing on the amount of α-secretase  concentration showed that  there are more α-secretases that were used  than left free  in monomer processing,  there are more α-secretases that are left free  than used  in the dimer processing,  the total amount of α-secretase that is free and used  is dominated by the corresponding amount of α-secretase concentration in dimer  and in monomer processing ,  sorla influences the amount of α-secretase concentration in dimer processing , but not those in monomer processing , and  its simulations in dependence of the three intermediate sorla expression levels  is consistent to that of dose–response kinetics of total sappα production .

the significant difference in the free  and used  amounts of α-secretase in dimer processing is a consequence of the large amount of α-secretase used in monomer processing . as the total amount of the app concentration increases , the amount of α-secretase, free in dimer processing,  decreases, while the amount of α-secretase used in monomer processing  increases. as the amount of sorla concentration increases, the curves representing the secretases move from solid to dashed lines. sorla does affect α-secretase in dimer processing : those used in dimer processing decreases , while those that are free in dimer processing increases . in the later figure, the increase is not obvious because the amount of change is so small as compared to the concentration values of α-secretase.

as for the influence of intermediate levels of sorla on app processing on the amount of β-secretase  concentration, the simulations showed that  there are more β-secretases that are left free  than used  in monomer processing,  sorla has no influence on β-secretase in monomer processing ,  sorla alters the dynamical behaviors of β-secretase in dimer processing ,  the total amount of β-secretase that is free and used  is dominated by the amount of β-secretase concentration in dimer processing , and  its simulations in dependence of the three intermediate sorla expression levels  is consistent to that of dose–response kinetics of total sappβ production . the curves for beta-secretase with sorla  are greater in values as compared to those without sorla , as a consequence of sorla’s influence on beta-secretase that is used in dimer processing .

when a comparison is made between the total amount of α- and β-secretase concentration that is free  and used  in dependence of the three intermediate sorla expression levels, we observed that the total amount of β-secretase concentration for both free and used deviated , which was not the case for α-secretase . this observation suggested that sorla is indirectly affecting the dynamics of β-secretase but not that of α-secretase. this result supports the hypothesis presented by schmidt el al.
 <cit> : “the global–local estimation of the parameter values in the model suggested a yet unidentified biological process whereby sorla might indirectly affect the β-secretase, but not with the α-secretase”. the present result therefore clarifies what was unidentified in our previous study
 <cit> .

with sorla concentration greater than the estimated total amount of sorla concentration , we arrived at figure s <dig> shown in additional file
1: figures s1d and s1j show that for a very large amount of sorlatot , the amount of α- and β-secretase are barely “used”. consequently, the amount of α-  and β-secretase  are all “free” in dimer processing, and there will be no sapp products produced in dimer processing.

sorla is more influential in dimer processing than in monomer processing
we also investigated the amount of app concentrations that is either free or used, in monomer or in dimer processing, and which is in the tgn, at the cell surface or in the endosomes . the term “used” refers to the complex formation of  app and sorla in the tgn,  app and α-secretase at the cell surface, and  app and β-secretase in the endosomes. wherein, the term “free” refers to the app that is not bound in the respective compartments.

first, we showed the simulations of the amount of app concentrations that is free or used in monomer and in dimer processing. the simulations under dimer processing showed that the amount of app concentrations that is free or used in each compartment were significantly affected by the presence of sorla , as compared to those under monomer processing . in particular, one observes from the simulations that the amount of app concentrations that is used to bind with sorla in dimer processing of the tgn tremendously increases from  <dig> m to at most  <dig> nm , wherein those in monomer processing are so small that they can be neglected . consequently, sorla decreases the amount of app concentrations that is free or used at the cell surface and in the endosomes . also, the total amount of app concentrations in dimer processing is dominated by the total amount of free app in the absence of sorla and by the total amount of used app in the presence of sorla .

next, in each compartment, the simulations for the total amount of app concentrations that is free, used, in monomer processing, or in dimer processing, are shown in figure
 <dig>  consistent to our previous observation , the simulations for total amount of app concentrations in monomer processing for the three different compartments  were not influenced by sorla, while those in dimer processing were affected by the presence of sorla . moreover, the simulations, in the first two columns of figure
 <dig>  also showed that the presence of sorla in the tgn decreases the total amount of free app , and increases the total amount of used app . in particular to the total amount of used app under the influence of sorla, it is  enormously increased in the tgn ,  not affected at the cell surface , and  reduced by at most half in the endosomes . taken together, the presence of sorla increases the total amount of app concentrations in the tgn , and subsequently decreases the total amount of app concentrations at the cell surface  and in the endosomes .

the simulations for the total amount of app concentrations in monomer processing , in dimer processing , and in both monomer and dimer processing  show that a conservation law was assumed for app in monomer and in dimer processing. above all, one observes that there are more app concentrations in dimer processing  than in monomer processing .

the spread and clustering of sorla expression levels
as noted in the subsection, intermediate levels of sorla, the simulations show that sorla expression levels are either “spread”  or “clustered” . this is most likely due to the effect of sorla on the processing of app dimer. with respect to the total amount of app, the amount of app concentrations  and α-secretase concentrations  that are “used” at the cell surface in dimer processing “spread”. considering the relevance of app and α-secretase at the cell surface to the production of sappα, the observations thus suggest the “spread” observed in figure
4a for sappα. similarly for the “clustering” observed in figure
4b for sappβ, it is a consequence of the “clustering” that is observed on app  and β-secretase  that are “used” in the endosome in dimer processing, which are relevant in producing sappβ. moreover, the change from “spread” at the cell surface  to “clustered” in the endosome  is probably due to the indirect influence of sorla on the dynamical behavior of β-secretase that is observed in figure
 <dig> 

effects of different sorla concentrations in switching sappα and sappβ from preferred dimer-to-monomer processing
lastly, in figure
 <dig>  are given simulations of the influence of sorla on app processing into sappα  and sappβ . the simulations show that the switch from preferred dimer-to-monomer processing is observed at 25% of sorlatot for α-secretase  and at 3% of sorlatot for β-secretase , where sorlatot equals  <dig>  x  <dig> fmol. in agreement with the study performed by schmidt and colleagues
 <cit>  previously, we therefore find that the switch from cooperative  to less efficient non-cooperative  processing occurs at small amount of sorla concentration. moreover, the end product obtained from monomer processing dominates the total amount of end product at 145% of sorlatot for α-secretase  and at 150% of sorlatot for β-secretase . in connection to what we observed in figure
 <dig> for the simulations of the influence of intermediate levels of sorla on app processing into sappα  and sappβ , these two sets of results  suggest that sorla reduces the products produced in non-amyloidogenic and amyloidogenic pathways of app processing at different rate.

CONCLUSIONS
our multi-compartment model is an extension of the single-compartment model that was established by schmidt and colleagues
 <cit>  previously. to our knowledge, this is the first multi-compartmental model developed to analyze app processing in the context of alzheimer’s disease. in addition, our model represents the regulated trafficking of app by sorla through the intracellular compartments, which critically affects amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic processing pathways
 <cit> . our model was established to answer questions that arose from a study based on a single-compartment model
 <cit> .

the first question that emerged concerned the relative contributions of sorla to monomer and in dimer processing. in the study conducted by schmidt and colleagues
 <cit> , we showed that sorla influenced the combined products obtained by monomer and dimer processing. however, limited by the structure of the single-compartment model, we were not able to investigate the relative contribution of sorla in monomer and in dimer processing. herein, using our multi-compartment model, we showed that the decrease in total amounts of sappα and sappβ is mainly due to the influence of sorla in dimer processing. this observation confirms previous hypothesis that sorla, prevent oligomerization of app, eliminating the preferred substrates for secretases.

the second question was how does sorla affect the dynamics of β-secretase? in the study conducted by schmidt and colleagues
 <cit> , it was suggested that there is an indirect effect of the sorla receptor on the β-secretase, which contributes to the regulation of amyloidogenic processing in the context of an intact cell. however, in order for the single-compartment model to closely resemble the experimental data, the model required a local parameter estimate for β-secretase activity in the presence or absence of sorla. through our multi-compartment model, where all parameters are estimated globally, we now confirmed that sorla affects the interaction between app and β-secretase, but not that of app with α-secretase. a previous study suggested that sorla directly interacts with β-secretase, preventing access of the enzyme to its substrate app
 <cit> . while our simulations confirm an important influence of sorla on β-secretase, this influence may also be indirect, for example by effecting trafficking of cofactors essential for enzyme activity. an indirect effect of sorla is in line with findings that the receptor does not impair β-secretase activity in cell-free assays
 <cit> .

in addition, we investigated the regulated trafficking of app by sorla in monomer and dimer processing, considering several cellular compartments, including tgn, cell surface, and endosomes. simulations of our multi-compartment model showed that sorla increases the total amount of app concentrations in the tgn  and subsequently decreases the total amount of app at the cell surface  and endosomes . in agreement with andersen and willnow
 <cit> , this result suggests that an over-expression of sorla prevents the localization of app from the tgn to the cell surface and to the endosomes, whereby an over-expression of sorla decreases the products produced in the amyloidogenic and non-amyloidogenic pathways of app processing. furthermore, our study confirmed that sorla is more influential in dimer than in monomer processing. this observation is in line with our previous model that app dimers represent the preferred substrate for α- and β-secretase as they enable cooperativity in substrate binding
 <cit> . taken together, data obtained both in single and in multi-compartment models strongly suggested that depletion of app dimer processing represents a major molecular mechanism in the pathology of alzheimer’s disease.

our multi-compartment model was used to simulate pathological situations involving app under different level of sorla concentration. our model can also be used as a kinetic-dynamic model to study the effects of sorla on α- and β- secretase. moreover, we observed that as the amount of sorla concentration increases, there is a relatively large decrease in the production rate of sappα as compared to that of sappβ .

using this refined model together with the chosen set of estimated parameter values , our results suggest the following biological implications of sorla:  decrease in total amounts of sapp products is mainly due to the large amount of sorla concentration in dimer processing , and not to the small amount of sorla concentration in monomer processing .  sorla indirectly affects the dynamical behavior of the β-secretase but not that of α-secretase. the receptor targets β-secretase, the enzyme responsible for initial amyloidogenic cleavage. this finding represents a major conceptual advance in our understanding of the complex processes in app processing and supports initial biochemical data that sorla can bind to β-secretase
 <cit> .  sorla is more influential in dimer processing that in monomer processing, which confirmed our initial hypothesis that blockade of app dimerization is an important aspect of sorla action on ad.

in future studies, we will extend this model by including additional cleavage activity by γ-secretase in monomer and in dimer processing. cleavage of app by γ-secretase leads to the formation of aβ peptides, which is the main pathology of alzheimer’s disease. the ultimate goal is therefore to establish a model that will test the potential effects of sorla on app processing in the context of ad therapy.

