BACKGROUND
bisphenol-a  is an estrogenic endocrine disruptor and is produced annually in large quantities for the production of polycarbonate plastics and epoxy resins. because of hormone-like properties, concerns have been raised about the sustainability of bpa in consumer products. the centers for disease control and prevention has identified high levels of urinary bpa in >90 % of the u.s. population  <cit> . bpa is associated with impaired reproductive functions as well as other diseases, such as cancer, diabetes, obesity, cardiovascular disease, thyroid dysfunction, developmental disorders, and miscarriages  <cit> . several in vivo studies have reported that bpa-exposed males are prone to reproductive developmental disorders  <cit>  and that the spermatozoa of exposed males are incapable of proper sperm-oocyte binding, thereby affecting embryonic growth  <cit> . recently we have reported that bpa-induced modifications of fertility-related proteins in spermatozoa are associated with increased reproductive health risk  <cit> .

genomic and non-genomic pathways are two proposed mechanisms by which xenoestrogens exert their hormone-like action. in the genomic pathway, xenoestrogens trigger estrogen receptors  and lead to the transcription of target genes, thereby affecting cell function  <cit> . in the non-genomic pathway, g protein-coupled receptors  together with membrane-bound ers  cause rapid estrogenic signaling through activation of mitogen-activated protein kinase  and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase , changes in camp/protein kinase-c , and fluctuation of intracellular calcium  <cit> . consistently, bpa also has been reported to exert its effects via activation of mapk and pi3k in human ovarian cancer cells  <cit> . as demonstrated, mature spermatozoa contain functional gpcrs  <cit>  and non-genomic ers  <cit> , therefore, provide a valid model to investigate the molecular mechanism of bpa action  <cit> .

recent advances in proteomic research have offered a new vista for developing proteomic biomarkers of chemical exposure, with the aim of evaluating hostile health effects  <cit> . in particular, two-dimensional gel electrophoresis  coupled with mass spectrometry  has been used effectively in several toxicology studies and in high-throughput industrial applications. a direct comparison of protein expression levels from control versus altered conditions reveals a set of biomarkers representative of the altered state. since spermatozoa have no functional protein synthesizing machinery, therefore provide a valid model for proteomic analysis . consequently, several laboratories have applied this technique to develop diagnostic biomarkers of spermatozoa in different functional states  <cit> . however, to date, efforts to establish protein expression profiles indicative of xenoestrogen  exposure in spermatozoa have not been attempted. therefore, the objectives of the current study were: 1) to determine whether different concentrations of bpa could affect sperm functions, and if so, to investigate the mechanisms linked with these observed effects and 2) to identify the differentially expressed proteins of exposure as a manner to screen their functional affiliation to diseases.

RESULTS
the effect of bpa on motility, viability, and intracellular lactate dehydrogenase  levels in spermatozoa
the percentage of motile spermatozoa decreased significantly in the presence of 100 μm of bpa  . however, the sperm viability was affected significantly by exposure to both  <dig> and 100 μm bpa  . in contrast, a non-significant increase of intracellular ldh levels was noted in all concentrations of bpa tested .fig.  <dig> effect of bpa on motility, viability, lactate dehydrogenase , mitochondrial activity, and intracellular atp  levels.  differences in motility in bpa-treated and control spermatozoa.  differences in number of viable spermatozoa between the control and bpa treatment.  differences in ldh levels in control and bpa-treated spermatozoa.  representative flow cytometry images of mitochondrial activity in control and bpa-treated spermatozoa.  the bar represents the difference in mitochondrial activity detected by flow cytometry in control and bpa-treated spermatozoa.  differences in i levels between control and bpa-treated spermatozoa. data are presented as mean ± sem . values with different superscript characters  indicate significant differences between the control and treatment groups as determined by one-way anova 



the effect of bpa on mitochondrial activity and intracellular atp  levels in spermatozoa
mitochondrial respiration produces atp, which is required to maintain sperm motility and other biochemical modifications required for fertilization  <cit> . current study showed that a high concentration of bpa  significantly altered the mitochondrial activity of spermatozoa  . to validate whether these alterations of mitochondrial activity were correlated with overall i production, we measured the i levels in spermatozoa. our results revealed that high concentrations of bpa were also able to significantly reduce i levels compared with those of other tested concentrations and the control  .

bpa stimulates mapk, pi3k, and pka pathways in spermatozoa
as reported previously  <cit> , bpa activates the mapk and pi3k signaling pathways in ovarian cancer cells. to evaluate this possibility in spermatozoa, activation of mapk and pi3k were evaluated using western blot analyses. our results showed that bpa induced a dose-dependent increase in both phospho-mapk  and phospho-pi3k  . further, it has been demonstrated that the activation of the mapk/pi3k signaling pathways regulates pka activity to maintain complex cross-talk between these pathways  <cit> . therefore, to further discriminate the pka activity in spermatozoa due to exposure of bpa, pka levels were also measured. significant increases in the levels of three pka substrates  were observed in the presence of 100 μm of bpa  .fig.  <dig> effect of bpa on mapk , pi3k , and pka signalings pathways in spermatozoa.  the bar represents the densities of phospho-mapk  in bpa-treated and control spermatozoa.  representative western blot image of phospho-mapk  probed with specific antibody.  densities of phospho-pi3k  in bpa-treated and control spermatozoa.  representative western blot image of phospho-pi3k  probed with specific antibody.  densities of pka substrate species in bpa-treated and control spermatozoa.  phospho-pka substrates were probed with an anti-phospho-pka antibody. lane 1: control; lane 2:  <dig>  μm bpa; lane 3:  <dig>  μm bpa; lane 4: 1 μm bpa; and lane 5: 100 μm bpa. data are presented as mean ± sem . values with different superscript characters  indicate significant differences between the control and treatment groups as determined by one-way anova 



identification and quantification of proteins differentially expressed in control and bpa-exposed spermatozoa
to learn pathophysiological importance of bpa exposure, we applied a proteomic approach  for identification of differentially expressed proteins in spermatozoa. on average,  <dig> spots were consistently detected in all gels,  <dig> of which shared almost similar expression patterns across treatments. fifty spots showed a dose-dependent expression profile, but significant  changes were noticed in  <dig> spots. in our assessment of the dose-dependent expression profiles, we avoided nine spots that demonstrated non-linear differences in expression between treated and control groups. finally, we identified  <dig> spots by electrospray ionization tandem mass spectrometry . the identified proteins spots and their normalized spot values in the control and bpa-treated spermatozoa are shown in fig.  <dig> and table  <dig>  respectively . our results showed that  <dig> proteins  were differentially expressed between bpa-treated  and control spermatozoa . the number of differentially expressed proteins in control vs  <dig>  μm and control vs 1 μm were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively . additionally, using gene ontology annotation in bioinformatics databases , the identified proteins were characterized according to their biological function as listed in table  <dig> fig.  <dig> representative silver nitrate stained image of 2-de protein spot.  protein spots of control spermatozoa.  protein spots of  <dig>  μm of bpa-treated spermatozoa.  protein spots of  <dig>  μm of bpa-treated spermatozoa.  protein spots from 1 μm of bpa treated-spermatozoa. e protein spots of 100 μm bpa-treated spermatozoa

*mascot score is − <dig> log , where p is the probability that the observed match is a random event. individual scores >  <dig> indicate identity or extensive homology . arelative spots intensity in control and bpa-treated  spermatozoa. data are presented as mean ± sem . values with different superscript characters  indicate significant differences between the control and treatment groups as determined by one-way anova 



functional analysis and signaling pathways of differentially expressed proteins
pathway studio program was used to identify signaling pathways regulated by the differentially expressed proteins. our results showed a significant association between five canonical signaling pathways and some of the differentially expressed proteins  . we also identified and schematized the clinical significance of these proteins using a medscan reader  search and pathway studio, respectively. the disease processes regulated by the differentially expressed proteins are compiled in fig. 4a.table  <dig> signaling pathways associated with differentially expressed proteins as identified by pathway studio program

bpa-induced differentially expressed proteins were entered into the pathway studio program to identify the significantly signaling pathways. the probabilities of the signaling pathways were determined using the fisher’s exact test 

fig.  <dig> differentially expressed proteins regulated cellular processes/diseases and hypothetical depiction of bpa action.  bpa-induced differentially expressed  proteins regulated cellular processes and diseases as depicted by pathway studio software. differentially expressed proteins have been highlighted in yellow background. at least  <dig> proteins among the  <dig> differentially expressed proteins were implicated in different disease processes.  hypothetical depiction showing the effects of bpa in spermatozoa and the possible mechanism of action. bpa may bind to membrane receptors on spermatozoa that induce rapid phosphorylation of mapk , pi3k , pka substrates and subsequent activation of the kinase systems. simultaneously, bpa induced the phosphorylation of tyrosine residue  of sperm proteins. bpa induced changes in spermatozoa affect the overall protein content of the spermatozoa, ultimately predispose to several pathological outcome



western blot analysis of six representative proteins and phospho-tyrosine proteins
to validate the 2-de results, six differentially expressed proteins, such as glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase , cytochrome b-c <dig> complex , peroxiredoxin- <dig> , glutathione peroxidase , actin, cytoplasmic  <dig> , and glutathione s-transferase  were further verified by western blot analyses using their commercially available antibodies. the western blot results confirmed the differentially expressed protein levels visualized in 2-de . western blot also was applied to investigate the phospho-tyrosine levels  in both the treated and control spermatozoa. significant increases in the levels of two tyrosine-phosphorylated species  were detected in bpa-treated  spermatozoa compared with the control  .

discussion
bpa has been regarded as a ubiquitous environmental chemical to which we are exposed in everyday life. considering the toxicological importance of bpa, here we attempted to investigate whether several concentrations of bpa would affect sperm functions and to investigate the molecular mechanisms. additionally, bpa was employed to separate differentially expressed proteins in spermatozoa as a manner to monitor their functional affiliation to several disease processes.

our results showed that higher concentrations of bpa significantly decreased sperm motility  and viability , even the doses that were potentially non-toxic . several earlier studies also demonstrated the similar action of bpa on sperm motility in rats and mice  <cit> . it has been reported that mitochondrial respiration mainly provides atp to support sperm motility  <cit> . to evaluate this possibility, the effect of bpa on mitochondrial activity and i also were evaluated. consistent with the motility and viability data, 100 μm bpa altered the mitochondrial activity significantly  and decreased the i . collectively, our findings support that bpa  alters the mitochondrial activity and decreases i and, thus, could affect sperm functions .

bpa has been demonstrated to activate the mapk and pi3k signaling pathways in cancer cells  <cit> . it has been demonstrated that p <dig>  and p <dig>  proteins are rapidly tyrosine-phosphorylated in response to extracellular stimuli and trigger subsequent activation of the kinase systems  <cit> . we have shown that the addition of bpa to spermatozoa leads to a significant dose-dependent induction of the phospho-mapk  and phospho-pi3k , thereby activating both kinase pathways . activation of mapk  <cit>  and pi3k  <cit>  also has been reported in ejaculated bovine spermatozoa due to exposure of extracellular stimuli. on the other hand, pka has been shown to be essential for the regulation of major signaling pathways in spermatozoa  <cit> , as well as cross-talk between mapk and pi3k signaling  <cit> . further, the activation of the pka pathway by structurally diverse estrogenic compounds, including bpa, also has been reported  <cit> . therefore, we performed western blot analysis for pka activity , in treated and control spermatozoa. consistent with previous finding in other cells, collectively our results support that bpa activates the mapk, pi3k, and pka signaling in spermatozoa and ultimately affects the cell functions.

a recent technological advance in proteomics is that researchers have successfully developed diagnostic biomarkers of several diseases  <cit> . nevertheless, complete proteomic biomarkers indicative of xenoestrogen exposure  in spermatozoa still remain unknown. therefore, we have performed 2-de coupled with ms to identify unique protein expression profiles in bpa-treated spermatozoa to predict the pathophysiological consequences of exposure. our results showed that  <dig> proteins  were dose dependently  expressed between bpa-treated and control spermatozoa . protein degradation  in spermatozoa due to environmental factors is well studied  <cit> ; however, the manner in which protein levels are increased in vitro need to be investigated. mature spermatozoa are silent in both transcription and translation or are poorly capable of translation  <cit> . therefore, protein up-regulation could be achieved by posttranslational modification, such as tyrosine phosphorylation  <cit> . a similar increase in protein tyrosine phosphorylation was also found in spermatozoa due to bpa exposure . taken together with several recent studies  <cit> , our results suggest that exposure to bpa induces protein degradation and phosphorylation in spermatozoa, ultimately affecting sperm function.

a total of  <dig>  proteins involved in energy metabolism exhibited altered levels in bpa-exposed  spermatozoa compared with those of the control . proteins warranting attention for being degraded were mitochondrial atp synthase subunit d , mitochondrial atp synthase subunit o , mitochondrial trifunctional enzyme subunit alpha , mitochondrial cytochrome c oxidase subunit 6a <dig> , phosphoglycerate mutase  <dig> , mitochondrial succinyl-coa:3-ketoacid coenzyme a transferase 2a , and mitochondrial isochorismatase domain-containing protein 2a  . most of the degraded proteins identified in this group were mitochondrial isoforms, thus predominantly involved in energy metabolism. therefore, down-regulation of these proteins could affect the overall mitochondrial functions and atp production as also demonstrated in current study . clinically, the atp synthase subunit and hadha have been shown to be down-regulated in type  <dig> diabetes  <cit>  and hepatocellular cancer cells  <cit> , respectively. moreover, cox6a <dig> exerts a protective role against ros-induced cell damage; thus, its down-regulation could lead to abnormal cell functions  <cit> . it is important to note that a significant down-regulation of hadha and cox6a <dig> were detected between the control and  <dig> /1 μm bpa exposure , and therefore, these proteins could provide potential biomarkers of low dose effects. on the other hand, the up-regulated proteins of energy metabolism group were gapdh, mitochondrial isoform of adenylate kinase  <dig> , succinate dehydrogenase ip subunit , and uqcrfs <dig> . it is unclear, how sperm motility  and atp  are decreased in the condition when energy metabolism proteins are increased. however, the level of expression may be suboptimal to overcome bpa-mediated toxicity, and/or the substantial increases may result in atypical functioning of these proteins.

six cytoskeletal/structural proteins  were found to be significantly altered in 100 μm bpa-treated spermatozoa compared to those in the control cells . the down-regulated proteins were ropporin- <dig> , actb, fatty acid-binding protein  <dig> , and outer dense fiber protein  <dig>  . the cytoskeletal/structural proteins are important for cytoplasmic integrity, cell movement, and signal transduction maintenance. therefore, down-regulation of these proteins could affect the cellular physiology. clinically, down-regulation of these proteins has been found in non-motile, abnormal headed, infertile spermatozoa  <cit> . additionally, the functional affiliation of these proteins also has been reported to prostatic carcinoma and metastatic melanoma of the testis  <cit> . in contrast, the up-regulated proteins were peroxisomal membrane protein  <dig>  and isoaspartyl peptidase/l-asparaginase  ; interestingly, neither of them had been previously described in spermatozoa. therefore, they might be the possible biomarkers of bpa hazard assessment; however, further study needs to be conducted to strengthen this hypothesis.

additionally, in fertility-related proteins , sperm surface protein sp <dig>  was increased by bpa exposure , whereas prohibitin , serine/threonine-protein phosphatase pp1-alpha catalytic subunit , and axonemal dynein light chain  <dig>  were decreased . spa <dig> has been reported to play a potential role in sperm-egg interactions; however, increased functionality of this protein induced immature acrosome reaction and tumor changes in cells  <cit> , which might support our current findings. in contrast, the degraded proteins are reported to play potential roles in the regulation of sperm motility and fertilization  <cit> . thus, degradation of these proteins results in spermatozoa with reduced motility and viability . lastly, among stress response proteins , gpx <dig> and prdx <dig> were up-regulated, and gstm <dig> was down-regulated by bpa . it has been reported that toxic levels of ros in mammalian spermatozoa are strongly associated with male infertility  <cit> . thus, failure of the antioxidant defense system of spermatozoa to remove excess ros levels ultimately compromises normal sperm function and fertilization. therefore, the elevated levels of gpx <dig> and prdx <dig> observed in the present study were assumed to offer the sperm cells a survival advantage  in a bpa-containing microenvironment. in addition, significantly increased expression of gpx <dig> was noted with  <dig>  μm bpa treatment compared with control , and thus, gpx <dig> could represent a brilliant candidate biomarker of low-dose exposure.

our data showed that  <dig> of  <dig> differentially expressed proteins in bpa-treated spermatozoa were significantly  correlated with five canonical pathways . since normal functioning of these pathways regulates cell physiology, manipulation of pathway entities definitely correlates with pathological consequences/diseases. using pathway studio program, we show that the disease processes regulated by the altered proteins of these pathways were putatively involved in cancer, carcinoma, neoplasm, infertility, and so, . however, the pathway studio program showed the particular proteins regulated pathways, cellular processes, and diseases from entries in the pubmed and other related databases; thus, the proteins that exhibited a non-significant relationship with several pathways might also have potential clinical significance.

CONCLUSIONS
here, we describe the in vitro effects of bpa on mouse spermatozoa and the possible mechanisms of action. additionally, we identified  <dig> differentially expressed proteins in spermatozoa indicative of bpa exposure and showed their affiliation with several diseases . these predicted protein markers could be used as potential candidates for developing a novel theranostic strategy for the management of bpa toxicity. additionally, we anticipated that the proteomics and informatics tools used current study might consider for the health hazard assessment of other toxicological agents. however, further studies are required to validate preliminary finding and to better elucidate the possible clinical applications of these techniques.

