BACKGROUND
in eukaryotes, the majority of transcripts are processed by splicing to remove intron sequences and form a mature messenger rna. there are well established conserved sequence motifs at the intron/exon and exon/intron boundaries that are known to be recognised by the splicing machinery. however, even for short intron sequences, it has been concluded that these signals do not contain sufficient information to accurately define splice sites  <cit>  and that other splicing factors, with associated binding sites, must be involved.

there is evidence that splicing is partly promoted and regulated by sequences embedded within exons. a number of sequences have been found embedded in the exons of both viral and cellular genes which can promote or repress the utilization of alternative splice sites. these are usually purine-rich sequence located near an alternative splice donor, that bind splicing factors such as members of the sr family. sr proteins are highly conserved serine/arginine-rich rna-binding proteins . they are essential splicing factors and have been shown to regulate the selection and use of alternative splice sites  <cit> . it is known that they function very early in the spliceosome assembly process, promoting the binding of u <dig> snrnp to the splice donor and of u2af to the splice acceptor, apparently by interacting with u <dig>  <dig> k and u2af respectively. observations have shown that sr proteins bound to exons recruit splicing factors to the adjacent splice sites. nine human sr proteins are currently known: sf2/asf  <cit> , sc <dig>  <cit> , srp <dig>  <cit> , srp <dig>  <cit> , srp <dig>  <cit> , srp <dig>  <cit> , srp30c  <cit> , 9g <dig>  <cit>  and the divergent srp <dig>  <cit> . these proteins are closely related in sequence and structure and share the ability to activate splicing. human sr related proteins of the tra <dig> family are similarly known to be splicing regulators and sequence specific activators of pre-mrna splicing  <cit> .

early research concentrated on how sr proteins function to regulate alternative splicing. however, the binding of sr proteins to constitutive exons, which are included in all splice variants of a gene, is also thought to play an important role in splicing. the exon definition model proposes that interactions between components bound to splice sites flanking an exon serve to highlight usually small exons against a background of much larger introns. it is conjectured that the majority of constitutively spliced exons are defined by this mechanism. to support the model, a number of sr protein binding sites have been identified in constitutive exons, and shown to function as constitutive splicing enhancers  <cit> .

although these binding sites are believed to be common, studying their sequences is difficult because they are embedded in exons, most of which are also functional protein-coding sequences. when a particular motif is found to be over- or under-represented in coding exons, it is generally unclear whether it is a consequence of the underlying protein sequence, or an unrelated signal, such as a splice enhancer, embedded in the protein coding sequence. here we describe a novel strategy for resolving this uncertainty. starting with annotated coding exons, we generate a 'neutralized' exon set: sequences which are generated randomly, but which nevertheless preserve both the amino acid sequence and overall composition features of the original exons. we then apply machine learning software to compare the original and neutralized exons. since the neutralized set codes for the same proteins, it is likely that any feature which can be used to discriminate between the original and neutralized sets is performing some function which is independent of the exons' primary, protein-coding, function.

RESULTS
neutralized exons
 <dig> internal coding exons with lengths ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> bases were extracted from the vega database of annotated human genomic sequence  <cit> . testing the neutralization process  on a typical  <dig> base exon  we see that the sequence identity between the original and neutralised sequence falls steadily for approximately  <dig> cycles, then stabilizes and only fluctuates slightly for the remainder of the cycles. allowing some margin for exceptional sequences, this suggests that that  <dig> cycles of neutralization is adequate to randomize any sequence with a length up to  <dig> bases. running the neutralization algorithm on the complete set of exons, for  <dig> cycles per exon, gave a neutralized set with an average of 78% sequence identity compared to the reference set. the average dinucleotide compositions of the exons before and after neutralization is shown in table  <dig>  we can see that most dinucleotides show negligible change in composition during the neutralization procedure, and in the most extreme case , the proportion of the sequences composed of tt dinucleotides changes by less that 2%. therefore, the neutralization algorithm seems able to preserve overall sequence composition while substantially changing the sequence itself.

comparison of dinucleotide frequencies in original and neutralized exons. in all cases frequencies before and after neutralization are very similar.

motif-based models can effectively distinguish between original and neutralized exons
from both the original and neutralized sets, we removed  <dig> randomly selected sequences for use as test data. the remainder were used to train a convolved eponine windowed sequence  model . these models are based on scaffolds of one of more sequence motifs . the motifs are represented as dna weight matrices  <cit> . when a scaffold includes more than one motif, probability distributions associated with each motif indicate the preferred relative positions of those motifs. each scaffold has an associated weight, which is used to combine scaffold scores in a relevance vector machine.

training resulted in a complex model consisting of  <dig> scaffolds, split evenly between positively-weighted scaffolds – signals which are likely to be over-represented in the original exons – and negatively weighted scaffolds. the complete set of scaffolds can be seen in figures  <dig> and  <dig> 

we tested the resulting model's classification ability using the unseen test data. specificity  and sensitivity  are shown for a range of classifier score thresholds in figure  <dig>  from the sensitivity-specificity curve, we see that the eponine-exons model is effective in distinguishing between original and neutralized exons.

since the human genome is a mosaic of isochores of high and low gc content and neutralization generates sequences with average properties, it was possible that the classifier's performance was an artifact resulting from differences in gc distribution between original and neutralized sequences. to check this was not the case, the original set of sequences was split into subsets of high and low gc content. for each subset an associated neutralized set was generated, based on the average properties of that subset. separate models were then trained and tested . we find that for both high and low gc subsets the classifier is still able to distinguish original and neutralized sequences.

the eponine exons model can also distinguish non-coding exons from randomized sequences
since the negative training set is not composed of natural sequences, an obvious concern is that the features we have detected are artifacts of the neutralization procedure, and are of no use when analysing real sequence data. to validate the eponine-exons model, we tested it on additional sequences from four classes: protein coding exons not in the original training set, non-coding  exons, introns, and intergenic regions, all from annotation of finished human chromosomes obtained from chromosomes  <dig> and  <dig> in the vega database  <cit> . for exons, introns and intergenic regions, we extracted sets of  <dig> sequences, each of  <dig> bases long . we were unable to obtain sufficient  <dig> base non-coding exonic sequences, so instead we used  <dig> base sequences.

for each data set, we produced a corresponding set of negative sequences with matching mono- and di-nucleotide composition using the randomizing procedure detailed in the methods section. we then used the eponine-exons model as a classifier, and tested its ability to separate each of the positive sequence sets from its corresponding negative sequence set. sensitivity-specificity curves are shown in figure  <dig> 

in the case of the intergenic sequences, there is no significant discrimination between real and shuffled sequences. the coding sequences, however, could be discriminated, as might be expected from a classifier trained on protein-coding sequences. moreover, the model was also able to distinguish many non-coding exons from their shuffled counterparts. this result is highly significant because it indicates that at least some of the signals discovered in coding exons are general to both coding and non-coding exons. this is consistent with the idea that they are involved in exon definition and splicing. finally, there is a far weaker, but still possibility significant, discrimination between real and shuffled intron sequences. one explanation for this is that the introns were contaminated with a small number of exons which were missed during the annotation process. however, a second possibility is that, in addition to an exon-specific signal, the eponine exons model is also detecting some  signal – perhaps an anti-termination signal – which is found throughout transcribed regions of the genome. we note that the discrimination between exons and shuffled sequences is not as effective as discrimination between exons and neutralized sequences, which implies that some degree of overfitting may have occurred in the training process. nevertheless these results suggest that a significant amount of relevant information has been captured.

based on these results, we hoped that the model would be able to successfully discriminate between exons and other biologically authentic sequences. however, in initial tests exons did not generally score higher than intronic or intergenic sequences . when we inspected the sequences, we found that the exons had a significantly different composition from other sequences: in particular, they tended to have a higher gc content. we suspected that the classifier output was somewhat sensitive to the gc content of the input sequence. when we compensated for this effect by randomly sampling a subset of intronic sequences with gc contents matching that found in the exonic test sequences , the eponine-exons model was able to discriminate between the sets .

comparing introns with similar gc content to the exons, the discrimination between non-coding exons and introns is relatively poor – although still substantially better than random. this points to a limitation in the training approach of exons vs neutralized exons: splicing signals in a background of non-coding exonic sequence are not captured well by our classifier. in addition,  <cit>  conclude the most exons require sequences in the flanks for efficient splicing, and these will clearly not be learned by our method, which focusses on the body of the exon.

the neutralization process we use has some similarities to the dicodon shuffling algorithm proposed by  <cit> , which swaps pairs of synonymous codons under a constraint that the dinucleotide composition of the sequence must be preserved. we implemented this algorithm to compare its performance and properties with our own neutralization strategy. on the same sequences, the dicodon shuffling algorithm gives a set of sequences with an average sequence identity of 90% to the reference set. this is much higher than the 78% sequence identity observed after applying our neutralization procedure. this is unsurprising because the constraints under dicodon shuffling are stronger, requiring the dinucleotide composition to be maintained on a per-sequence basis, whereas neutralization only requires this across the complete set of sequences. to test whether this makes a significant difference when searching for functional motifs, we carried out identical training using c-ews and obtained a model of similar complexity. however we found it had a much lower classification ability using unseen test data  and was unable to distinguish between shuffled and reference sequences better than random for either coding, non-coding or intronic sequence . we conclude that our approach of neutralization destroys information more readily than dicodon shuffling and that this is necessary to reveal a strong enough signal for motifs to be recognised.

comparison of learned motifs with known splice-enhancer sites
if the motifs learned in the eponine exons model are meaningful, a subset of them might be expected to match the set of motifs that have already been show to influence splicing. we therefore compared the weight matrices in the positively weighted scaffolds of our exon model with known splice enhancer sites  <cit> .

direct comparisons of weight matrices with sequence motifs – with or without ambiguity symbols – is complicated, since different positions in a weight matrix may convey different amounts of information. furthermore, it is not certain that either the learned weight matrices or the published motifs correspond to the full length of the biologically functional sequence. it is therefore important to consider a range of possible alignments of motifs to weight matrices.

we extracted all weight matrices from the eponine exons model which were associated with a positive scaffold and which were at least four bases long. for each known motif, we calculated the log-odds score against all weight matrices from scaffolds with weights greater than  <dig> , considering all possible alignments with up to one base of overlap, and took the maximum score. we summed the maxima to give an aggregate score for the degree of match between that motif and the full eponine model.

we then constructed  <dig> random weight matrix sets, each with matched information profiles to the eponine exons matrix set. again, we calculated the aggregate score for each known motif. finally, we counted the fraction of random matrix sets which scored higher than the eponine exons matrices. this can be considered as an empirical p-value, with low values providing strong support for the hypothesis that there is some correspondance between motifs in the eponine exons model and the known motif being tested. presumably, in each case there is some subset of eponine exons motifs which actually correspond with the known motifs, but identifying these in a statistically rigorous manner is harder: since the eponine exons model is relatively large, a corresponding multiple testing correction would be needed. we therefore limit ourselves to considering aggregate scores here, even though we believe it to be a rather conservative strategy.

tables  <dig> and  <dig> list the p-values for known motifs from exons and introns respectively. we see significant associations for 4/ <dig> exonic motifs and 2/ <dig> intronic motifs. interestingly, one of the two matched intronic motifs is a substring of the other, and they are believed to be binding sites for the same protein – tra2beta – so arguably they should be merged, in which case 1/ <dig> intronic motifs are matched. such a preference for exonic over intronic motifs may not be surprising, since the model was training only on exonic sequences. several other computational methods for finding splice enhancer signals have been proposed  <cit> . one method, rescue-ese  <cit>  compares the sequences around weak consensus splice sites with those around strong consensus sites, with the expectation that splice enhancer motifs are more likely to be found in the vicinity of weak splice sites. this strategy relies information orthogonal to that used by our method, thus it is interesting to compare the results. we compared the rescue-ese derived motifs with the eponine model using the same approach as used for the experimentally determined motifs . the results in table  <dig> shown that our model finds one of the motifs detected by the rescue-ese method. we are not surprised that our method did not find all the rescue-ese motifs since rescue-ese is designed to detect both exon and intron localized motifs.

comparison between the eponine exons model and known ese motifs which are located within internal exons. a '+' in the status column indicates a significant p-value <=  <dig> .

comparison between the eponine motif model and known ese motifs which are located in introns at the splice acceptor site of the exon-intron boundaries. a '+' in the status column indicates a significant p-value <=  <dig> .

comparison between the eponine motif model and known ese motifs determined using the rescue-ese method in  <cit> . a '+' in the status column indicates a significant p-value <=  <dig> .

finally, we performed an analogous experiment to discover what proportion of our discovered motifs matched previously known motifs. in this case, 41% of motifs from the eponine-exons model had a good match to at least one motif from the exonic splice enhancer and rescue-ese sets described above , suggesting that around 59% of discovered motifs may be novel.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that a motif-based machine learning strategy can extract signals which discriminate effectively between original and neutralized sets of protein-coding exons. the resulting model included recognizable consensus sequences for many of the previously reported splice-enhancer binding sites.

although the model was trained only on coding exon sequences, it gives high scores for both coding and non-coding exons, but not introns or intergenic regions. we therefore believe that the neutralization strategy is a powerful and effective method for learning functional non-coding elements embedded in protein coding sequence.

one interesting feature of the model learned here is its complexity:  <dig> scaffolds, split evenly between positively and negatively-weighted scaffolds. this is a large number, both in absolute terms, and also in comparison with ews and c-ews models trained for other purposes, such as promoter prediction  <cit> . this suggests that a large number of functional elements could play widespread roles in exon definition. the motifs learned here which cannot be assigned to any currently known splice-regulating protein are strong candidates for investigation with a view to discovering novel splice regulators.

we hope that changes in the machine learning strategy will improve the classification accuracy of this method. possible candidates for investigation include the use of scaffolds comprising more than  <dig> motifs, and the replacement of simple weight matrices with more complex models which serve as better representations of protein binding sites. we do not, however, necessarily expect that it will be possible to classify original and neutralized exons with 100% accuracy: most proteins can accept many mutations with little or no change to structure and function, so it is inevitable that some of the information which the cell uses to define exons will be encoded in the choice of amino acids, rather that just the choice of nucleotides used in redundant positions.

in the future, we hope to apply the results of this technique to the problem of ab initio prediction of genes. current gene-prediction techniques rely on a combination of splice-site models and 'coding bias' – the observation that coding sequence looks very different from intronic and intergenic sequence when considering properties such as hexamer frequencies. while such methods work reasonably well for protein-coding genes, they seldom make good predictions of untranslated regions, and do not detect the non-coding rna genes which are now known to be important in many aspects of cellular function. scanning bulk genomic dna using our model makes many predictions outside known exons . this suggests that while the motifs discovered here may be necessary for efficient splicing, they are not sufficient to fully define exons. we hope that building knowledge of candidate binding sites into gene prediction methods, together with other features such as splice junction consensus sequence, will improve the prediction of all spliced transcripts, whether coding or non-coding.

