BACKGROUND
the estimation of the timing of evolutionary events from dna sequence information has become a major research topic in evolutionary biology. although the use of molecular data to estimate divergence times goes back to the mid 60's of the past century  <cit> , the number of studies that include time estimation has increased rapidly over the last decade due to the ever increasing amount of dna sequence data and the development of new algorithms that relax the limiting assumptions of the molecular clock . information on timescales has shed light not only on the origin of taxonomic groups but has also allowed for the testing of biogeographic and climatic hypotheses, the estimation of rates of species diversification, and the investigation of rates of molecular evolution, among other topics  <cit> .

genetic distances are transformed into absolute divergence times by incorporating calibration points. the choice of a specific calibration date is therefore potentially crucial to accurately infer molecular dates . biogeographic and paleoecological data are among the main sources of information for dating phylogenetic nodes, either as a complement to the fossil record, or as the only available evidence in poorly preserved organisms. the use of geologic and paleoclimatic evidence, however, has been criticised on the basis of their limited accuracy and unwarranted assumptions . therefore, the appropriate use of biogeographic events to calibrate phylogenies requires a well-documented geochronology and the demonstration that the assumed barriers constitute a true obstacle to dispersal for the focal group.

the complex geological evolution of the western mediterranean region, located at the edge of the converging african and eurasian plates, is relatively well understood  <cit>  and has been extensively used for molecular dating  as well as to explain present-day species distributions . the opening of the western mediterranean basin started during the alpine orogeny, when an eastward tectonic extension occurred between the african and eurasian plates due to a subduction rollback between the oceanic and the continental slab . as a result, at the beginning of the oligocene , several continental microplates that formed part of the hercynian belt  broke off and started drifting from the eastern iberian peninsula and southern france to their present-day location ). during the first stage of the back arc extension, the northern microplate assemblage  started drifting counter-clockwise with respect to the eurasian plate, whereas the southern assemblage  drifted clockwise relative to iberia. the movement of the northern microplates resulted in the opening of the ligurian sea, the valencia trough and the gulf of lyon. corsica, sardinia and the calabro-peloritan massif collided with the apulian plate around 20- <dig> ma, completing the formation of the gulf of lyon. there is no general consensus on the time of separation of corsica and sardinia, although it almost certainly occurred during the corsica-sardinia rotation. this rotation has been dated to approximately 21- <dig> ma  <cit>  based on paleomagnetic data and is further corroborated by the presence of early burdigalian marine sediments in southern corsica  <cit> . likewise, there are doubts about the time when the exotic blocks of the calabro-peloritan massif drifted off from sardinia to their present-day positions, although it is generally accepted that it occurred during the formation of the tyrrhenian sea  <cit> . according to rosenbaum & lister  <cit> , the tyrrhenian sea started opening 10- <dig> ma in the northern and western part, finishing around 5- <dig> ma in the southern part. the same geological processes that generated the tyrrhenian sea also broke off the land connection between the maghrebides and sicily, opening the strait of sicily  <cit> . the provençal and the algerian basins are both older than the tyrrhenian sea, and originated during the early-middle miocene , when the kabylies block broke off from the balearic islands  and started drifting southward until they collided with the african margin . the formation of the alboran basin is a matter of debate because the original position of the rif-betic mountain range is uncertain  <cit> . some authors suggest that during the oligocene, the rif-betic mountain range formed a continuous orogenic belt together with the western alps, calabria, corsica and the kabylies blocks  <cit> . at the time of the main subduction rollback, the rif-betic block drifted southwest up to its present location , completing the formation of the alboran basin.

although the formation of the main western mediterranean islands has been used to date evolutionary divergence times and to explain species ranges, most studies using independent calibration points or substitution rates estimated from related organisms have concluded that the origin of present-day fauna in the region greatly post-dates the opening of the basin  <cit> . in particular, the messinian salinity crisis  has been pointed out as one of the main drivers of local diversification. the late miocene  marine corridors in southern iberia and northern morocco closed about  <dig>  ma, isolating the mediterranean sea from the atlantic ocean and causing a large reduction in mediterranean water levels and the emergence of land connections between north africa, corsica, sardinia and eurasia and between the balearic islands and iberia  <cit> . the opening of the strait of gibraltar about  <dig>  ma restored the water exchange between the atlantic and mediterranean waters, reestablishing effective isolation of the island ecosystems  <cit> . to date, the plant family araceae constitutes the only case reported of mediterranean organisms in which diversification has been shown to correspond to the oligocene break-off of the hercynian belt  <cit> .

the ground-dweller spider genus parachtes alicata,  <dig>  is a promising candidate for a terrestrial animal whose diversification may have been shaped by western mediterranean plate tectonics. this genus is restricted to the western mediterranean, where it exhibits a disjunct distribution  <cit> . it currently includes  <dig> species: p. ignavus simon,  <dig> and p. inaequipes simon  <dig> from corsica, p. limbarae kraus,  <dig> from sardinia, p. siculus caporiacco,  <dig> from sicily, p. romandiolae caporiacco,  <dig>  p. vernae caporiacco,  <dig>  p. latialis alicata,  <dig> and p. andreinii alicata,  <dig> from the italian peninsula, and p. cantabrarum simon,  <dig>  p. teruelis kraus,  <dig>  p. loboi jiménez-valverde,  <dig> and p. deminutus denis,  <dig> from the iberian peninsula. two new species, one endemic to majorca  and another to the italian peninsula , have been recently discovered and are awaiting formal description . parachtes shows a remarkable uniformity in its somatic morphology and most species' diagnostic features are restricted to the male and female genitalia  <cit> . parachtes species are nocturnal wandering hunters, usually found in leaf-litter, under dead logs or stones and in dark and humid habitats at mid to high altitudes . these spiders do not build webs, and ballooning  has been reported neither in the genus nor in the whole family. the low vagility and habitat preferences suggest limited opportunities for overseas dispersal, although transport by floating islands has been proposed to explain colonisation of the oceanic canary islands by the closely related genus dysdera  <cit> .

here, we investigate the role of the major geological events associated with the opening of the western mediterranean basin in shaping diversification of the spider genus parachtes, by inferring a molecular phylogeny based on eight mitochondrial and nuclear genes from a thorough taxonomic sampling of the genus and its close relatives. relaxed clock models in combination with multiple, independent biogeographic and fossil calibration points are further used to reconstruct the temporal framework of species diversification.

RESULTS
samples and sequences analysed
the specimens and sequences analysed in the present study are summarised in additional file  <dig>  the alignment of the non-protein coding genes, including informative gap characters coded as absence/presence characters , were merged with the protein-coding genes , resulting in a combined matrix of  <dig> characters for the "default alignment",  <dig> for the "gappy alignment" and  <dig> for the "compressed alignment". gap characters were included in the parsimony and bayesian inference analyses but excluded in maximum likelihood and divergence time analyses.

phylogenetic analyses
preliminary analysis using parsimony conducted on the concatenated matrices of the default, gappy and compressed alignments resulted in almost identical topologies and similar jackknife supports, although jackknife values were slightly higher for the default alignments . the 12s and 16s-l <dig> genes were the most variable and hence the most sensitive to changes in the alignment parameter values, recovering slightly different topologies. differences, however, involved unsupported alternative positions.

bayesian inference and maximum likelihood analyses were only conducted on the default alignment concatenated matrix, because no remarkable differences were found among the resulting topologies of each alignment. the selected substitution models for each gene and gene partition are shown in additional file  <dig>  phylogenetic analyses under the three inference methods and partition strategies resulted in almost identical topologies, summarised in figure  <dig> 

all methods support the monophyly of parachtes and its sister group relationship to the western mediterranean species of harpactocrates. as suspected  <cit> , the eastern european species currently included in harpactocrates did not form a clade with its western counterparts. the most basal split in the genus parachtes separates species of the iberian peninsula  from those of the western mediterranean islands, italy and the betic species . although all analyses support this basal split, the support for the hercynian-italian clade was moderate to low , and the au topology test could not reject the alternative topology where all iberian and the balearic species formed a clade sister to the remaining species . maximum likelihood and bayesian inference analyses conducted on p <dig> and p <dig> partition schemes, however, increased support for the hercynian-italian clade . the hercynian-italian clade was further resolved into two clades, one clade including the balearic and betic species, and a second clade where the italian species form a monophyletic group sister to corsica, with both of them in turn sister to sardinia. all of the former clades were highly supported.

temporal framework of parachtes diversification
bayes factor analysis provided decisive support for selecting relaxed clock models against the strict clock, but could not discriminate between the two bayesian relaxed clocks. the lognormal model, however, yielded the highest harmonic mean likelihood and was used in subsequent analyses. likewise, beast analyses using yule as tree prior yielded the highest likelihood harmonic means, but provided no strong evidence as compared to the more complex birth-death models. finally, bayes factors indicated decisive evidence in favour of the p <dig> partition scheme over the alternative schemes .

the chronogram with corresponding confidence intervals obtained with the preferred analysis options is shown in figure  <dig>  the time of the split between the iberian clade and the hercynian-italian clade was estimated at  <dig>  ma , while the time of divergence between the balearic-betic clade and the sardinian-corsican-italian clade was estimated at  <dig>  ma . the baleares and the betic clades split at  <dig>  ma . sardinia split from the corsican-italian clade at  <dig>  ma , and the corsican lineage split from the italian clade at  <dig>  ma , similar to the estimated time of divergence of the two iberian species p. loboi and p. teruelis,  <dig>  ma . the southern italian species p. andreinii diverged from the remaining italian species at  <dig>  ma . italian p. siculus and p. vernae split from p. romandiolae and p. n. sp. at  <dig>  ma . the most recent species splits correspond to the two former pairs, at  <dig>  ma  and  <dig>  ma , respectively.

the substitution rates inferred for each gene partition were :  <dig> % ,  <dig> % ,  <dig> % ,  <dig> % ,  <dig> %  and  <dig> %  . the 18s substitution rate could not be estimated due to low genetic variability and limited phylogenetic resolution. all genes evolved in a non-clocklike manner, as indicated by ucld.stdev values and the high coefficient of variation, which reflects heterogeneity in substitution rates along tree branches. the nuclear gene 28s showed higher deviation from the strict clock, as ucld.stev and the coefficient of variation were greater than  <dig>  moreover, the 95% hpd interval of the covariance values span zero in all genes, which means that there is not evidence of autocorrelation of rates in the phylogeny .

estimations obtained under uncorrelated lognormal relaxed clock. lower and upper bounds of the 95% hpd are indicated between brackets. mean rate: number of substitutions per site across the tree divided by the tree length. ucld.mean: mean of the branches rates.

the lineage age estimates obtained in r8s under the preferred method selected by cross-validation analyses for the different partition schemes are summarised in additional file  <dig>  differences among divergence time estimation methods and partition strategies at different phylogenetic levels were assessed by monitoring the following clades: the dysderidae node, the parachtes node, and the corsican-italian node. the analyses performed with r8s and beast yielded similar estimates for the parachtes and the corsica-italian nodes, but differed greatly for the deeper dysderidae node .

discussion
timing of parachtes diversification
although our discussion and conclusions are based on the time estimates obtained using bayesian methods, we also investigated estimates based on alternative, widely-used smoothing methods. the results showed that time estimates of parachtes diversification are consistent across methods and data partition schemes. the two time estimation methods, however, greatly differed at older time splits, suggesting that there could be incorrect assumptions under certain analytical conditions. smoothing methods differ from bayesian methods, as implemented in beast, by the use of fixed topologies and roots and by assuming rate autocorrelation between ancestral and descendant branches  <cit> . to date, there has been a limited advance in evaluating the strengths and weaknesses of both methods, because direct comparisons between them are hampered by their numerous differences  <cit> . finding out the causes of the reported discrepancies are beyond the scope of this study, but our results recommend exerting caution when trying to estimate ages close to the root.

the tree topology and estimated divergences identify the opening of the western mediterranean basin as the main driver for the diversification of parachtes species . the estimated age for the split of the parachtes stem group closely matches the geochronology of the hercynian belt break-off, and these node age estimates are robust to alternative analytical procedures and to partition schemes . therefore, our results reject previous suggestions for a quaternary origin of the genus  <cit> , mostly based on the absence of these species from the rift and kabylies regions in northern africa. indeed, the absence of parachtes in northern african exotic terrains poses a challenge to the miocene origin hypothesis. it may be argued that biotic surveys of the region are far from complete, and that, hence, the presence of the species cannot be completely ruling out. alternative explanations, such as species extinction due to unfavourable climatic conditions seem unlikely given that other humid fauna with northern mediterranean affinities, such as the salamandra newts  <cit>  or alytes toads  <cit> , are still found in northern africa. evidence of absence is always hard to prove, and further exhaustive, systematic biotic surveys of northwestern africa will be necessary to discard the presence of parachtes in the region.

most current evidence indicates that corsica, sardinia, northern sicily, the balearic islands, and the kabylies microplates were part of a single block by the time of the onset of the back arc extension , when the microplates broke and drifted off the iberian peninsula  <cit> . nevertheless, the actual location of the rift-betic block is still controversial. it has been suggested that the internal part of the rift-betic belt was laid near the balearic hercynian microplates . some authors go further and propose that the balearic microplate, together with the betic belt, formed a betic-balearic domain, which suffered a wnw progressive thrust sheet stacking during the back arc extension, ending approximately at the time of the middle-miocene   <cit> . the existence of a betic-balearic corridor during the langhian-serravallian marine regression  has been proposed to explain the origin of some balearic mammalian fossil remains  <cit> . alternatively, the betic-balearic clade could be the result of a later colonisation facilitated by the land bridge connections between the balearic islands and the continent established during the messinian salinity crisis  <cit> . however, our much older time estimates disagree with this scenario.

the sister group relationship of the sardinian lineage with the remaining thyrrenian and the italian species together with the divergence time of these two lineages  are consistent with the time frame of the separation of corsica from sardinia, dated at 21- <dig> ma  <cit> . a similar phylogenetic pattern, i.e., sardinia as a sister group of corsica and italy, has also been reported in the subterranean aquatic stenasellid isopods  <cit>  and the terrestrial isopod helleria brevicornis  <cit> , although in the latter case time estimates suggest an early pleistocene split of corsica and sardinia.

the close relationships between corsican and northern italian species revealed in parachtes have also been recovered in a diverse assemblage of arthropods, including cave crickets, wasps or isopods  <cit> . in most cases, these links originated as a result of active dispersal during the pleistocene glacial cycles , when recurrent marine regressions led to the formation of land bridges between corsica and tuscany or when the tuscany archipelago could have been used as stepping-stones. our results, however, point towards a deeper split between the corsican and italian lineages , which matches the onset of the opening of the tyrrhenian sea. about 10- <dig> ma, corsica, sardinia and the calabro-peloritan massif separated from the apennines, after having progressively collided with the apulian plate at around 20- <dig> ma  <cit> .

the basal split of italian p. andreinii was estimated at about  <dig> ma. similar divergence times were found between northern and southern italian species of the salamandrina spectacled salamanders  <cit> . however, the finding of miocene-age salamandrina fossils in sardinia led some authors to propose a double origin for the italian salamandrina: the ancestor of the northern species would have colonised the peninsula from corsica/sardinia, while the southern one would have drifted eastward from sardinia on the calabro-peloritan massif. the double-origin hypothesis put forward for salamandrina does not match the topology inferred for parachtes. italian parachtes are monophyletic, and thus a double colonisation scenario would require extinction events on both the islands and the continent. indeed, the lack of direct links between the sardinian and any italian lineage seems to be at odds with geological expectations, given that sardinia was connected to the apennines until the opening of the tyrrhenian sea  <cit>  and given the biogeographic links such as those reported in cave salamanders of the genus hydromantes  <cit>  and discoglossus toads  <cit> .

with the exception of p. andreinii, the estimated timeframe suggests that the diversification of parachtes in the italian peninsula was mostly driven by plio-pleistocene glacial cycles, as already predicted by alicata  <cit> . the key role of geographic isolation due to quaternary climatic oscillations seems to explain the origin of other components of the italian fauna, such as frogs and snakes  <cit> . further comprehensive phylogeographical studies on italian and iberian parachtes species are, however, needed to gain detailed insight into their evolutionary history and to fully expose the factors responsible for their diversification.

recent studies have suggested that divergence time estimates under recently developed multilocus coalescent methods may provide younger time estimates than the standard concatenated approach conducted in the present study . although, this issue is still little explored in the literature, the amount of disagreement seems to be particularly significant at shallow divergence times. in fact, it has been argued that the younger estimates obtained with coalescent approaches may be the results of unaccounted recent gene flow  <cit> , since most multilocus coalescent methods of species trees inference assume incomplete lineage sorting as the single source of gene tree incongruence .

estimates of substitution rates
in the absence of fossil or biogeographic calibration points, the extrapolation of substitution rates from independent analyses provides the only information for inferring absolute timeframes. the confirmation that tectonic evolution of the western mediterranean shaped parachtes diversification opens the possibility of using this model system to characterise substitution rates in molecular markers of interest.

the use of extrapolated substitution rates for one lineage and markers to date another may be compromised by the variation in rate of molecular evolution among lineages  <cit> . in the present study, the estimated average substitution rate for the mitochondrial genes estimated  closely matches the "standard" arthropod mitochondrial dna clock estimated at  <dig> % my- <dig>  <cit> , one of the most widely used universal rates. these results are surprising, given that the analytical procedures and assumptions used to estimate rates widely differ in the two studies. nevertheless, papadopoulou et al.  <cit>  have reached similar conclusions by using another well-dated geological event, the formation of the mid-aegean trench on the eastern mediterranean, dated at 9- <dig> ma, . these results may be viewed as a further support for the geological scenario proposed for parachtes diversification.

the few spider rates available in the literature are significantly higher than the ones obtained here. bond and collaborators  <cit>  estimated a substitution rate for 16s of 4% my- <dig> in the trapdoor spider aptostichus simus, while phylogeographic studies in woodlouse hunter spiders endemic to the canary island have reported cox <dig> rates as high as  <dig> % my- <dig>  <cit>  or  <dig> % my- <dig>  <cit> . interestingly, the former rates were derived from population-level comparisons, which have been shown to produce higher estimates of mutation rates as compared to substitution rates inferred in phylogenetic  studies . the slower estimates found in cox <dig>  in a species-level phylogeny of eastern canarian dysdera  <cit>  supports this last contention.

our study provides valuable information on the substitution rates of the handful of markers commonly used to infer phylogenies in non-model arthropods. next-generation sequencing approaches promise to expand the range of molecular markers amenable to phylogenetic inference for organisms such as spiders. until then, however, rigorous and thorough sampling of phylogeny of non-model organisms may rely on the set of genes used in the present study. in this context, our estimates could be an alternative to obtain absolute time estimates in the absence of calibration points when using such standard sets of molecular markers. additionally, parachtes may serve as a model system to gain further insights into the rate of molecular, morphological, and ecological trait evolution through time.

CONCLUSIONS
the pattern and timing of species formation in the spider genus parachtes match the geochronological sequence of the opening of the western mediterranean basin. therefore, parachtes spiders provide one of the first and unequivocal pieces of evidence for endemic terrestrial taxa whose origins can be traced back to the separation of the major western mediterranean islands from the continent . our results confirm that early oligocene tectonics played a key role in generating the diversity of the earth's most populated biodiversity hot-spot  <cit> .

