BACKGROUND
enterococci are part of the normal flora of the gastrointestinal and genitourinary tracts and colonize the bowels of more than 90% of healthy humans  <cit> . enterococci are opportunistic pathogens with generally low virulence, but their intrinsic and increasing acquired resistance to multiple drugs have made them a major cause of nosocomial infections  <cit> . enterococci are intrinsically resistant to a number of antimicrobial drugs, including cell wall-active agents, many commercially available aminoglycosides, and vancomycin – the antibiotic of last resort against multidrug-resistant bacteria  <cit> . enterococci can cause severe invasive infections such as peritonitis, endocarditis, meningitis, and abscesses in the urinary tract, along surgical sites, the lung and pleural spaces, facial sinuses, and peritoneal cavities  <cit> . because enterococci can spread rapidly among hospital patients and transfer their antibiotic resistance genes widely, even to other bacterial species, they may cause epidemics difficult to control and thus pose a significant threat to public health. the ever-increasing resistance of enterococci to multiple drugs prompts us to search for prominent antigens for the development of vaccines.

enterococci are gram-positive cocci that share morphology and lancefield antigenicity with group d streptococci. invasive gram-positive pathogens, such as streptococcus pneumoniae, are often encapsulated with weakly immunogenic polysaccharides . these pss are major virulence factors. it has been found that the structural differences between capsular pss form the molecular basis of serologic specificity for many species such as s. pneumoniae  <cit> . specific antibodies to s. pneumoniae pss promote opsonization and phagocytosis and thereby confer protection against pneumococcal infection. many successful antibacterial vaccines, such as ones against various serotypes of s. pneumoniae, type b of haemophilus influenzae, and group c of neisseria meningitides, have been developed based on their capsular pss; and many other polysaccharide-based vaccines are under development  <cit> . pss and ps-synthesis genes have been noted to be widespread among enterococcal strains  <cit> . enterococcal pss have been demonstrated to play important roles in enterococcal pathogenesis, such as conferring resistance to phagocytosis  <cit> . furthermore, enterococcal pss have been proposed as promising vaccine antigens  <cit> .

among enterococcal species, enterococcus faecalis and e. faecium are the two major human pathogens, accounting for 85–89% and 10–15% of all enterococcal infections, respectively  <cit> . previous investigations have revealed that enterococci express surface pss analogous to capsules of other pathogenic bacteria  <cit> . however, only a few types of enterococcal pss have been characterized with respect to their structure and antigenicity, and then only partially so. it is not known whether strains of enterococci express different pss, nor how many types of pss exist within the enterococci family. on the hypothesis that cell-surface pss of enterococci form an antigenic basis for serotyping and are promising vaccine candidates, we investigated and compared the immunochemical properties of pss from six clinical strains of enterococci, including five strains of e. faecalis and one strain of vancomycin-resistant e. faecium.

RESULTS
three different pss were isolated from each enterococcal strain
to ease the ps isolation and purification, bacteria of each enterococcal strain were grown in dialyzed columbia broth containing only nutrients with size less than  <dig> kda, which were removed by dialysis later in the purification process. pss, released by bacterial cells during fermentation, were found negligible when we attempted to isolate the pss from the culture medium. therefore, all pss characterized in this study are cell-attached.

of various enterococcal strains examined in this and our unpublished studies, three pools of pss were obtained from each of the six enterococcal strains, eluting from the size-exclusion sephacryl s <dig> column in the same order . the first ps eluted close to the void volume. as determined by gc-ms analysis of its alditol acetate derivative , this ps consists solely of glucose. based on its 1d 1h and 2d 1h-13c hmqc spectra , this ps is a poly-α-d--glucose, i.e., dextran. dextran was found in all six enterococcal stains in this study and also in other enterococcal strains . the second ps consisted of disaccharide repeating units as suggested by nmr analysis. because of the low yield of this ps, it was difficult to conduct further analysis. however, we speculate this ps might be consistent with the previously identified teichoic acid  <cit> . the third ps is a complex heteroglycan, as revealed by nmr, and its structure varies among different strains . the heteroglycans were the most abundant pss isolated from each enterococcal strain. they are relatively small, with average molecular sizes of ~ <dig> kda, as compared with the dextran standards.

when blotted with sera raised against whole bacterial cells, column-eluting fractions corresponding to the dextran-like ps and the teichoic acids were reactive. because the dextan-like ps fractions were contaminated with proteins, the immune reactivity is most likely due to the contaminants but not the ps. the reactivity of teichoic acids with immune sera is consistent with previous findings  <cit> . the heteroglycans did not react with immune sera raised against the whole bacterial cells, indicating that these pss are not natively immunogenic on the enterococcal cell surface.

chemical structural analysis of heteroglycans
monosaccharide composition of the heteroglycans was identified by gc-ms analysis of their corresponding alditol acetate derivatives. the analysis revealed that the heteroglycans isolated from the six strains of e. faecalis and e. faecium contained the same five monosaccharides, namely, rhamnose, glucose, galactose, mannosamine, and glucosamine. furthermore, the mannosamine and glucosamine residues were n-acetylated as suggested by nmr analysis. although these pss contain the same components, five monosaccharides can form an enormous number of differently structured pss by varying their sequences and linkage sites. therefore, we relied on nmr spectroscopy to distinguish these pss.

the heteroglycans from the six enterococcal strains display distinct patterns on their 1h-nmr spectra . in each spectrum, signals between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ppm correspond to the anomeric protons of the monosaccharide components of the ps, and these signals often serve as signatures for differentiating complex carbohydrate structures. the signals between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ppm are due to protons attached to c2-c <dig> and are poorly resolved due to the overlapping chemical shifts. the pattern of these signals, nonetheless, also reveals the similarities and differences between pss. the signals at ~ <dig>  ppm, resulting from the methyl protons of n-acteyl or o-acetyl groups, clearly show the different degree of acetylation of each ps. in addition, the signals at  <dig>  ppm that arise from the c- <dig> methyl protons of rhamnose are indicative of difference or similarity of the rhamnose component of the ps. overall, the nmr spectral patterns revealed that the pss from e. faecium b <dig> and e. faecalis strains 324057b, type ii, type v, and r <dig> are different. however, the pss from e. faecalis strains type v and  <dig> have very similar structure . it is possible, in fact, that these two pss are identical. the structural elucidation of these pss is quite complicated and is part of an ongoing study.

immunological characterization of heteroglycans
to verify the antigenic specificity of the six heteroglycans, we obtained polyclonal antibodies against the heteroglycan pss from e. faecium b <dig> and e. faecalis type v. because these pss are not immunogenic in its native form, they were conjugated to tetanus toxoid. both conjugates induced high titers of specific antibodies against the pss. therefore, the immunogenicity of these pss can be significantly enhanced by conjugation to immunogenic protein carriers. if their specific antibodies are proven protective in future investigation, these pss will become promising antigen candidates for enterococcal vaccines.

the antisera specific for pss of e. faecium b <dig> or e. faecalis type v were used to probe the antigenic specificity of pss from different enterococcal strains. the ability to inhibit the binding between these pss and their specific antibodies by each of the six pss was determined by competitive elisa inhibition. as shown in figure 3a, the results of the elisa study indicate that the ps from the vancomycin-resistant e. faecium b <dig> is significantly different from e. faecalis pss. the binding between e. faecium b <dig> ps and its antisera was only completely inhibited by itself. pss from e. faecalis type ii,  <dig>  and r <dig> did not inhibit this binding even at high ps concentrations. some batches of pss from e. faecalis 324057b and type v displayed limited inhibition at high concentrations.

on the other hand, the binding between e. faecalis type v ps and its specific sera could be inhibited to various percentages by the ps from e. faecalis strain  <dig>  324057b, and r <dig> . e. faecalis type ii ps showed minimal cross-reactivity with type v ps, supporting the contention that these two strains belong to different serotypes. ps from the vancomycin-resistant e. faecium b <dig> did not show cross-reactivity with the type v ps, which was confirmed in both inhibition assays . ps from e. faecalis  <dig> is highly cross-reactive with ps type v . thus, both inhibition experiments and nmr analysis revealed that pss from e. faecalis type v and  <dig> are highly similar in structure and antigenicity. it is possible that these two pss are the same antigen and that the subtle difference is the result of minor contamination in these ps preparations.

this study reveals that all six enterococcal strains express three types of pss, namely, a large dextran-like polyglucan, a medium-sized teichoic acid, and a heteroglycan with average molecular size of ~ <dig> kda. this result is in line with early findings that the ps gene cluster is widespread among e. faecalis strains and that e. faecalis produces several large and small pss  <cit> . we are particularly interested in the heteroglycan pss, because they are the most abundant pss isolated from all six strains. we also confirmed that the heteroglycans are located at the cell surface by immunofluoresence spectroscopy  although these heteroglycans could be part of the capsule, cell wall, or both.

discussion
various capsular or cell wall enterococcal pss have been reported. in  <dig>  wicken and baddiley identified an intracellular glycerol teichoic acid containing various glucose substituents as the group antigen for group d streptococci, to which enterococci previously belonged  <cit> . in  <dig>  pazur et al. characterized an antigenic ps from e. faecalis consisting of a main chain of trisaccharide units joined with lactosyl and cellobiosyl side chains  <cit> . in  <dig>  bleiweis et al. reported a type  <dig> antigen containing glucose, rhamnose, glucosamine, galactosamine, ribitol, and phosphorus  <cit> . in  <dig>  we characterized a teichoic acid consisting of glucose, glycerol, and phosphate common to several enterococcal strains  <cit> . recently, hancock et al. suggested that rhamnopolysaccharides consisting of rhamnose, glucose, galactose, glucosamine, and galactosamine are an invariant component of e. faecalis cells  <cit> . it is possible that the rhamnopolysaccharides and the heteroglycans in our study belong to the same category, e.g., they are both expressed at a similar cell surface location or serve similar functions in enterococcal physiology or pathogenesis.

CONCLUSIONS
we have isolated and characterized the chemical and immunological properties of various pss from six clinical strains of e. faecium and e. faecalis. each strain produces large amounts of a complex heteroglycan consisting of glucose, galactose, rhamnose, n-acetyl-mannosamine, and n-acetyl-galactosamine. these pss are not natively immunogenic but can be converted to potent immunogens by conjugation to protein carriers. analysis by nmr spectroscopy and antigenicity analysis by competitive elisa inhibition revealed that heteroglycan pss from e. faecium b <dig> and e. faecalis types ii and v are distinct antigens. pss from e. faecalis strains 324057b and r <dig> share some epitopes with type v, whereas e. faecalis  <dig> ps is highly cross-reactive with type v ps. it is our hope that the heteroglycans may be used as the molecular basis for serotyping enterococcal strains and candidate antigens for the development of vaccines against multi-drug resistant enterococci.

