BACKGROUND
several different dna repair systems have evolved within all living cells to correct mispaired or damaged nucleotide residues generated either by endogenous events or by exposure to exogenous mutagenic agents  <cit> . the frequency of mutational events varies widely within the genome, and specific sites harboring increased frequency of mutation are now defined as 'hot spots' of mutation. the human ras protooncogene family contains three such hot spots – codons  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  factors contributing to these and other hot spots of mutation are still largely unknown, despite much investigation, but now appear to have several different contributions, such as type of dna damage, genomic location, surrounding sequence, cell cycle position, efficiency of the optimal dna repair pathway, and involvement of alternate repair and other cellular pathways.

dna mismatch repair  is a repair system that corrects mispaired nucleotides and insertion/deletion loops , resulting from replication, recombination, or repair errors. consequences of defects in this dna repair pathway are evidenced by microsatellite instability , elevated mutation frequency throughout the genome, enhanced recombination events, as well as tolerance to cytotoxic effects of alkylating agents as evidenced by decreased apoptosis. deficient mmr is, in turn, associated with hereditary nonpolyposis colorectal cancer , as well as other types of sporadic tumors in humans and animal models  <cit> . although the contribution of mmr to highly mutable genomic sites other than microsatellite sequences is largely unknown, several specific genetic mutations involved in neoplastic progression, including ras-activating mutations, have been reported as frequent occurrences in hnpcc and other msi tumors  <cit> .

dna mmr is conserved amongst highly divergent species, reflecting the essential role of this dna repair process  <cit> . the mmr system in eukaryotes is more complex and has different mismatch-specific repair efficiencies than that of e. coli  <cit> . several human homologs of bacterial muts and mutl proteins have now been identified  <cit> . the primary human homologs for muts that play instrumental roles in mmr include hmsh <dig>  hmsh <dig>  and hmsh <dig>  <cit> . the hmutsα heterodimer  has been demonstrated to recognize and bind dna mispairs and short idls  <cit> . the hmutsβ heterodimer  preferentially recognizes and binds idls of up to  <dig> nucleotides. human cells lacking hmsh <dig> protein expression also lack its cognate partners, hmsh <dig> and hmsh <dig> . this lack is associated with defective mmr, microsatellite instability, and is associated with a high percentage of hnpcc  <cit> . mutl homologs that are most relevant to human mmr are hmlh <dig> and hpms <dig>  which form the hmutlα heterodimer  <cit> . similar to the observed instability of individual muts homologs, lack of hmlh <dig> protein expression results in the lack of hpms <dig> protein, which in turn results in microsatellite instability, defective mmr, and is also associated with a high percentage of hnpcc  <cit> . the mutlα heterodimer is thought to act as a molecular matchmaker between the mutsα-dna complex and downstream enzyme activities responsible for subsequent identification, excision, and replacement of the incorrect base  <cit> . biochemical interactions and genetic studies have further implicated proliferating cell nuclear antigen , exonuclease i , replication protein a , replication factor c , and dna polymerase δ as active participants in the mmr pathway  <cit> . recently, the differential requirement of specific proteins associated with mmr have been identified for both 3'-nick directed and 5'-nick directed mmr by the use of an in vitro model  <cit> .

we have previously demonstrated that the efficiency of correct mismatch repair within the cell can differ significantly, depending on exact type of mismatch, site-specific location, phase of cell cycle, or cell type  <cit> . within this report, we have focused on a more precise understanding of the differences between mmr protein interactions with a g:a  or g:t  mismatch located at h-ras codon  <dig> to better understand molecular events leading to activating mutations at this site. our current results indicate that initial recognition and subsequent binding for repair signaling by hmutsα may be two separably measurable steps in the mmr pathway that can significantly affect downstream cellular events.

RESULTS
specificity of hmutsα protein binding to dna mismatches at h-ras codon 12
to determine that the binding complex recognizing mismatches at codon  <dig> of h-ras in hct <dig> + ch. <dig> nuclear extract is composed of hmutsα, dna binding reactions were conducted using -g:t oligos incubated with nuclear extracts from these mmr proficient cells. in confirmation of hmutsα binding to a g:t mismatch at this oncogenic site, the hmutsα :dna complex was efficiently interrupted by goat anti-hmsh <dig> and with rabbit anti-hmsh <dig> , but not by bsa, nonspecific goat igg, or nonspecific rabbit igg . as further evidence of specific hmutsα:dna mismatch binding, addition of  <dig>  mm atp completely disrupted the gel shifted band   <cit> . thus, mmr protein binding to a g:t mismatch located at h-ras codon  <dig> within the nuclear environment appears to be primarily, if not exclusively, hmutsα.

comparison of hmutsα binding 'avidity' to a g:t mismatch located at h-ras codon  <dig> within mmr competent and deficient nuclear extracts
the hct <dig> cell line completely lacks both 3' and 5' nick-directed mmr, putatively due to lack of hmlh <dig> expression, although these cells normally express hmsh <dig> and hmsh <dig>  to determine if hmutsα recognition and binding of a mismatch at the h-ras codon  <dig> hot spot might undergo alteration within hct <dig> cells, in conjunction with the lack of hmutlα, binding competition experiments were performed. figure  <dig> is a comparison of the amount, or 'avidity', of hmutsα binding affinity within mmr proficient  and within mmr deficient  nuclear extracts. these gel shifts demonstrate virtually identical mismatch specific binding avidity of hmutsα to -g:t-oligo. as well, 50x molar excess of unlabeled g:t-oligo, which does not completely inhibit hmutsα gel shift of the radioactively labeled mismatch, demonstrates a similar degree of competitive inhibition of mismatch specific binding in both mmr proficient and mmr deficient nuclear extracts . these results provide strong evidence that there is no discernable difference in hmutsα binding avidity to a g:t mismatch at h-ras codon  <dig>  despite that hct <dig> + ch.  <dig> is mmr proficient and hct <dig> lacks expression of hmutlα and is mmr deficient.

comparison of competitive inhibition of hmutsα binding avidity to g:t versus g:a mispairs at h-ras codon 12
we have previously determined that the g:a mismatch at h-ras codon  <dig> is accurately repaired back to g:c much less frequently than g:t  <cit> . in addition, we have previously demonstrated that recognition and binding of this poorly repaired mismatch is also very weak within hela nuclear extracts  <cit> . we therefore asked if competitive inhibition by several different concentrations of these mismatches would reveal more specific mechanisms of these intriguing differences at this same location. firstly, using increasing concentrations of unlabeled g:t oligo as a competitor for -g:t-oligo, we observe the expected highly competitive inhibition of the radioactive g:t mismatch gel shift band in the presence of as little as 25x cold g:t-oligo . in comparison, the radioactive g:t-oligo gel shift band is much less competitively inhibited by increasing concentrations of cold g:a oligo , further confirming the observed preference of hmutsα for a g:t mismatch as compared to a g:a mismatch at the h-ras codon  <dig> hot spot of mutation. comparison of the densitometric band intensities reveal that even 25x cold g:t oligo can successfully decrease hmutsα binding to radioactive g:t by 80%, but that 25x cold g:a decreases hmutsα binding to radioactive g:t by only 10%.

an alternate approach to more precisely define the extent of this phenomenon was to measure competitive inhibition of radioactively labeled g:a-oligo  by incubation with unlabeled g:a-oligo, to determine if equal ratios of competitive binding might occur for g:t and g:a, despite the very different avidities of hmutsα for each mismatch. this would provide an indication of equal recognition of each type of mismatch by hmutsα, despite unequal binding avidity for these two mismatches. for these experiments, it was necessary to extend incubation periods from  <dig> min. to  <dig>  hr, as sufficient concentrations of gel shifted bands can be detected with the g:a oligo only after extended incubation . as expected, binding of hmutsα to -g:a-oligo is approximately  <dig> fold weaker in intensity than for -g:t-oligo after the extended incubation . however, 100x molar excess of cold g:a-oligo competitively inhibits mmr protein binding to -g:a-oligo by 89%, which is similar to the same concentration of cold g:t-oligo competitive inhibition of mmr protein binding to -g:t-oligo , as determined by comparison of the densitometric intensity of each band. all of the above experiments have been repeated with similar results.

mmr at h-ras codon  <dig> hot spot of mutation
results within table  <dig> were determined by incubating plasmids containing a g:t or g:a mismatch at the h-ras codon  <dig> middle base pair location containing a 5' nick on the "t" or "a" strand  with mmr proficient  or mmr deficient  nuclear extracts. efficiency of correct, incorrect, and total  mmr for each mismatch was subsequently calculated   <cit> . surprisingly, total repair of the g:a mismatch  was almost twice as high as for g:t . this phenomenon was consistently observed within the several different experiments required to obtain the total results depicted in table  <dig>  and was statistically significant . in direct contrast, correct  repair of g:a → g:c  was significantly low when compared to correct  repair of g:t → g:c  . inadvertent nicks in the "g"  strand of the h-ras  <dig> mer or puc plasmid during preparation could not have contributed to the increased total, or increased incorrect repair  results for the g:a mismatch because the efficiency of incorrect repair would then be similar for both the g:t and the g:a mismatch. instead, mmr results within table  <dig> were found to be consistently different for the two mismatches, and are the compiled results of several different mismatch-containing plasmid preparations and subsequent mmr assays. in addition, mmr proficient e. coli nick-directed repair results are consistently high, for both mismatch-containing plasmid preparation subsequently used for each nuclear extract mmr assay . as well, mmr deficient e. coli repair ratios  are 1: <dig> after transformation of unmethylated plasmids . in combination, all of the above control experiments demonstrate a lack of any significant unintentional misrepair events on either strand of dna, for either site-specific mismatch plasmid preparation. therefore, the results within table  <dig> suggest that increased total repair  combined with increased incorrect repair of g:a, as compared to the decreased total repair and increased correct mmr repair of g:t, may result in increased mutational events when a g:a mismatch occurs at this oncogenic site. somewhat surprisingly, mmr deficient nuclear extracts did not repair either mismatch at codon  <dig> above background, indicating a complete lack of alternate dna repair activity that can correct either mismatch at this oncogenic site. therefore these results indicate that the observed repair efficiencies in mmr proficient nuclear extracts are due solely to mmr activity, rather than to a combination of mmr and other dna repair pathways. alternatively, it is possible that the methods used for nuclear extract preparation or the in vitro mmr assay might cause an artifactual decrease in the activity of other dna repair pathways.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
previous investigations of ours have revealed significantly decreased nick-directed g:a → g:c repair at codon  <dig> of h-ras, as compared to g:t → g:c repair at this location  <cit> . decreased mmr of g:a has also been observed within different sequences by other investigators, although molecular mechanisms for these differences remain obscure  <cit> . the current investigation was undertaken to determine key steps differentiating g:t and g:a repair pathways at the h-ras oncogenic hot spot within the nuclear environment. our results suggest that, firstly, the mmr pathway is the primary, if not the only, dna repair pathway that can recognize and is subsequently responsible for the repair of both mismatches at this oncogenic location within the cell. secondly, although 'recognition' of either g:t or g:a by hmutsα is likely equal, and is essential for initiation of mmr, the avidity – or strength – of hmutsα binding to either mismatch is not equal, and may play a significant role in the decision of whether to activate nick-directed correct mmr, or the activation of an alternate response pathway. in support of this concept, and in correlation with weak hmutsα binding to g:a, we have observed significantly decreased nick-directed  mmr of g:a → g:c , as compared to nick-directed mmr of g:t → g:c . we have however, consistently measured almost twice the efficiency of total repair of g:a  as compared to total g:t repair  at this oncogenic site. this phenomenon appears to be due to increased non nick-directed incorrect repair of g:a → t:a .

this raises the possibility that  initial recognition of a mismatch is essential but separable from  differential binding of mmr proteins to specific mismatches, which in turn is directly correlated either with nick-directed correct mmr, or with alternate events other than nick-directed mmr. in support of this concept, wang, et. al. has recently demonstrated by atomic force microscopy that e. coli muts-dna complexes exist in two conformations  <cit> . the initial recognition of a mismatch by muts results in a localized kink in the dna conformation and is termed the initial recognition complex . the second step is required for mmr and is a further conformational change in which the localized kink in the dna becomes unbent. this is called the ultimate recognition complex  and may be the conformation required for atp activation and subsequent mmr activity. it is also possible that either differential binding kinetics , or very low avidity of binding or a different molecular binding mechanism  may contribute to subsequent cellular events specific to the g:a mismatch. these possibilities are currently being investigated. an additional hypothesis has been proposed by junop, et. al., placing e. coli muts in the role of 'authorizing' different repair events  <cit> . also, it is now well documented that while hmutsα recognizes dna damage other than mismatches, the mmr pathway does not appear to play a direct role in the repair of these damaged bases, but rather is associated with initiation of cell cycle and/or apoptotic events and therefore is described as a "sensor of genetic damage" within this context. the molecular mechanisms contributing to the various cellular activities associated with the well documented hmutsα recognition and differential binding to different dna structures is not yet clear. although there does not appear to be a consistent physical size or shape of hmutsα recognizable structures that trigger different pathways of cellular activity, dna sequence context does appear to play a role  <cit> .

these results agree with, and build upon our previous experimental results, and also agree with the presence of specific mutations predominantly found in human tumors  <cit> . it has now been demonstrated by several different investigators that, although any base pair other than g:c at the h-ras codon  <dig> location is activating, the majority of human tumors containing mutations at this site are g:c → t:a transversions  <cit> . our observed increased overall mmr of g:a, combined with a high ratio of incorrect mmr of g:a → t:a at this oncogenic location correlates well with the predominant ggc → gtc  ras-activating mutation found in a high percentage of human tumors  <cit> . thus the demonstration of a significant increase in the frequency of both total repair and incorrect repair of the g:a mismatch at the h-ras codon  <dig> oncogenic hot spot of mutation, combined with a complete lack of rescue by other dna repair pathways, is biologically relevant.

