BACKGROUND
recent years has witnessed an increasing number of studies on constructing simple synthetic genetic circuits that exhibit desired properties such as oscillatory behavior, inducer specific activation/repression, etc. the hope is that these simple circuits are the vanguards of more complex ones with far ranging implications to biotechnology and medicine bringing to fruition the promise of synthetic biology. it has been widely acknowledged that that task of building circuits to meet multiple inducer-specific requirements is a challenging one  <cit> . this is because of the incomplete description of component interactions compounded by the fact that the number of ways in which one can chose and interconnect components, increases exponentially with the number of components. to meet these emerging challenges, in this paper we introduce an optimization based framework that, given an underlying quantitative description, automatically identifies the circuit components from a list and connectivity that brings about the desired functionality.

to date, several small synthetic gene networks that accomplish a specific functionality have been constructed. for example, gardner and co-workers have developed a genetic toggle switch- a synthetic gene regulatory network that exhibits bistability  <cit> . similarly, elowitz and leibler have constructed a synthetic circuit termed as repressilator that was designed to produce an oscillatory response  <cit> . subsequently, researchers have extended the repressilator circuit design to induce synchronous oscillations  <cit> , design a synthetic gene-metabolic oscillator  <cit>  and many others  <cit> . several researchers have employed synthetic circuits to investigate the dynamics and inner workings of more complex natural genetic networks. for example, hooshangi et al. have constructed synthetic transcriptional cascades to investigate the ultrasensitivity and noise propagation in genetic networks  <cit> . mangan et al. have investigated the structure and dynamics of the widely occurring feed forward loop motif  <cit> . similarly, becskei and serrano designed simple gene circuits to examine the effects of autoregulation in gene networks  <cit> .

in addition to uncovering the design principles of natural genetic networks, synthetic genetic networks are now increasingly finding roles in applications ranging from biotechnology, medicine and bio-sensing. for example, martin et al. have successfully expressed enzymes from plants, yeast and escherichia coli to produce amorphadine, a precursor to an anti-malarial drug artemisinin  <cit>  and anderson et al. have engineered the interaction between bacteria and cancer cells to depend on heterologous environmental signals  <cit> . similarly, levskaya et al. have devised a synthetic circuit that switches between different states in response to red light  <cit> . these ever-expanding applications have spurred the interest for the development of efficient experimental, database and computational techniques to support these efforts  <cit> .

in response to these developments the research community has been rapidly moving towards standardization by creating the registry of standard biological parts  <cit> . this registry provides a comprehensive compilation of well defined elements of a genetic circuit such as promoters, ribosome binding sites, transcripts, inducer molecules, terminator sites and plasmids among others. the impetus is that these spare parts registries will help usher the development of more rational engineering approaches for designing such circuits. the potential of using modeling and computations to better understand the function of these circuits has already been recognized and mathematical models have been proposed to describe the interactions between genetic elements  <cit> .

the recent availability of well-defined spare parts lists and their interactions brings at the forefront the need to develop procedures to design and optimize genetic circuits that exhibit a desired functionality. previous efforts in this direction include electrical circuit inspired designs proposed by basu and weiss  <cit> . by constructing a library of cellular gates the authors have implemented simple logical functions such as or, not and and. similarly, mason et al. have investigated the behavior of an electronic model of a gene circuit to produce oscillatory behavior  <cit> . other efforts include the combinatorial synthesis approach employed by guet et al.  <cit> . in this work the authors varied the connectivity of genes and their corresponding promoters thus generating an ensemble of responses from the resulting genetic circuits. this approach, however, becomes intractable for circuits involving a large number of components  <cit> . another important consideration associated with the design and fabrication of genetic circuits is the proper matching of kinetic rates of individual elements of the circuits. several studies have reported that failure to generate the correct response is often due to improper assembly of the basic elements. for example, simulations conducted by tuttle et al. have confirmed that repressillator circuits constructed by using wild-type promoters do not result in oscillations  <cit> . similarly, studies conducted by hoosangni et al. have revealed that the behavior of a transcriptional cascade depends on the promoter leakiness and expression levels at the previous stage  <cit> . several researchers have stressed the need for optimizing the kinetic parameters to ensure functionality and both experimental  <cit>  and computational approaches  <cit>  have been proposed to this end.

to address these questions, in this work we introduce optcircuit , an optimization-based framework that  automatically identifies the circuit components from a list and connectivity that brings about the desired functionality;  rectify or redesign an existing  biological circuit and restore functionality by modifying an existing component  and/or identifying additional components to append to the circuit; multiple literature sources are used to compile a set of kinetic descriptions of promoter-protein, protein-protein and protein-inducer pairs. the dynamics that govern the interactions between the elements of the genetic circuit are currently modeled using deterministic rate equations but the framework is general enough to accommodate stochastic simulations. the desired circuit response is abstracted as the maximization/minimization of an appropriately constructed objective function. subsequently, an iterative procedure is implemented within our framework to identify an ensemble of circuits that exhibit the desired response. optcircuit has been applied to a variety of applications ranging from the design of circuits that discriminate between inducer molecules; circuits that detect the combination of inducer molecules  and finally circuits whose responses are dependent on the concentration of the external inducer .

RESULTS
in this section we highlight the capabilities of the optcircuit framework to design circuits of varying stimulus and complexity. we first examine the design of simple circuit against known architectures that discriminate between inducer molecules. next, we dialup the complexity of the desired circuit response by seeking circuit configurations that can detect which combination of inducer molecules are present/absent . finally, we test the ability of the framework to identify circuits whose responses are not only dependent on the presence/absence but also on the level of external inducers . in addition to identifying optimal configuration of the design variables, in the last example we also explore whether optimizing the kinetic parameters of specific elements within a given circuit can improve its performance.

inferring circuits with inducer-specific responses
here we test optcircuit by generating circuit designs whose responses are contingent on the presence/absence of different inducer molecules and compare the results with known designs  <cit> . specifically, in the presence of anhydrotetracyclin  the desired circuit must express only protein laci while in response to inducer iptg the circuit must express only protein tetr.

the desired circuit response is imposed by maximizing the scaled difference between the expression of the desired minus the undesired florescent protein in response to the two different inducers in line with the description provided in the methods section.

 maximize z=+)/ <dig> 

in eq  <dig> , placiatc,ptetratc represent the levels of transcripts laci and tetr in presence of inducer atc and similarly, placiiptg,ptetriptg represent the levels of laci and tetr in presence of inducer iptg respectively.

using optcircuit we identify multiple circuits with up to two promoter transcript pairs. the circuit configuration for the best solution is shown in figure 2a. interestingly, the configuration is reminiscent of the architecture of the well-studied genetic toggle switch  <cit> . briefly, in line with the construction of a genetic toggle switch, in presence of atc, the activity of protein tetr is suppressed . this in turn leads to the expression of protein laci from ptet <dig> promoter  as shown in the figure 2b. on the other hand, in presence of inducer iptg, the activity of protein laci is suppressed which enables expression tetr from plac <dig> promoter . in terms of computational requirements, a total of  <dig> iterations required a total of  <dig> minutes when run on a  <dig> node linux cluster running dual intel  <dig>  ghz xeon processors. after performing an exhaustive search on circuits having two-promoter transcript pairs, the effect of dialing up the complexity of the designed circuits by allowing for as many as three to four promoter transcript pairs is examined. our results shown in figure  <dig>  indicate that in addition to relatively simple circuit designs, akin to known ones, optcircuit suggests non-intuitive designs with added complexity affording more opportunities for kinetic parameter tuning.

design of genetic decoder
in this section, we use optcircuit to design for more complex responses by constructing a genetic circuit equivalent of a 2– <dig> bit decoder. a digital decoder is a multiple-input, multiple-output logic circuit that converts coded inputs into coded outputs. figure  <dig> illustrates the block diagram of a digital decoder and the corresponding truth table is shown in figure  <dig>  in the context of genetic circuits, we seek the design of a circuit architecture that produces four different responses dependent on the presence and/or absence of the sugars glucose  and l-arabinose  respectively. specifically, we would like the circuit to express  yfp  in response to the presence of l-arabinose and absence of glucose,  rfp  in response to the absence of both glucose and l-arabinose,  bfp  when both l-arabinose and glucose are present,  gfp  when l-arabinose is absent but glucose is present. note that since absence of glucose is known to induce the expression of camp, in this work we assume that absence of glucose implies presence of camp and equivalently, presence of glucose implies absence of camp.

given n different promoter elements and m transcripts, the total number of design configurations with upto k promoter-transcript pairs is given by k. this implies that the search space characterizing all circuit configurations is enormous even for relatively modest values for n and m thus preventing its exhaustive navigation. to alleviate this problem, we implemented the optcircuit framework in a sequential fashion where successive elements are appended to the genetic circuit to meet, one at a time, the four desired responses . as shown in the figure, at each step, the objective function values of the ten best circuit architectures are recorded and the circuit producing the best objective value is retained for the next step. the first step shown in figure  <dig>  involves the expression of yfp under the   condition. to this end, we borrowed the circuit configuration from the well studied, feed-forward loop architecture  <cit> . crp and arac are expressed from the constitutive promoters, pcons <dig> and pcons <dig> respectively and yfp is placed under the control of the pbad promoter. using this as the seed, the optcircuit framework is employed to sequentially identify additional components by following the step-wise procedure shown in figure  <dig>  after the second step  response), our framework identifies the expression of laci from the pbad promoter and the expression of rfp from the plac promoter. in the third step  response) the best objective value was realized following the expression of protein tetr from pbad and plac promoters and expression of bfp from the ptet promoter which is repressible by protein tetr . finally after the last step  response), by allowing for expression of gfp, the additional elements appended to design the decoder include, the expression of protein ci from the para and plac promoters and the expression of proteins tetr and gfp from the pλ promoter.

the results shown in the previous paragraph also sheds light onto the design principles for the construction of a genetic decoder. figure  <dig>  illustrates the binary logic schematics for the genetic circuits characterizing each step shown in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig>  observe that at each step, the optcircuit framework allows for the addition of components that are activated only when the corresponding inducer conditions are met. in addition, by expressing appropriate repressor molecules, the optcircuit framework ensures the repression of all the other promoters expressing fluorescent proteins. for example, after step  <dig> the and gate expressing yfp is active only when glucose is absent of l-arabinose is present. subsequently, a not gate logic is introduced after the second step to turn off the plac promoter when yfp is expressed. after the third step, an or gate with two inputs followed by an not gate is introduced. the or gate combines the indirect repressive effect of tetr that turns off the production of bfp if either yfp or rfp are expressed. finally, after the last step the or gate with three inputs of tetr and and an or gate with two inputs of ci followed by a not gate are introduced. this ensures that if either one of bfp, rfp or yfp are expressed then gfp is turned off and conversely gfp is expressed only if none of the other three reporters are expressed.

the identified circuit design  happens to be consistent with a purely binary logic viewpoint of regulation. this is not the case with all identified designs. for example, one such circuit configuration involves the expression of protein laci from para promoter instead of the expression of protein tetr from the pbad promoter  leading to a behavior that is inconsistent with boolean-only regulation. to illustrate this, consider the truth table of the design shown in figure  <dig>  under -/+ condition yfp is expressed and rfp and gfp are shut-off. however, unlike the circuit described in previous paragraph, expression of yfp is not accompanied by expression of tetr and hence the ptet promoter is free to express the fluorescent protein bfp. nevertheless, optcircuit identified this circuit configuration as an optimal architecture for a genetic decoder because the employed kinetic description accounts for not only the presence but also the level of each participating molecule needed to activate transcription. figure  <dig>  provides a comparison of the steady-state levels of proteins tetr and bfp for the circuits described in figure  <dig>  and figure  <dig>  in circuit , the level of tetr is relatively high  which in turn strongly represses the expression from the ptet promoter. this is expected since, in circuit a, expression of yfp is accompanied by expression of tetr. in contrast, in circuit b, even though the level of protein tetr is relatively low , examination of the level of protein bfp suggests that even low levels of protein tetr are able to effectively repress the expression of bfp from the ptet promoter. the low level of tetr is a manifestation of the leaky repression exerted on the plac promoter by the laci protein. this observation is further substantiated by expression of protein rfp, albeit at low levels. these results indicate that by taking into account the underlying kinetic description of the interactions, the optcircuit framework is able to expand upon possible circuit designs by drawing from architectures that may not be valid based on digital logic viewpoint though adequately meet the imposed requirement due to the careful matching of kinetic parameters as often observed in nature.

design of concentration band detector
with this example, we explore whether optcircuit can pinpoint design configurations whose responses are dependent not only on the presence/absence of external inducers but also on their concentrations. we use the concentration band detector example  <cit>  to demonstrate the optcircuit application. briefly, this circuit expresses high levels of a reporter protein only when the concentration of the external inducer  is within a specific range  <cit>   as shown in figure  <dig> 

in line with the design proposed by basu and coworkers, optcircuit first places the reporter protein under the control of a repressible promoter  which is repressed by protein tetr ). subsequently, we use optcircuit to design two circuits, a low threshold detector  and a high threshold detector . the ltd circuit expresses high levels of tetr at low levels of l-arabinose and low levels of tetr at high levels of l-arabinose ). in contrast, the htd circuit is designed to express low levels of tetr at low levels of inducer and high levels of tetr at high levels of l-arabinose ). finally, the ltd and htd circuits are fused together to obtain an inverted bell shaped response for protein tetr.

the best circuit configurations proposed by optcircuit are shown in figure  <dig>  the only difference between the ltd and htd is that while tetr is expressed from the plac promoter in the ltd, it is expressed from pbad promoter in the htd. examination of the circuit behavior reveals that at low levels of l-arabinose, the pbad promoter is not sufficiently activated ensuring low levels of protein laci. this in turn implies that the plac promoter is free to express tetr from the ltd circuit ). as the amount of l-arabinose accumulates in the system, the transcriptional expression from the pbad promoter is enhanced leading to expression of laci from ltd and tetr from htd ). finally, expression of laci from htd turns off expression of tetr from htd. the final optcircuit design enables the expression of protein tetr from plac and pbad promoters, laci from pbad promoter and reporter protein gfp from ptet promoter. the level of protein tetr as a function of level of l-arabinose is shown in figure  <dig>  as shown in figure  <dig>  we find that the circuit response deviates significantly from the desired response implying that by simply reshuffling existing components the desired response is not attainable.

to address this remaining challenge we next explore whether modifying any existing component in the circuit will shift the circuit response closer to the desired response. specifically, the circuit described in the previous paragraph is "fixed" and subsequently starting from the current parameter values as an initial guess we optimize the kinetic parameter values using eq  <dig> . results indicate that a considerable improvement in circuit response is obtained when the transcriptional efficiency of the constitutive promoter expressing protein crp is decreased  <dig> fold. this resulted in a  <dig> % decrease in the objective value . the effect of this parameter modifications are quantified in figure  <dig> demonstrating that optcircuit can be used to pinpoint kinetic parameter modifications improving its functionality.

discussion
in this work, we introduced an optimization-based approach termed optcircuit that  automatically identifies the circuit components from a list and connectivity that brings about the desired functionality;  rectify or redesign an existing  biological circuit and restore functionality by modifying an existing component and/or identifying additional components to append to the circuit. the dynamics that govern the interactions between the elements of the genetic circuit were modeled using deterministic rate equations and the desired circuit response is abstracted as the maximization/minimization of an appropriately constructed objective function. subsequently, an iterative procedure was implemented within our framework to identify an ensemble of circuits that exhibit the desired response. the capabilities of the developed tool were investigated by synthesizing circuits that exhibit a wide array of responses. the genetic toggle switch example demonstrated the ability of the framework to suggest simple or more complex circuit configurations capable of discriminating between inducer molecules. the  <dig> to  <dig> genetic decoder example led to complex circuit designs consisting of as many as  <dig> promoter-transcript pairs that may or may not be identifiable through a digital logic based design procedure. finally, the concentration band detector example illustrated how optcircuit can be used to design not the architecture of the synthetic circuit but also suggest modifications on its kinetic parameters for optimized performance. optcircuit can also be employed in tandem with existing computational methods for fine-tuning circuit performance by providing initial configurations. for example, feng and co-workers developed a global sensitivity analysis based approach to identify the optimal parameter configuration  <cit> . in their approach, they start from a representative circuit configuration and then proceed to identify the optimal parameter set by estimating the sensitivity of the parameter variation on the circuit response.

it is important to emphasize that all the kinetic parameter modifications suggested by optcircuit can be realized using a host of experimental strategies. for example in the construction of repressilator circuit, the authors control the rate of protein degradation by ssra tagging whereby an amino acid sequence is introduced into the proteins which makes them a target for all proteases  <cit> . similarly yokobayashi and co-workers have used directed evolution to restore the performance of an unoptimized circuit  <cit> . specifically, by focusing on the ci gene and its corresponding ribosome binding site, the authors report mutations that potentially reduce the translational efficiency or reduce the ribosome binding affinity. other promising strategies include the approaches developed by lutz and bujard  <cit>  to control the promoter activity and repression for the ptet and plac promoters.

while our results demonstrate the ability of the framework to design circuits that accomplish a wide variety of responses, it is important to emphasize here that the framework does not take into account potential interactions with other biological components and processes present in the cellular environment. further, the deterministic nature of optcircuit may render the circuit deign sensitive to stochastic fluctuations and hence may fail to function properly in wake of noise. this observation assumes further significance in light of multiple modeling studies that have demonstrated the strong influence of noise and stochastic events on circuit performance  <cit> . for example, examination of the decoder circuit response to varying level of input signal reveals that the while the circuit is optimal with respect to connectivity; it is sensitive to changes in the input signal levels . this implies that the circuit behavior can be realized in only a very narrow range of concentrations  <cit>  motivating the need to design circuits that are inherently robust to noise and leakiness of specific components. key features that confer robustness are redundancy, modularity and the ability to decouple perturbations  <cit> . while most of the current literature regarding biological robustness has focused on elucidating the architectural and mechanistic features of a network, much less effort has been devoted to developing quantitative and qualitative criteria for quantifying robustness. efforts in this direction include the works of cherry and adler  <cit>  and tomshine and kaznessis  <cit>  who have proposed that large separation between steady states is likely to render the biological switch immune to stochastic fluctuations. subsequently, h. el-farra et al.  <cit>  employed these performance measures to develop optimization problems to identify parameters that confer robustness. the above observations highlight one potential way of improving the robustness of the circuits using optcircuit. specifically, performance measures such as separation between steady-states could be imposed as appropriate formulated objective functions to systematically synthesize circuits that are likely to be robust to stochastic fluctuations. similarly, enforcing alternative ways of realizing an outcome can incorporate other qualitative metrics such as redundancy. we are currently exploring ways of protecting against component failure and incorporating robustness into the circuits we developed in this manuscript.

another important limitation of the current approach lies in the computational requirements to accomplish a specific circuit design. we find that while optcircuit was able to readily design circuits with relatively simple architecture , the design procedure for more complex responses  entails expensive computational resources. however, our results indicate that the computational burden may be alleviated to a certain extent by exploiting the inherent decomposable structure built into the circuit responses. specifically, both the decoder and band detector circuits were constructed by assembling smaller less complex building blocks . these observations suggest that by carefully identifying key decomposable structures within the desired response, it is possible to overcome this important limitation of the framework.

CONCLUSIONS
in recent years, researchers have deposited several standard and interchangeable biological parts in the registry of standard biological parts , elowitz repressilator ).

currently efforts are underway to specify the functionality of these parts in terms of parameter estimates and behavior. our results and those proposed by other researchers conclusively demonstrate that proper parameter compatibility is essential to ensure funtionality. as the characterization of these parts is moving at a fast pace, the optcircuit framework could serve as a design platform to aid in the construction and finetuning of integrated biological circuits.

