BACKGROUND
the availability of syncres that directly control gene expression in diverse cell types and upon environmental cues would prove invaluable to define signaling pathways, to isolate novel mutants via targeted genetics, and to engineer crop species for improved stress tolerance  <cit> . syncres offer several advantages over native promoters for bioengineering purposes. native promoters often contain multiple cres that can drastically modulate promoter strength in a positive or negative manner depending on the cellular context, reflecting the complexity of transcriptional regulation exerted by trans-acting factors. moreover, the presence of elements mediating tissue- or hormone-specific and/or developmental expression in native promoters may limit their versatility. in contrast, a single or tandem version of a syncre normally reduces the overall transcriptional complexity  <cit> . a synthetic element can have a more defined spatial and temporal expression pattern suitable for driving transgene expression in a more tightly regulated fashion  <cit> . delineation of in vitro cres is laborious and requires extensive functional promoter dissections. in silico analyses are equally difficult. despite sophisticated algorithms developed to search for motifs  <cit> , subsequent in vivo functional validation of such elements is nonetheless required  <cit> .

synthetic dna sequences have been successfully used as an unbiased source of cres in animal cell lines employing a retroviral vector and fluorescent cell sorting  <cit> . although plant cell lines also represent a valuable tool to study gene expression  <cit> , they are often comprised of small cell aggregates thereby preventing sorting of individual cells. also, their thick cell walls preclude the high transformation efficiencies necessary to screen complex syne libraries. in contrast, parsley protoplasts have proven to be highly suitable for expression studies as they retain their responsiveness to environmental stimuli such as uv light and pathogen-derived elicitors  <cit> . nevertheless, transfection efficiencies of plant protoplasts remain several orders of magnitude lower compared to virus-mediated transduction of animal cells.

in this study, we have devised a strategy to overcome some of the limitations associated with plant cell lines that allows us to use complex random syne libraries and to isolate syncres capable of maintaining or enhancing transcriptional activity in planta upon elicitation.

RESULTS
our approach to identify stimulus-responsive cres is based on the pol ii chip technique, targeted to the ser- <dig> phosphorylated pol ii carboxy-terminal domain   <cit> . ser- <dig> phosphorylation occurs at promoter-proximal regions, is directly proportional to transcriptional activity, and correlates with the release of pol ii from the pre-initiation complex to initiate transcription  <cit> . therefore, pol-ii chip enables the capture and enrichment of promoter fragments containing syncres actively supporting transcription within libraries transformed into cells or protoplasts . in this study, parsley protoplasts were stimulated using pep <dig>  a phytophthora sojae-derived peptide that triggers plant immune responses  <cit> .

the synes carried a tandem of two  <dig> randomized nucleotides  separated by a  <dig> base pair spacer sequence . this topology was adopted to link cres often not associated in native promoters. such composites can enhance transcriptional activity  <cit> . the syne cassettes were cloned upstream of the minimal  camv 35s promoter driving the expression of a luciferase reporter gene  to construct a main library of randomized elements . two sub-libraries  each comprised of about 1 ×  <dig> recombinant synthetic elements originating from the main library were transformed into parsley protoplasts and subjected to several subsequent rounds of pol ii chip . the library was screened by monitoring luc transcriptional activity in vivo for several hundreds of samples in parallel using a topcount machine  <cit> . for the pol ii chip we utilized a commercially available monoclonal antibody  recognizing the ser- <dig> phosphorylated ctd of pol ii previously used successfully in arabidopsis  <cit> . we verified the specificity of the antibody for four plant species including parsley .

syncres immunoprecipitated from pep <dig> elicited cells in a first chip round should represent a pool of active synes that are partly enriched for a set of synes mediating pep25-dependent expression with respect to the original library. by comparing the reporter gene activities of cells transformed with the primary library with that of a subsequent library of synes, it was possible to draw conclusions regarding enrichment for syncres .

luciferase activity measurements confirmed that the two sub-libraries contained functional syncres . the fact that the control parsley protoplasts initially showed overall higher luc transcriptional activity following the first chip round compared to the pep25-induced cells  is consistent with previous observations that pep <dig> represses growth and overall metabolism of parsley cells during activation of selective defense responses  <cit> . formaldehyde cross-linking was performed 3 hours post pep <dig> treatment of the cells. the dna fragments harboring the enriched set of synes of the first chip  were re-cloned and subjected to a second chip  . hence, as expected, subsequent rounds of chip resulted in an enrichment of syncres within the pool of immunopecipitated synes mediating expression and/or responsiveness to pep <dig> .

overall, eight samples were subjected to deep sequencing; the main library , two sub-libraries  and six samples at different rounds of chip . barcoding was employed to discriminate between samples . a bioinformatics pipeline was developed for sequence analysis data and to identify candidate responsive syncres . reads were filtered using the designed sequence pattern in order to recognize and exclude sequencing errors . a non-redundant set of reads was extracted for each sample and showed that the libraries  contain >90% unique sequences thereby confirming their random synthetic oligonucleotide compositions . in contrast, a drastic reduction of unique sequences was observed in the other samples . this reduction in complexity is consistent with enrichment for selective synes during chip.

the number  of total sequences, the number of filtered sequences, the non-redundant sequence data set and the clustering sequence data obtained for the main-  and the two sub-libraries , and following two rounds  or three rounds  of chromatin immunoprecipitation for the indicated samples. asterisk denotes the number of filtered sequences that exactly matched the experimentally designed sequence pattern.

to further reduce complexity, we performed a clustering analysis using the program freclu  <cit> . this analysis revealed that the library samples consisted of a large number of individual sequences, which could not be clustered. in contrast, the chip samples showed clustering above 40% , revealing an enrichment of similar sequences indicative of syne selection during the chip procedure. a sequence with the highest frequency within a cluster identified the representative syne. by cluster comparisons we identified common representative synes among chip samples associated with the same enrichment stage . the samples derived from the third round of chip correlated with a reduction in the number of common clusters . one aspect of the selection system  that would support a diversified enrichment is represented by the relatively low transformation efficiency of parsley protoplasts  compared with the number of synes. thus, each protoplast transformation with ≈ 1× <dig> synthetic elements should be viewed as a nearly independent experiment, and parallel chip experiments using the same sub-library will not necessarily isolate a highly overlapping set of synes. in addition, exhaustive deep sequencing of the samples would be required to fully reveal the extent of sequence overlap.

to uncover dna motifs within the chromatin immunoprecipitated synes we applied different approaches. the frequencies of all possible sub-sequences  of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> bases long were calculated in each immunoprecipitated sample and compared to their frequencies in the sub-library from which the sample originated. the sub-sequence frequencies in the sub-library represented a randomized control set. a high frequency ratio between the sample and the sub-library for a particular sub-sequence indicated its potential functional importance within the synes, making it a candidate motif for further validation . additionally, we analyzed the correlation of left and right 12 n sequence combinations. we found that individual 12 n-left or 12 n-right sequences of the synthetic element can be coupled to diverse 12 n-right or 12 n-left sequences, respectively. this could be due to the ability of a left- or right 12 n to support transcription in combination with different highly represented motifs embedded within the combined 12 n respective sequences. for each left and right 12 n sequence the corresponding coupled 12 n sequences were extracted and analyzed using the motif discovery tool meme  <cit>  . finally, the synes were analyzed in silico for the presence or absence of known plant dna binding motifs by searching  the place database  <cit> . these analyses revealed that the isolated synes contained bonafide functional dna motifs  known to mediate transcriptional responses upon phytopathogen challenge  <cit> . however, many synes had no counterparts in the database suggesting that they were novel .

several putative pep25-responsive syncres  were selected for functional validation in parsley protoplasts and in stably transformed arabidopsis plants. all tested synes supported transient reporter gene activity at a higher level compared to the empty vector control in the protoplasts but with varying strength. eleven synes showed enhanced transcriptional activity upon pep <dig> treatment . other frequently occurring synes  showed higher transcriptional activity under non-inducing conditions indicating that they contain elements that negatively affect pep25-dependent expression . the limited number of individual tested pep <dig> responsive elements enhanced expression by  <dig>  to  <dig>  fold. although quite moderate, these results are consistent with previous reports in the animal field using defined cells or cell lines and similar plasmid reporter vectors  <cit> . overall the sum of synes mediating pep <dig> repression in the initial library may have been larger than those allowing activation. activation of plant immune responses by elicitors such as pep <dig> or flg <dig> have been shown to negatively impact on the expression of genes involved e.g. in photosynthesis, plant growth, dna replication, auxin signaling, uv-b stress signaling and anthocyanin biosynthesis  <cit> . dna elements known to mediate such responses were also identified in our syne collection. additionally, promoter-proximal pausing of rna polymerase ii, a recently revealed common feature in metazoans but not yet investigated in plants, may also have allowed capture of non-responsive synes due to pol ii recruitment  <cit> . furthermore, several of the selected putative syncres may actually be composites containing distinct cres that exert partly contrasting functions, constitutive/repressible or inducible, embedded within the two 12 n sites. to test this hypothesis, two additional versions of syne <dig> to syne <dig> were constructed to uncouple the 12 n-left  from the 12 n-right  sequence . transcriptional activities of these versions revealed that three, syne-2r, syne-4r, and syne-11r, mediated inducibility upon pep <dig> treatment in the protoplasts . syne-4r showed the highest level of pep <dig> inducibility . increasing the copy number of cres can enhance inducible gene expression  <cit> . thus, tandem versions of syne- <dig>  syne- <dig> and syne- <dig> were generated and tested in the transient protoplast assay. syne- <dig> in diverse forward and reverse tandem combinations allowed a further increase in pep <dig> inducibility , whereas no further increase was observed with tandem versions of syne- <dig> and syne- <dig> .

for in planta validation we transformed arabidopsis to generate lines harboring syncre reporter constructs that were pep <dig> responsive in the transient assay or that formerly showed little or no inducibility . a previous study on semi-synthetic cres has shown that the transcriptional regulation exerted in planta by such elements was tighter compared to the protoplast system  <cit> . several independent transgenic lines were selected for each syncre construct and the transgene copy number determined . two-week old seedlings of t <dig> generation lines were treated with flg <dig>  a bioactive  <dig> amino acid peptide from bacterial flagellin  <cit> . as demonstrated in figure  <dig> flg22-dependent luciferase activity was detected in plantlets harboring selected syncre constructs. similarly, syncre-mediated expression of the luciferase reporter construct was observed in five-week old t <dig> transgenic arabidopsis lines challenged with spores of the oomycete hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis . temporal activation of the luc reporter gene upon h. arabidopsidis challenge could clearly be observed as documented by the additional movie files . in total four tested syncres were capable of supporting transcriptional activity mediated by flg <dig> and upon pathogen infection illustrating that our approach has succeeded in identifying such elements. the remaining lines showed no luc activity upon stimulation. this may in part be due to co-suppression of the transgene in multi-copy lines, position effects at specific chromosomal sites, or non-responsiveness of such elements in leaf tissue, a situation reminiscent of the strong expression bias observed for some elements between different human cell lines  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our ability to identify functional syncres in plant cells illustrates the power of this method considering the numerous inherent difficulties associated with using plant material for such studies as compared to well-established animal systems. this methodology should reveal both previously unrecognized native dna elements mediating transcriptional responses as well as synthetic elements whose strength and specificity may be highly suited to design tunable promoters for biotechnological approaches and for the development of artificial genetic systems employing diverse tissues and cell types. a key aspect of the described approach is that it can be applied to any transformable eukaryotic system to isolate and identify syncres active in transcription and/or responses to various environmental cues.

