BACKGROUND
malaria is a mosquito-borne parasitic disease, which causes nearly  <dig>  deaths every year, mainly in children under  <dig> years of age in sub-saharan africa  <cit> . most deaths are attributed to the most virulent human malaria parasite, plasmodium falciparum. current disease control measures rely on reducing exposure to the mosquito vector or treatment of clinical malaria cases with antimalarial drugs that target the disease causing blood-stage trophozoite; most of these act against the parasite’s food vacuole or interfere with pyrimidine synthesis of maturing trophozoites . of major concern is the emerging development of drug resistance to the highly effective artemisinin family of compounds in southeast asia . the prospect of widespread resistance to the most effective antimalarials becoming entrenched has led to the implementation of an emergency response plan by the world health organization  to prevent the spread of resistance and the inevitable increase in childhood mortality that would result  <cit> . this developing emergency highlights the urgent need for new antimalarials with novel mechanisms of action for use in combination with artemisinins, or to replace these drugs in the future.

invasion of blood-stage merozoites into host cells has been proposed as a potential target for antimalarial chemotherapy . invasion of the extracellular merozoite into a new host erythrocyte  is a complex process requiring the coordinated interaction of unique parasite ligands, signaling pathways, and a form of gliding motility powered by an actomyosin motor. the multiple accessible targets make this essential stage of the lifecycle an attractive drug target. in addition, inhibition of merozoite invasion into the erythrocyte would lead to instant disruption of the parasite lifecycle and prevent sequestration, dormancy and commitment to the mosquito-transmissible gametocyte stage, which have been reported to occur after drug treatment with current first-line antimalarials . application of antimalarial drugs that target invasion has the potential to result in quicker resolution of clinical disease if used in combination with antimalarials that act at other developmental stages.

few compounds have been directly tested for ability to inhibit p. falciparum merozoite invasion, partly through lack of tractable invasion inhibition assays. the ability to assess the invasion inhibitory potential of compounds and their biological activity in vitro has been greatly enhanced with the development of a robust and efficient merozoite purification protocol and techniques to directly measure invasion inhibition , allowing the accurate and rapid assessment of a compounds invasion inhibitory potential. while some invasion inhibitory compounds  have been reported, to date no drug used clinically to treat malaria has been shown to have inhibitory activity against merozoite invasion  <cit> . in this study, we have identified clinically relevant macrolide antibiotics and related compounds, exemplified by azithromycin, as rapid inhibitors of p. falciparum and p. berghei merozoite invasion in vitro. this represents the first time that a drug or drug class that has clinical applications against malaria has been demonstrated to inhibit parasite invasion of the red blood cell.

antibiotics such as azithromycin and clindamycin  have been proposed as potential partner drugs for artemisinin combination therapies owing to their extremely long half-life and good safety profile in vivo . both azithromycin and clindamycin inhibit apicoplast ribosomal protein synthesis of asexual blood-stage parasites at nanomolar  concentrations by binding to the apicoplast ribosomal 50s subunit and blocking protein exit from the ribosome . in vitro experiments at clinically relevant concentrations show that these antibiotics have a ‘delayed death’ drug response. treated parasites grow normally during the first lifecycle under treatment. only during the second post-treatment cycle  are drug effects observed. parasite death at this stage is thought to result from the inheritance of a defective apicoplast that is unable to synthesize isoprenoid precursors required for development . this ‘delayed death’ response currently limits the usefulness of azithromycin and clindamycin for the treatment of clinical disease as stand-alone drugs, and successful combinations with other antimalarials remain elusive  <cit> .

in this study, we aimed to identify existing, and novel, compounds with invasion inhibitory activity that have the potential for development as effective antimalarials. we demonstrate that the antibiotic azithromycin can specifically inhibit merozoite invasion. related macrolide antibiotics were also found to inhibit invasion, and the ic <dig> of invasion inhibitory activity could be lowered through modification. these results provide the basis for a novel strategy of antimalarial drug development by advancing compounds that have dual mechanisms of action. given the established safety and low cost of macrolides in widespread clinical use, development of macrolides as antimalarials with dual modalities against merozoite invasion and protein translation in the apicoplast is a promising strategy to counter the rapid emergence of drug resistance.

RESULTS
azithromycin inhibits merozoite invasion
application of the merozoite purification method of boyle et al.  <cit>  identified the macrolide antibiotic azithromycin as a candidate inhibitor of p. falciparum asexual blood-stage merozoite invasion of the host erythrocyte . initial screens indicated that the invasion inhibitory ic <dig> differed between azithromycin prepared in ethanol  or dmso , suggesting that choice of vehicle can impact azithromycin potency in vitro. comparative screens of azithromycin potency over different treatment times demonstrated that the ic <dig> of merozoite invasion assays  were surprisingly similar to the in cycle  and  <dig> cycle  assays  invasion  <dig> μm; in cycle  <dig> μm;  <dig> cycle  <dig> μm, − invasion  <dig> μm ; in cycle  <dig> μm;  <dig> cycle assay  <dig> μm, fig. 3a, table 1). these results suggest that azithromycin can act independently against both merozoite invasion and intracellular parasite growth within one cycle of treatment in vitro.fig.  <dig> drug treatment strategies used in this study. the lifecycle stage of drug treatment is represented in the first box for each panel and the stage of parasitaemia measurements are highlighted by red boxes with yellow background.  merozoite; successful invasion of drug-treated purified merozoites was measured at ring-stage immediately after addition of erythrocytes and merozoite invasion  or after washing out the drug  and growing parasites through to late trophozoite stage .  in cycle; early ring-stage parasites  were drug-treated and the resulting growth inhibition was assessed at late trophozoite stage .   <dig> cycle; early ring-stage parasites  were drug-treated and the resulting growth inhibition was assessed  <dig> hours later, after  <dig> cycle of reinvasion, at late trophozoite stage. these assays are a longer duration, but nonetheless equivalent in terms of including  <dig> cycle of reinvasion and development, to  <dig> cycle assays reported in other studies .   <dig> cycle ; early ring-stage parasites  were drug-treated and the drug-treated parasites were grown for  <dig> hours prior to washing out the drug in fresh media . growth inhibition was assessed approximately  <dig> hours later after a second cycle of reinvasion .  live filming; mature schizont-stage parasites were incubated with azithromycin and the success of merozoite invasion was recorded and quantified by live filming  . white box-drug treatment; yellow box-analysis of parasitaemia; green dashed line-drug washout

fig.  <dig> structure of macrolide antibiotics.  structure of the 15-membered macrolide, azithromycin, and its modified analogues .  structure of the 14-membered macrolide, erythromycin a, and its modified analogues.  structure of the 16-membered macrolide, spiramycin.  structure of the non-macrolide antibiotic, clindamycin

fig.  <dig> azithromycin inhibits p. falciparum merozoite invasion.  the potency of azithromycin in ethanol or dmso as vehicle was compared for invasion inhibition  and  <dig> cycle growth inhibition assays . the invasion inhibitory ic <dig> of azithromycin prepared in ethanol  was similar to that for growth inhibition assays . the invasion inhibitory activity of azithromycin in dmso  was 5-fold higher than  <dig> cycle growth assays .  inhibition profiles for pretreated erythrocytes , merozoite treatment  and rings treated for < <dig> hour  were identical between azithromycin  and the invasion inhibitor heparin .  increasing the concentration of azithromycin  to  <dig> × ic <dig>  did not result in substantial inhibition of invasion into pretreated cells compared to treatment of merozoites.  flow cytometry and microscopy assessments confirmed that azithromycin  and heparin, but not the trophozoite-targeting antimalarial halofantrine   <cit> ), inhibit merozoite invasion and establishment of ring stages in erythrocytes. representative  flow cytometry plots  and  microscopy thin smears  show absence of ring-stage parasites for azithromycin and heparin compared to non-invasion inhibitory controls . experiments represent the mean and sem of three or more experiments. significance was tested using an unpaired t-test 

1g

avehicle was ethanol; bvehicle was dimethyl sulfoxide ; cfrom bukvic et al.  <cit> ; dfrom peric et al.  <cit> ; efrom hutinec et al.  <cit> ; ffrom goodman et al.  <cit> . all ic50s are for the d10-pfphg line used throughout this study, with the exception of gwhich were undertaken with the d <dig> azithromycin-resistant line  made as per goodman et al.  <cit> . all assays were measured by flow cytometry, with the exception of hwhich were measured by hypoxanthine uptake assays. desclad, descladinosyl; desglycan, descladinosyl and desosaminyl; na, not applicable; nd, not done



to confirm that azithromycin was inhibiting merozoite invasion directly in our assays and was not acting downstream of invasion during intracellular parasite growth, the effect of exposure of merozoites or early ring-stage parasites to the drug was examined; azithromycin was washed out of the cultures within  <dig> hour and parasitaemia assessed by flow cytometry  <dig> hours post-assay setup for all treatments . treatment of merozoites  and early ring stages for less than  <dig> hour  with azithromycin  and the invasion inhibitory control compound, heparin, was significantly more inhibitory to parasite growth than the same treatment of early ring stages at the time-point of  <dig> minutes post-invasion ; azithromycin p < <dig> ; heparin p < <dig> ). additionally, pretreatment of erythrocytes, followed by washout of drug, had little or no inhibitory effect on invasion . this indicated that exposure of merozoites, but not very early ring stages or uninfected erythrocytes, was inhibitory to parasite growth.

in order to confirm that the inhibitory activity was against purified merozoites and not the uninfected erythrocyte prior to merozoite invasion, erythrocytes were pretreated with azithromycin at a  <dig> × ic80mero ) prior to washing and addition of merozoites. there was minimal loss of invasion into erythrocytes pretreated with a  <dig> × ic80mero concentration of azithromycin for  <dig> hour relative to control . in contrast, merozoites treated for  <dig> minutes with the same concentration of azithromycin were unable to establish erythrocyte infections , supporting the conclusion that it is the merozoite and its interaction with the erythrocyte, and not the erythrocyte itself, that is the target of inhibition.

next we confirmed that azithromycin was inhibiting merozoite invasion directly, rather than acting on growth downstream of invasion, through the complementary methods of microscopy and flow cytometric quantification of ring-stage parasites at the time-point of  <dig> hour post-invasion. there was an almost complete loss of ring-stage parasites seen by both microscopy and flow cytometry for azithromycin , confirming that azithromycin is indeed inhibitory to merozoite invasion . the merozoite invasion inhibitory activity of azithromycin was unaffected by limiting drug exposure to < <dig> seconds prior to erythrocyte addition, by the presence of serum in the culture medium or the presence of haemazoin crystals  in the invasion assay. these results demonstrate that azithromycin is a rapid inhibitor of merozoite invasion in vitro.

azithromycin inhibits merozoite invasion prior to tight junction formation
live cell imaging of invading plasmodium merozoites indicates that erythrocyte invasion is a multi-step process that typically takes less than  <dig> seconds to complete, after contact occurs between the merozoite and the erythrocyte, in primate species and slightly longer in rodent species . after contacting its target erythrocyte, the merozoite reorients its apical end onto the erythrocyte surface in a process that deforms the erythrocyte. this reorientation lasts about  <dig> seconds and is followed by the formation of a ring-like region of close and irreversible contact, called the tight  junction, between the merozoite apex and the erythrocyte. the merozoite enters the host cell through this junction using the power of its actin-myosin motor. after invasion, the erythrocyte surface reseals and the merozoite differentiates into a ring-stage parasite over several minutes  <cit> . we used live cell imaging to identify invasion step that are inhibited by azithromycin . late schizont-stage parasites were allowed to rupture in the presence of  <dig> and  <dig> μm azithromycin , which represent  <dig> × ic <dig> and  <dig>  × ic <dig> of merozoite invasion inhibition concentrations, respectively. these slightly higher drug concentrations were used to clearly define the inhibitory phenotype. these concentrations were not found to inhibit schizont rupture. five schizont ruptures were observed for each treatment. in the untreated control,  <dig> merozoites were observed to contact erythrocytes. after a contact period ranging from a few seconds to  <dig> minutes,  <dig> % of the merozoites released or detached. a further  <dig> % of the merozoites progressed to the erythrocyte deformation stage before releasing over a few minutes, and the remaining  <dig> % advanced to complete invasion . azithromycin treatment at  <dig> μm changed this profile with fewer merozoites invading  and a greater proportion failing to progress beyond the initial contact and deformation stages . at  <dig> μm there was a significant and dramatic change in the invasion profile compared to the untreated control and azithromycin treatment at  <dig> μm with no merozoites invading and most releasing after initial contact . the observation that merozoites failed to make sustained contact with erythrocytes in the presence of azithromycin indicates that azithromycin acts early in invasion to prevent tight junction formation  <cit> . the periods of time that each of the invasion steps took to occur was also measured, but in nearly all cases showed no significant difference between the treatments. representative video files showing the effects of azithromycin are shown in additional file 1: video s <dig> and additional file 2: video s <dig> fig.  <dig> azithromycin inhibits the early steps of invasion. video microscopy of merozoite invasion of erythrocytes was performed in the presence of  <dig> and  <dig> μm azithromycin  compared to a no drug control . five schizont ruptures were observed for each treatment. of the merozoites that contacted erythrocytes, some were observed to deform erythrocytes and then successfully invade their host cells , while others did not progress beyond initial attachment  or progressed to deformation but did not invade . from several rupturing schizonts, the number of merozoites exhibiting each of these steps was counted for each drug treatment and the percentages are shown along with the number of events in the column boxes. a chi-squared test was performed to indicate significant differences at the following levels 



macrolides related to azithromycin also inhibit merozoite invasion
after identifying that azithromycin was inhibitory to merozoite invasion, we examined whether related drugs with a history of clinical use as antibiotics also had this property. macrolides with a 14-membered macrolactone ring  and 16-membered ring  were tested using the same methods as azithromycin . determination of the inhibitory concentration  indicated that azithromycin  had >8-fold lower ic <dig> for merozoite invasion when compared to roxithromycin  and spiramycin , while erythromycin  was 42-fold less potent than azithromycin. of interest was the very poor invasion inhibitory activity of dirithromycin , which was 52-fold less potent than azithromycin, even though the ic <dig> values determined using  <dig> cycle growth assays were very similar . invasion inhibition was confirmed by measurement of ring-stage parasites  <dig> hour after invasion at  <dig> × ic80mero for erythromycin a, roxithromycin and spiramycin. the lack of inhibitory activity when erythrocytes were pretreated with drug  further confirmed specific inhibition of merozoite invasion .fig.  <dig> related macrolides inhibit merozoite invasion. the 14-membered macrolides  erythromycin a ,  roxithromycin ,  dirithromycin  and  the 16-membered macrolide spiramycin  had variable levels of invasion inhibitory activity  and a higher ic <dig> than that achieved for  <dig> cycle assays .  the invasion inhibitory activity of erythromycin a, roxithromycin and spiramycin at an ic <dig> concentration was confirmed by flow cytometry assessment of ring stages with minimal inhibition evident for pretreated erythrocytes. all experiments represent the mean and sem of three or more experiments. significance of differences was compared using an unpaired t-test 



merozoite invasion inhibition is independent of macrolide activity against apicoplast ribosomes
since macrolide antibiotics are known to target the 50s ribosomal subunit of the apicoplast to inhibit subsequent intra-erythrocytic development, we tested the invasion inhibitory activity of clindamycin, which has a similar mechanism of action and exhibits overlapping binding of the 50s ribosomal subunit of the apicoplast to azithromycin  <cit>  . clindamycin had very weak invasion inhibitory activity; there was evidence for invasion inhibitory activity with a 74-fold higher ic <dig> observed for clindamycin  than seen for azithromycin . however, pre-treatment of erythrocytes with  <dig>  μm of clindamycin  resulted in a  <dig> % reduction in merozoite invasion relative to untreated controls and there was evidence of erythrocyte lysis using these high levels of clindamycin . this suggests that at such high concentrations clindamycin is having a largely non-specific effect on merozoite invasion through damaging erythrocytes.fig.  <dig> the mechanism of invasion inhibition is unlikely to target the apicoplast ribosome.  clindamycin targets the same subunit of the apicoplast ribosome but was found to have a much higher ic <dig> for apparent merozoite invasion inhibition . there was evidence of non-specific inhibition of invasion as pretreatment of erythrocytes with clindamycin gave significant inhibition, which was not seen for azithromycin  .  the d10-azrr line showed up to a 57-fold higher tolerance of azithromycin in  <dig> cycle  apicoplast-targeting drug inhibition assays compared to d <dig> parental line. in contrast, the ic <dig> for purified merozoite invasion inhibitory activity differed by less than  <dig> -fold between the d10-azrr line and the d10-pfphg line for  azithromycin ,  erythromycin a  and  clindamycin . data represent the mean of two or more experiments in at least duplicate. d10-azrr, d <dig> azithromycin-resistant



we tested further whether apicoplast ribosomal protein translation was the target of the inhibitory activity at the merozoite stage by comparison of the invasion inhibitory activity of azithromycin, erythromycin and clindamycin between the d10-pfphg  parasite used throughout this study and an azithromycin-resistant d <dig> derivative  selected for reduced sensitivity to both azithromycin and erythromycin in  <dig> cycle  assays. sequencing of apicoplast ribosome genes revealed a g91d mutation in the rpl <dig> gene product, corresponding to the g112d mutation in chlamydomonas reinhardtii, known to confer resistance to erythromycin  <cit> . this mutation is associated with a 57-fold loss of sensitivity to azithromycin over  <dig> cycles of parasite growth . comparison of the ic50mero  suggested that there was very little difference in merozoite invasion inhibitory activity between the resistant versus sensitive lines for azithromycin , erythromycin  or clindamycin . together, these data suggest that the invasion inhibitory activity of azithromycin is largely independent of apicoplast ribosomal protein synthesis, consistent with the current view that the apicoplast does not play a role in invasion.

modification of macrolides enhances invasion inhibitory activity
we tested a panel of macrolide analogues to determine whether the ic <dig> of merozoite invasion inhibition could be reduced. an erythromycin a l-megosamine sugar derivative  that has a lower ic <dig> in  <dig> cycle growth inhibition assays  <cit>  was tested and found to reduce the ic <dig> of merozoite invasion inhibition  32-fold compared to the parent compound . furthermore, addition of an oxime group  to erythromycin a  lowered the invasion inhibitory ic <dig>  almost 3-fold compared to erythromycin a. the increased potency of meg-erythromycin and erythromycin oxime compared to the parent drug indicates that various modifications to macrolides can lead to more potent invasion inhibitory activity.fig.  <dig> macrolide modification lowers invasion inhibitory ic <dig>  but not apicoplast-targeting ‘delayed death’ inhibition.  addition of an l-megosamine sugar  <cit>  to form meg-erythromycin  or an oxime group  lowered the invasion inhibitory ic <dig> activity compared to the parent drug erythromycin a .  screening of an azithromycin analogue panel identified three compounds  with up to 5-fold lower invasion inhibitory ic <dig> compared to the parent azithromycin .  treatment of parasites during in cycle ,  <dig> cycle  and  <dig> cycle  assays with azithromycin  and analogues , indicated that the ic <dig> of  <dig> cycle  inhibition was greatly reduced for the analogues compared to azithromycin. in contrast, the ic <dig> of the delayed death phenotype was almost identical for azithromycin and its analogues. d) video microscopy of merozoite invasion was performed in the presence of a no drug control ,  <dig> μm of analogue 12e  and azithromycin . merozoites that contacted the erythrocyte and i) invaded , ii) deformed but did not invade , or iii) released without deforming or invading  were tallied and analyzed as per fig.  <dig>   removal of the cladinosyl sugar  from azithromycin increased the invasion inhibitory ic <dig> compared to azithromycin . the additional removal of the desosaminyl sugar  resulted in loss of invasion inhibitory activity compared to azithromycin. data represent the mean and sem of three or more experiments 



next we obtained a small panel of azithromycin analogues  from glaxosmithkline   with reported ic <dig> values lower than azithromycin in a  <dig> hour growth inhibition assay . in our studies, we found that azithromycin dissolved in dmso was less effective so the following comparisons use the ic <dig> values for both azithromycin and the azithromycin analogues with dmso as the solubilization vehicle. two compounds  had a substantially lower ic <dig> for merozoite invasion inhibition than azithromycin ; fig. 7b; table 1; fig. 2a), indicating that azithromycin can also be modified to lower its invasion inhibitory activity in vitro.

when early ring-stage parasites were treated with the compounds 1j and 12e for  <dig> hours  and  <dig> hours  the ic <dig> of the modified analogues was between 10- and 14-fold lower than that of azithromycin . in contrast, parasites treated for  <dig> hours  showed a small increase in the potency of azithromycin  over 1j  and 12e  for the ‘delayed death’ inhibition typical of apicoplast ribosome targeting . this would suggest that the apicoplast ribosome targeting is not affected by the modifications of 1j and 12e, and is a further indication that invasion inhibition or parasite growth inhibition over  <dig> cycle of parasite growth or less is not a result of inhibition of apicoplast ribosome activity. further, the ability of azithromycin and its analogues to inhibit intracellular parasite growth during in cycle assays  at ic <dig> values lower than the invasion inhibition assays suggests that the compounds can inhibit parasite growth independent of merozoite invasion.

in order to assess whether the invasion inhibitory phenotype of a more potent analogue was similar to our observations for azithromycin in ethanol , live filming of merozoite invasion in the presence of analogue 12e was examined using live video microscopy. as was observed in fig.  <dig>  for the no drug treatment control  <dig> % of merozoites that contacted an erythrocyte invaded,  <dig> % deformed but failed to invade the erythrocyte after contacting and  <dig> % released the erythrocyte membrane without invading or deforming the erythrocyte . in contrast, addition of 12e at  <dig> μm  reduced invasion to only  <dig> % of total contact events, reduced contacts leading to erythrocyte deformation to  <dig> % of contact events and increased the number of merozoites releasing without invading or deforming the erythrocyte to  <dig> % of all contact events, resulting in failure to invade for  <dig> % of all contact events. these results support the live filming observations for azithromycin in ethanol  and again indicate that azithromycin acts early in the invasion process and inhibits tight junction formation. we compared the invasion phenotype of 12e to that of azithromycin in dmso at an equal concentration . as expected, at the same concentration the less potent parent azithromycin was less inhibitory to invasion  and as a result had fewer failed invasion events . together, these findings establish a proof-of-concept that macrolides with more potent invasion inhibitory activity can be developed through chemical modification and that the dual activities of invasion inhibition and other inhibitory activities can be developed in single compounds and are not mutually exclusive.

identification of structural groups on azithromycin important for invasion inhibitory activity
we sought to identify structural groups of azithromycin that were most important for invasion inhibitory activity by determining the effect of removing one or both of the glycosylated groups. the two glycan groups of azithromycin, in particular the desosamine group, have been identified as critical to proper drug binding and inhibition of bacterial ribosome translation  <cit> . removal of the cladinosyl group  for both azithromycin and erythromycin a led to an increase of the drugs ic <dig> for both in cycle  and  <dig> cycle  drug assays . similarly, removal of the cladinosyl group from azithromycin  led to 5-fold reduction in the invasion inhibitory activity of the compound compared to azithromycin .

we were further able to remove both the cladinosyl and desosamine groups from azithromycin , which led to a dramatic loss of invasion inhibitory activity and an increase in the ic <dig> beyond the limits of the assay . comparison of these compounds indicates that the cladinosyl group has a role in lowering the ic <dig> of invasion inhibition for azithromycin, but the presence of both the cladinosyl and desosamine groups is critical for azithromycin’s invasion inhibitory activity. while these data suggest that the desosamine group plays the critical role during invasion inhibition, technical limitations prevented the selective removal of the desosamine group.

azithromycin inhibits p. berghei merozoite and toxoplasma gondii tachyzoite invasion, but not p. berghei sporozoite invasion
to test whether azithromycin could inhibit invasion of p. berghei, widely used as a murine model of malaria, we purified merozoites  <cit>  and allowed invasion to proceed in the presence of azithromycin. azithromycin inhibited merozoite invasion of p. berghei at very similar concentrations to that seen for p. falciparum, with no evidence of inhibition for parallel treatments of newly invaded rings .fig.  <dig> azithromycin inhibits p. berghei merozoite and toxoplasma gondii tachyzoite, but not sporozoite, invasion of host cells.  azithromycin inhibited purified p. berghei merozoite invasion at similar concentrations compared to p. falciparum.  treatment of p. berghei-infected erythrocytes immediately after invasion with azithromycin for  <dig> minutes did not result in a loss of late-stage parasites detected by flow cytometry, confirming that azithromycin inhibited invasion and not parasite growth.  azithromycin was found to have a small but significant effect on the number of p. berghei sporozoites that had entered or traversed host cells. however, using a more specific assay that measures successfully invaded hepatocytes containing a developing parasite , there was no significant inhibition in sporozoites that had invaded and formed a parasitophorous vacuole.  azithromycin treatment of t. gondii tachyzoites at concentrations of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> μm resulted in a dose-dependent inhibition of host cell invasion. the invasion inhibitory control cytochalasin d  was a considerably more potent inhibitor of tachyzoite invasion, while erythromycin a, as was found for p. falciparum, showed no evidence of invasion inhibitory activity at concentrations up to  <dig> μm.  azithromycin analogue 12e  was significantly more inhibitory to toxoplasma tachyzoite invasion than azithromycin  even when tested at a 6-fold lower concentration. data represent the mean and sem of three or more experiments, significance of differences was tested using an unpaired t-test 



since azithromycin was found to be an effective inhibitor of merozoite invasion, we tested whether this drug could also inhibit invasion of p. berghei sporozoites into liver cells in vitro. the effects of azithromycin on p. berghei in vitro liver-stage infections following invasion have been previously reported to be limited to retardation of apicoplast development with no effect on overall parasite growth   <cit> ; the effect of azithromycin on sporozoite invasion has not directly been examined. initially, we assayed the ability of p. berghei sporozoites to enter liver cells in vitro using an established assay. gfp-expressing sporozoites were allowed to settle on and invade hepg <dig> cells. after free sporozoites were removed by washing, cells were fixed and then antibody-labeled without cell permeabilization, thereby preventing labeling of sporozoites that are inside host cells. we then compared the number of labeled cells  to the total number of cells  to determine invasion efficiency. there was a statistically significant, but modest, effect indicating that azithromycin may inhibit sporozoite invasion of hepatocytes at concentrations up to  <dig> μm azithromycin ; fig. 8c). however, this assay is unable to robustly distinguish between sporozoites traversing liver cells from those establishing an infection. therefore, to assess the impact of azithromycin treatment on the establishment of successful infection of liver cells, we repeated the treatment and then allowed any successfully invaded sporozoites to develop for  <dig> hours; this is a point at which parasites developing within the liver cell can be distinguished from any remaining sporozoites that have not established infection. the number of parasites successfully establishing an infection and forming a vacuole at  <dig> hours did not differ between azithromycin-treated and control  cultures. this suggests that while there was some evidence of reduced sporozoite invasion of liver cells, this did not result in measurably reduced hepatocyte infections by p. berghei sporozoites .

we next explored whether azithromycin could inhibit invasion of the related apicomplexan parasite, toxoplasma gondii, which has orthologues of many plasmodium invasion proteins and a similar invasion process  <cit> . there was a significant dose-dependent inhibition of tachyzoite invasion at azithromycin concentrations  between  <dig> μm and  <dig> μm . azithromycin inhibited  <dig> % of tachyzoite invasions at the highest concentration tested  compared to  <dig> % inhibition for the invasion inhibitory control cytochalasin d   <cit>  and the invasion inhibitory ic <dig> of azithromycin against p. falciparum merozoite , clearly indicating that azithromycin is a less potent inhibitor of t. gondii invasion in vitro. importantly, there was no evidence of tachyzoite invasion inhibition in the presence of  <dig> μm erythromycin a, reflecting the results of the p. falciparum studies which showed that erythromycin a is a poor inhibitor of merozoite invasion compared to azithromycin. we next explored whether the azithromycin analogue 12e, which was found to be a more potent inhibitor of p. falciparum merozoite invasion than azithromycin , had improved tachyzoite invasion inhibitory activity compared to azithromycin. analogue 12e  was found to be a consistently more potent inhibitor of t. gondii tachyzoite invasion  than much higher concentrations of azithromycin , suggesting that analogues of azithromycin could be developed to have much greater potency against t. gondii host cell invasion than the parent compound. these data suggest that azithromycin and analogues are effective inhibitors of plasmodium spp. merozoite and t. gondii tachyzoite invasion, raising the possibility that azithromycin may target proteins or events conserved between organisms. however, there are clearly differences in drug potency between parasites hence drugs will have to be optimized to target invasion for each organism.

discussion
successful control and treatment strategies for malaria currently rely on the availability of effective antimalarial drugs. the emergence of resistance to the critically important artemisinin family of drugs  highlights the need for new drugs to partner and replace current therapies, and new drug development strategies. drugs that target merozoite invasion have been proposed as a novel strategy for antimalarial development . we have applied robust methods for the purification of viable p. falciparum merozoites and invasion assays  <cit>  to screen for inhibitors of merozoite invasion. the antibiotic azithromycin and related compounds were identified as rapid inhibitors of p. falciparum merozoite invasion into erythrocytes. this is the first time that an antimalarial in clinical use has been linked to inhibition of merozoite invasion in vitro, and the first clear identification of antimalarial compounds with dual mechanisms of action against merozoite invasion and intra-erythrocytic parasite development. live video microscopy revealed that azithromycin acts to prevent the essential step of tight junction formation during invasion. furthermore, the inhibitory activity of azithromycin was largely ablated by selective removal of glycan groups, and we identified modified macrolides with increased potency against merozoite invasion.

azithromycin is a macrolide antibiotic with a 15-membered macrolactone ring that is well tolerated and safe for clinical use by children and pregnant women  <cit> . azithromycin and related macrolides are known to inhibit ribosomal protein synthesis in the asexual-stage parasite apicoplast by binding to the 50s subunit of the apicoplast  ribosomal complex  <cit> . typically, clinical concentrations of azithromycin based on current dosing regimens result in ‘delayed death’ of the parasite in in vitro assays. the progeny of azithromycin-treated parasites fail to form functional apicoplasts in the daughter merozoites, thereby causing the death of the second generation of parasites after treatment  <cit> . azithromycin has been considered a candidate for inclusion in artemisinin combination therapies  and for the prevention of malaria in pregnancy  <cit>  due to its safety and its long half-life   <cit> .

in addition to its ‘delayed death’ effect on parasite growth, azithromycin has been reported to kill parasites within the first cycle of in vitro parasite growth at a drug concentration just above reported peak plasma concentrations  <cit> . it has been speculated that inhibition of parasite growth during the first cycle of treatment is a result of azithromycin having a secondary target in addition to the apicoplast ribosome  <cit> . given growth inhibition via apicoplast-targeting ‘delayed death’ is approximately 150-fold more potent than that achieved for  <dig> cycle growth inhibition in vitro, azithromycin is thought to act predominantly through targeting the apicoplast when used clinically. because of azithromycin’s safety profile, several studies have investigated modifications to the drug with a view to lowering the ic <dig> of short-term treatment  to the low nanomolar range . yet despite this interest in azithromycin, the target of drug inhibition during the first cycle of growth is unknown, and the potential of this novel mechanism of action as a clinical treatment remains unclear.

several lines of evidence indicate that azithromycin has a secondary mechanism and target of action to inhibit invasion, in addition to binding to the 50s apicoplast ribosomal subunit as described for the ‘delayed death’ phenotype  <cit> . clindamycin, a smaller and structurally unrelated antibiotic that has overlapping binding sites to azithromycin on the apicoplast ribosome  <cit> , as well as an identical mode of action, had very little invasion inhibitory activity. selection of a d <dig> line for resistance  to azithromycin in the  <dig> cycle ‘delayed death’ assays did not result in a similar increase in resistance to azithromycin invasion inhibition assays when compared to a parental d <dig>  line. comparison of azithromycin and its modified analogues  showed that modifications increasing the potency of these analogues over azithromycin in invasion inhibition, in cycle  and  <dig> cycle  assays did not appreciably increase the potency of the compounds over  <dig> cycle ‘delayed death’ assays, suggesting the mechanism of enhanced inhibitory activity was independent of anti-ribosomal activity.

the near instantaneous inhibition of merozoite invasion caused by azithromycin also suggests that this drug can rapidly kill parasites through a secondary mechanism of action. typical ‘delayed death’ inhibition by macrolide antibiotics results in the loss of apicoplast functionality  <cit> , with this then leading to the loss of isoprenoid precursor biosynthesis, the only essential function of the apicoplast during blood-stage development  <cit> . the long timeframes required for apicoplast translation inhibition and the resulting ‘delayed death’ caused by macrolide antibiotics is in striking contrast to the very rapid inhibition of merozoite invasion at higher drug concentrations. furthermore, removal of the apicoplast in the experiments by yeh et al.  <cit>  was not reported to result in an invasion defect. combined, the available evidence suggests it is very unlikely that the apicoplast plays some as yet undefined role in merozoite invasion and implicates a secondary mechanism of action of azithromycin against invading merozoites. whether the mechanism of invasion inhibition and intracellular asexual-stage parasite growth inhibition  is the same remains to be elucidated. however, the similar ic <dig> values seen for both inhibitory phenotypes raises the intriguing possibility that this secondary mechanism of action could be targeted throughout the disease causing blood-stage of p. falciparum malaria.

the ability of azithromycin to rapidly inhibit merozoite invasion, in addition to the apicoplast-targeting ‘delayed death’ mechanism of action, is an exciting prospect for the development of macrolide-based drugs in combination therapies. this dual modality could see azithromycin assist in rapid clearance of parasites as well as offering longer-term treatment of the remaining low-level blood and liver-stage parasites through its activity against the apicoplast. such a drug treatment strategy has the potential to increase drug efficacy, while reducing the chances for the development of resistance.

although the in vitro merozoite invasion inhibitory activity of azithromycin required drug concentrations at the upper end of what is achieved clinically  <cit> , we demonstrate that modification of the macrolides can lead to a substantial improvement in invasion inhibitory activity; this suggests that invasion inhibitory macrolides could be developed as therapeutics. addition of an l-megosamine sugar to erythromycin a through an in vivo fermentation process  <cit>  produced a compound with 32-fold greater invasion inhibitory activity than parent erythromycin a. furthermore, a selection of azithromycin analogues  lowered the invasion inhibitory ic <dig> by up to 5-fold. the azithromycin derivatives were tested only when solubilized in dmso due to limitations in the amount of available material. importantly, the use of dmso as vehicle for solubilization reduced the potency of the parent compound azithromycin 4-fold relative to ethanol as vehicle. if this observation were to hold true for the derivatives, the invasion inhibitory ic <dig> of the compound 1j   <cit>  would be in the range of 1– <dig> μm.

the invasion inhibitory ic <dig> of azithromycin  and analogues  is comparable to that achieved for inhibitors that specifically target the function of essential merozoite proteins. two recent proof-of-concept studies identified small molecule invasion inhibitory compounds targeting interactions between essential invasion ligands ron4-ama <dig>  and msp1- <dig>   <cit> , and reported invasion inhibitory ic <dig> values in a very similar range to azithromycin and analogues. another highly selective invasion inhibitor, the 3d7-ama1-specific peptide inhibitor r <dig>  <cit> , has an invasion inhibitory ic <dig> of  <dig>  μm in assays using purified merozoites  <cit> . azithromycin, with minimal modification, can rapidly inhibit merozoite invasion at concentrations comparable to some of the best and most selective invasion inhibitors available for drug development and research. the encouraging improvements evident in the invasion inhibitory activity of azithromycin from only a small panel of derivatives, combined with the proven safety and efficacy of macrolides, support the potential for developing such compounds as therapeutics.

removal of azithromycin’s glycan groups provided insight into the structural requirements for invasion inhibitory activity. removal of the cladinosyl sugar resulted in a 5-fold reduction in invasion inhibitory activity. strikingly, removal of both sugars resulted in complete loss of invasion inhibitory activity, strongly suggesting that the desosamine sugar, rather than the cladinosyl, is critical for invasion inhibitory activity. interestingly, the desosamine sugar is also considered the critical glycosylated group in binding of macrolides to microbial ribosomes  <cit>  with clinically used macrolide antibiotics such as telithromycin having dispensed with the cladinosyl group altogether. screening of a larger number of macrolides and modified analogues will help identify others with greater potency, and allow assessment of which modifications and groups are most important for activity.

the fact that azithromycin inhibits host invasion by plasmodium merozoites  and t. gondii tachyzoites parasites suggests that the target of inhibition is shared amongst some apicomplexan invasive stages. the fact that the potency of azithromycin against p. falciparum  and p. berghei  malarias was very similar raises the possibility that targeting this pathway could be an effective strategy to treat other malaria species. the results of the t. gondii invasion assays suggest that host cell invasion of this more distantly related apicomplexan parasite can also be targeted by azithromycin, albeit at higher concentrations. importantly, the analogue 12e had equal or better invasion inhibitory potency than azithromycin  when tested at a 6-fold lower concentration. this strongly suggests that analogues of azithromycin could be developed with superior inhibitory activity against tachyzoite invasion and confirms that the invasion inhibitory activity of azithromycin and analogues is shared across distantly related apicomplexan parasites.

macrolide antibiotics have been linked to mechanisms of action other than binding to microbial ribosomes, including interference with intracellular signalling mechanisms such as ca2+ and mapk through an as yet undefined mechanism . intracellular ca2+ signalling is thought to play an important role in invasion  so interference with this mechanism by macrolide antibiotics could contribute to inhibition of invasion. macrolide antibiotics have also been shown to bind to negatively charged phospholipid bilayers and interfere with normal membrane function  <cit> . intriguingly, the relative activity of the macrolides appeared to be in part related to the number of cationic groups present on the macrolide.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study have identified for the first time that macrolide antibiotics, a diverse group of well-tolerated antibiotic drugs with antimalarial properties, inhibit plasmodium spp. merozoite invasion into erythrocytes in vitro. invasion inhibition assays and live filming experiments show that azithromycin acts rapidly to stop merozoite entry very early during the invasion process. the mechanism of invasion inhibition appears to be independent of apicoplast ribosomal translation inhibition, which is the currently described mechanism of action of these drugs. modification of both azithromycin and erythromycin a resulted in promising reductions in the invasion inhibitory ic <dig> to levels nearing those achieved clinically for the parent compounds, providing a proof-of-concept for the potential development of potent invasion inhibitors. elucidation of the mechanism of action and subsequent improvements in compound potency could pave the way for development of macrolide antibiotics with dual modality as novel and potent antimalarials to complement frontline treatments for malaria. furthermore, the use of drugs that inhibit merozoite invasion in combination with drugs that inhibit intra-erythrocytic parasite development may be an effective strategy to facilitate rapid parasite clearance to help improve clinical outcomes, reduce transmission, and minimize the development of resistance.

