BACKGROUND
in the last 30 years, sanger sequencing has been the gold standard technique in molecular diagnostics. recent years have witnessed the advent of next generation sequencing  technologies that have greatly improved sequencing capability, while dramatically decreasing the cost per sequenced base. ngs techniques generate high-throughput genomic data and specific analysis procedures  are currently developed to extract the information of interest from the extremely large amount of raw data generated as output from ngs experiments. while whole-genome and whole-exome sequencing experiments are exploited to investigate the entire genetic heritage of an individual, targeted re-sequencing applications have been introduced for those investigations where only small, user-defined portions of the genome need to be sequenced. this last approach is widely employed to study single- or multi-gene disorders  <cit> .

amplicon-based applications for targeted re-sequencing are a commonly adopted solution  <cit> . these approaches are based on the design of synthetic oligonucleotides , with complementary sequence to the flanking regions of the target dna to be sequenced.

commercial gene panels are available to investigate widely studied diseases , while customized gene panels can be designed to meet the specific requirements . multi-gene custom panels for neurological diseases are today currently employed in both research and diagnostics  <cit> .

amplicon-based sequencing approaches are characterized by high specificity and deep coverage  <cit>  and have been successfully employed both with good-quality dna sources such as blood or frozen tissues and with more challenging samples extracted from formalin-fixed and paraffin-embedded tissues  <cit> . since amplicon-based sequencing is still based on pcr amplification, some of the artifacts that can be encountered in traditional sanger sequencing are still present, such as nucleotide misincorporation by polymerase, chimera formation  and allelic drop-out  .

several efforts to manage such artifacts have been attempted, including the progressive development of gold standard rules for pcr, based on the use of independent amplification reactions, the reduction of pcr cycle number, the increase of elongation time and the addition of a reconditioning step  <cit> . other approaches are based on the modification of experimental design by introducing additional redundant overlapping amplicons to over-cover the target regions  <cit> .

further methodologies include the use of replicated amplicons and of a specific workflow to classify each amplicon as a putative allele or an artifact  <cit> . advances in the bioinformatics field led to the creation and the development of algorithms to manage such artifacts during the analysis . amplivar is based on the reduction of the number of input reads to be aligned to a reference genome by grouping for primer sequence in a key-value structure, where each group is analyzed independently  <cit> . tssv is a tool specifically designed to profile all allelic variants present in targeted locus, able to detect and characterize complex allelic variants, such as short tandem repeats  <cit> . mutascope is a software dedicated to the detection of mutations at low-allelic fraction from amplicon sequencing of matched tumor-normal sample pairs, based on variant classification as somatic or germline via a fisher exact test  <cit> . new bioinformatic pipelines, based on primer trimming and perfected variant calling have also been developed and tested on synthetic amplicon datasets  <cit> . also, manufacturer’s proprietary software for the analysis of amplicon-based data is available, like ilumina miseq reporter custom amplicon workflow , based on primer sequence soft-clipping and on the alignment of each read with the expected amplicon, thus obtaining a fast and reliable variant identification procedure. amplivar and mutascope performances were compared to illumina workflow on five separate amplicon assays  <cit> : amplivar sensitivity was higher than mutascope and variant identification was in full accordance with illumina workflow. it is worth noting that none of the previously described tools is designed to manage ado artifacts, with the exception of illumina workflow, via primer sequence soft-clipping.

ado entity is tremendously variable, depending on the type and on the position of the primer-sequence mismatch. single nucleotide mismatches occurring at the 3’ terminus of a primer can dramatically affect amplification efficiency , depending on mismatch position  and on mismatch nature  . widely used, online available tools for primer design show that a single nucleotide mismatch can lower primer melting temperature up to 18 °c  <cit> , with serious impacts on process efficiency. nucleotide insertion/deletions have an even more disruptive effect.

in this paper, we have considered the exemplificative configuration of a single nucleotide mismatch and hypothesized the worst-case configuration of a yield reduction up to 100-fold, but drawn conclusions can be extended to more favorable cases with mitigated yield reduction and to more general cases with insertions or deletions falling on primer-matching sequence.

an exemplificative configuration in which ado-related artifacts can affect variant discovery is reported in fig. 1a. here, two alleles are represented, one of them containing a single nucleotide variant . the wild type allele  perfectly pairs with both the red and blue primer couples, generating both blue and red amplicons, not containing the mutation. the mutated allele  perfectly matches the red primer sequence only, thus generating the red amplicon, containing the mutated sequence. the blue amplicon is rarely generated by the mutated allele, since, we suppose, imperfect sequence matching between primer and sequence biases amplicon formation towards wild-type allele. during variant calling step, the reads containing the mutation account for a fraction that is often neglected by variant callers , thus resulting in a false homozygosity. an even more complex configuration is represented in fig. 1b, where an additional mutation  is present. this mutation is present in heterozygous state, on the same allele containing the mutation illustrated above . although not falling on a primer matching sequence, this second mutation is hidden and variant calling issues are the same as illustrated before.fig.  <dig> allele drop-out related artifacts in variant identification. a one mutated  and one wild type allele are shown. only amplicons originated from primers pairing a non mutated region  are randomly generated by both alleles, while primers pairing the mutated region  preferentially amplify the wild type allele. b in this configuration, a second mutation  is also present on the mutated allele. this mutation is masked by ado effects, since the mutated allele is never amplified by blue primers. c primer trimming  restores the balance of aligned bases in the mutated position. d primer trimming in this context is not sufficient to restore a balanced number of reads in the position relative to the second mutation. in order to do this, one possible approach is the removal of blue reads, generated by the amplicon affected by ado-artifacts




we designed a methodology to prevent ado artifacts, based on a first step of alignment and variant calling after primer sequence trimming  and on a second step, after removal of reads generated from primers matching a sequence containing a mutation identified at the first step . this methodology exploits the redundancy of amplicon coverage on target regions to maximize the retrieved information from available data. the procedure is summarized in fig.  <dig> fig.  <dig> schematic representation of trimming algorithm, based on two separate steps of alignment and variant calling. the first step is characterized by primer sequence trimming, the second step by the removal of reads generated by primer pairs that pair in a mutated region, with the mutation identified during the first step of variant calling. variants obtained in the two different steps are merged, annotated, and provided as output from this pipeline




with this methodology, we have analyzed  <dig> samples, obtained from four newly designed illumina truseq custom amplicon gene panels related to neurological diseases. results have been compared with the miseq reporter custom amplicon workflow output and a subset of putative representative mutations identified via this procedure, considered by genetists to be clinically relevant for the studied phenotype, has been validated via sanger sequencing. a synthetic dataset has also been constructed to allow the comparisons of these methodologies for variant calling when two mutations  are present on the same allele. a synthetic dataset corresponding to a representative configuration was also analyzed with amplivar tool  <cit> .

methods
truseq custom amplicon gene panels and sequencing experiments
illumina truseq custom amplicon kit was used to capture all exons, intron–exon boundaries, 5’- and 3’-utr sequences and 10-bp flanking sequences of target genes .

four different gene panels, related to neurological diseases, were de-novo designed, as shown in table  <dig> table  <dig> the four gene panels designed and adopted in this study

for each panel, the genes involved are reported, together with the total number of amplicons per panel and the dimension of the target regions in base pairs. for each panel, the number of sequenced samples is reported




parkinson panel is composed by ten known causative genes for parkinson disease, both for the autosomal dominant and recessive forms .

both cacna1a and atp1a <dig> panels are monogenic. mutations in cacna1a gene determine two allelic disorders with a dominant-autosomic transmission: spinocerebellar ataxia  <dig> and episodic ataxia  <dig>  <cit> . furthermore, mutations have been described in patients with alternating hemiplegia and recurrent ischemic stroke  <cit> . mutations in atp1a <dig> are reported in case of alternating hemiplegia  <cit> . both genes are causative for familial and sporadic hemiplegic migraine  <cit> .

col <dig> panel contains col4a <dig> and col4a <dig> genes, the mutations of which contribute to a broad spectrum of disorders, including myopathy, glaucoma and hemorrhagic stroke .

for the four studied gene panels, probes were designed using designstudio  and amplicon length averaged  <dig> base pairs . amplicon number varied from  <dig> to  <dig> .

for this work,  <dig> patients with suspected diagnosis for the studied diseases have been recruited at “c. mondino” national institute of neurology foundation  and from other clinics in italy.

peripheral blood samples were collected after obtaining written informed consent  from all the participants and genomic dna was purified by automatic extraction .

the truseq custom amplicon sequencing assay was performed according to manufacturer’s protocol . all dna samples were diluted to the same initial concentration . in order to artificially increase the genetic diversity, 10 % dna from phage phix was added to the library of genomic dna before loading on the flow-cell  <cit> .

sample normalization has been performed according to illumina manufacturer protocol to get a concentration of  <dig> nm per sample. pal  preparation has been performed according to manufacturer’s protocol. 6 μl of pal were diluted in 600 μl of dal  and then loaded on the flow cell.

runs were performed on illumina miseq sequencer with v <dig> flow cell. reagent cartridges were purchased from illumina .

six sequencing experiments have been carried out, with an average sample number of  <dig> samples per run . five experiments have involved a single gene panel, while in one experiment samples analyzed with cacna1a and atp1a <dig> panels have been pooled. in this case, in the final pool realization, a normalization on the amplicon number was performed in order to have the same expected average coverage for all the samples, although cacna1a and atp1a <dig> panels already have similar dimension.

when specified, candidate genes were amplified by pcr using primers located in adjacent intronic regions from genomic dna. the amplicons were screened for sequence variations by direct sequencing using the big-dye terminator v <dig>  sequencing kit  and abi  <dig> genetic analyzer . the alignment to reference sequence has been performed using sequencher  <dig>  software.

bioinformatic data analysis
primary analysis
data collected from ngs experiments were analyzed in order to identify single nucleotide variants and small insertions/deletions.

the first steps of bioinformatic analysis  have been performed using miseq provided software . fastq files provided for each sample, containing mate paired-end reads after demultiplexing and adapter removal, were used as input for two different pipelines.

miseq pipeline
first, fastq files were processed with miseq reporter v <dig> . <dig> using the custom amplicon workflow . this analytical method requires as input both fastq files with forward and reverse reads and a “manifest file” containing information about the sequences of primer pairs, the expected sequence of the amplicons and the coordinates relative to the reference genome . as output, a vcf file is generated, containing the list of the identified mutations. briefly, each read pair is separately processed to individuate the corresponding primer pair  and then aligned to the expected amplicon sequence  via banded smith-waterman algorithm, accepting gaps up to one third of its length . the alignment bam file thus obtained is then provided as input to gatk variant caller  that generates a vcf file for each sample.

trimming pipeline
the second bioinformatic pipeline  implements the algorithm shown in fig.  <dig> and receives as input both fastq files  and manifest file. first, a quality control check is implemented with fastqc tool  <cit>  and only samples with sufficient number of reads and base quality are considered. these thresholds were a posteriori empirically determined based on the 20 % of samples for each panel showing the smaller number of uncovered regions and considering the average quality and number of reads per sample as a reference. samples with average reads quality lower than 30 % of the reference or total number of reads lower than 10 % of the reference were excluded. then, a primer sequence trimming step is performed  via ad-hoc developed perl scripts . here, forward and reverse oligonucleotide sequences  are extracted from manifest file and used to match read pairs. only read pairs matching a primer pair, accepting one mismatch per read and no gaps, are maintained and used for further analysis. more in detail, the first read mate is aligned against the forward primer sequence. if the primer sequence entirely matches the first bases of the reads, allowing one mismatch and no gaps, it is trimmed off from the read. if no primer sequence is identified, the entire read pair is discarded. the mate read is also aligned against the reverse primer sequence. in case of sequence matching , also the reverse primer sequence is trimmed off and the trimmed mate pair reads are saved, otherwise both reads are discarded. trimmed fastq files are provided as input for the first step of alignment and variant calling.

burrows-wheeler transformation-based alignment is performed with bwa software v <dig> a  <cit> , and bam files are obtained using samtools v <dig>   <cit>  and picard-tool v <dig>  .

gatk v <dig>  is used for insertions/deletions realignment  and variant calling  according to gatk best practices recommendations  <cit> .

a second round of alignment and variant calling is then applied, with the aim of individuating those mutations present on the same allele affected by allele drop-out, downstream of the primer sequence and covered by another amplicon . in this second round, reads generated from primers containing a mutation  are discarded  and the remaining reads are provided as input to the alignment and variant calling pipeline described above. the newly identified variants are merged with the ones obtained in the previous step to provide the final set of identified variants. the reads removal step has been implemented via an ad-hoc developed perl script .

coverage evaluation
coverage evaluation was performed with gatk depthofcov and via an ad-hoc developed perl script to find adjacent regions with average coverage  less than 30x. this threshold has been established according to  <cit> . the determination of uncovered or low-coverage regions in ngs applications is required when a complete sample sequencing is desired. uncovered regions can be sequenced via other sequencing techniques .

variant annotation
variant annotation was performed via annovar software . mutations were considered pathogenic if they were absent from controls , predicted to alter the sequence of the encoded protein  and to adversely affect protein function, with the use of in silico prediction software .

sanger sequencing was used for variant validation in the target genes and to cover all non-covered regions.

amplivar pipeline
amplivar was downloaded from https://github.com/alhsu/amplivar and installed following the instructions. the hg <dig> version of the human genome in 2bit format  for blat gfserver configuration was downloaded from the university of california, santa cruz online repository .

synthetic dataset generation
a synthetic dataset  was created to simulate the configuration shown in fig. 1b, where two single point mutations are present on the same allele, the first falling on a primer-matching region and the second downstream and covered by another amplicon.

first, a real dataset with a mutation on a primer-pairing region was identified. the region of interest was covered by two overlapping amplicons, here called a and b, as shown . reads generated from these amplicons were isolated and, as expected, only reads originated by a, whose primers matched a non-mutated region, contained the mutation with a percentage of about 50 %. amplicon b, originated by primers pairing a mutated sequence, was affected by ado and all the reads were obtained by the non-mutated allele, so that less than 1 % contained the mutation . following this procedure, fastq files containing  <dig> reads from amplicon a and  <dig> reads from amplicon b were constructed.

synthetic datasets were in silico constructed via matlab r2015a software . in all the reads generated by amplicon a and containing a mutation, a second mutation falling 5 bps downstream  was introduced with a probability of 90 % . in order to simulate the unbalanced amplifications of a and b , synthetic datasets were constructed by randomly combining read pairs from both amplicons in different proportions from 0 % to 100 %, as described in additional file 1: table s <dig> 

similarly, a second synthetic dataset  was constructed to simulate the presence of a single nucleotide insertion in the primer matching region. this dataset was identical to sd <dig> in terms of mutation percentage and amplicon composition , with the only exception that the single nucleotide mismatch in the primer matching region was replaced by a single nucleotide insertion.

all datasets were analyzed with both miseq and trimming pipelines.

RESULTS
coverage evaluation
a total of  <dig> samples were sequenced with truseq custom amplicon kit on miseq sequencer.

the average number of reads per sample varied from  <dig> . <dig>  for samples belonging to atp1a <dig> panel to  <dig> . <dig>  for col <dig>  no correlation was observed between the total number of reads generated per sample and the panel dimension , nor with the number of samples loaded on the flow-cell per run .

coverage was evaluated as defined in methods section and the percentage of not covered base pairs varied from  <dig>  %  to  <dig>  % , showing an increasing trend with panel dimension .

all samples had a sufficient number of reads . a negative correlation was found between average coverage  and panel dimension, probably due to the unvaried average number of reads for all samples .

variant identification with trimming and miseq pipelines
variant calling step was performed with both miseq and trimming pipelines.

miseq pipeline identified an average number of variants per sample per panel ranging from  <dig>   for cacna1a panel to  <dig>   for col <dig> panel , while trimming pipeline identified a systematically higher number of variants . the total number of variants identified with miseq and trimming pipelines was correlated  and the systematically higher number identified with trimming pipeline could be explained by less stringent filtration criteria on variant quality. most of these variants were single nucleotide variations and less than 18 % were small insertions or deletions . the correlations for single nucleotide variants, insertions and deletions are shown in fig. 3b, c and d, respectively. the  <dig>  % of miseq variants was also detected by trimming pipeline.fig.  <dig> comparison between trimming and miseq pipelines in terms of number of identified variants. all variants are shown in panel a, while only single nucleotide variants, insertions and deletions are shown in panel b, c and d, respectively. dots represent the average on samples belonging to the same panel; error bars represent the 95 % confidence intervals. solid line represents the linear regression fitting and equation and r <dig> are displayed in the plot




interestingly, about 14 % of variants per sample fall on a primer-pairing region, thus highlighting the high impact of ado-related artifacts in presence of one single nucleotide variation . this percentage is not negligible and emphasizes that bioinformatics approaches, together with improvement and optimization of capturing kits, are indispensable to reduce artifacts.

the new discovery rate of trimming pipeline, expressed as percentage of mutations identified from trimming pipeline not found with miseq pipeline, is  <dig>  %  for insertions and deletions and  <dig>  %  for snvs.

samples belonging to the same panel share a large number of mutations. in fig.  <dig>  variants present in at least 80 % of samples of the panel are shown in grey and in 50 % of the panel in orange, while the percentage of variants present in less than 50 % of samples  is represented in blue. this phenomenon is common in both analytical methods.fig.  <dig> percentage of shared variables between samples belonging to the same gene panel. in blue, the variants present in less than 50 % of the sample, in orange variants present in more than 50 % and less than 80 % of the samples and in grey variants present in more than 80 % of samples




in order to explore the nature of these shared mutations, we randomly selected ten of these variants that were sequence-verified via sanger sequencing for all the samples of the panel . all of them showed to be false positives, probably due to sequencing artifacts. considering these shared variants as artifacts, the percentage of unique candidate variants ranges from  <dig>  %  for col <dig> panel to  <dig>  %  for cacna1a panel.

this finding suggests that highly shared variants may be candidate to be false positive, although these results are not conclusive and further investigations would be required to reveal the nature of such artifacts.

the number of predicted pathogenic variants in each cohort of patients varied between  <dig>  and  <dig> for parkinson panel .

identification of a novel damaging-predicted variant for cacna1a gene
a novel predicted damaging mutation on cacna1a gene  was present in one of cacna1a samples and was correctly identified with both analytical procedures and sanger sequence confirmed . this mutation falls on a primer-pairing region and is covered by an additional amplicon. this configuration is shown . as expected, reads generated from the primer pair that matches the mutated sequence  do not contain the mutation in the specified position, being identical to the reference for 99 %, while reads generated from the other overlapping amplicon  contain the mutation for 44 %. relative abundances of reads from amplicon a and b are  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.fig.  <dig> newly identified cacna1a mutation. a the newly identified heterozygous cacna1a mutation nm_001127221:c.t4535c:p.i1512t was confirmed via sanger sequencing on both dna strands. b the mutation was correctly identified by both trimming and miseq pipelines. the first alignment results from miseq pipeline, while the second from trimming pipeline. alignment qualities and parameters are highly similar between the different pipelines




the alignment obtained with miseq and trimming pipelines are shown in fig. 5b. in case the alignment is performed without the trimming step, the mutation is present in less than 20 % of reads and it is not detected during variant calling.

comparison of miseq and trimming pipelines performances on synthetic data
in order to evaluate the performances of miseq and trimming pipelines on a more complex configuration, not found in experimental data, an in silico evaluation procedure has been carried out.

synthetic datasets have been in silico constructed as described in methods section to reproduce the configuration where two single point mutations or an insertion and a single point mutation occur .

in table  <dig>  the number of identified variants as a function of the percentage of reads belonging to amplicon a is shown. while trimming pipeline always identified the second mutation, the miseq pipeline could identify it in sd <dig> only if the percentage of reads coming from amplicon a was above 50 %, thus showing a threshold effect. furthermore, miseq pipeline has similar performances to the first round of variant calling of trimming pipeline, while the second step is required to correctly determine the mutation. miseq performances improved for sd <dig>  being able to detect the second mutation also if present at lower percentage.table  <dig> pipeline performance evaluation on a synthetic dataset containing two mutations

results for both sd <dig>  and sd <dig>  synthetic datasets are reported. the number of mutations found with trimming pipeline  is reported. miseq pipeline performances for sd <dig> are comparable with the first step of variant calling of trimming pipeline and can identify the second mutation only if the percentage of reads from amplicon a  is above 50 %. for lower percentages, only trimming pipeline with the second step of variant calling can correctly identify the second mutation, even if amplicon a reads percentage lowers to 10 %. in sd <dig>  trimming pipeline performances are identical to sd <dig>  while miseq performances slightly improve, being able to identify the second mutation in two additional configurations 




sample  <dig> of the synthetic dataset sd <dig> containing two single point mutations  was also analyzed with amplivar tool  <cit>  and it provided identical results than miseq pipeline, being able to determine only the first variant, falling on primer matching region. it should be noted that amplivar is not designed to manage complex configurations, as the ones reported in this work, and issues in variant calling, if variants overlap primer region, are a known limitation of the tool, due to the lack of primer soft-clipping  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
amplicon-based ngs techniques are gaining great importance in the field of molecular-based diagnosis and research. based on the targeted amplification of small portions of the genome, via sequence-specific probes, they suffer from the typical problems of pcr-based approaches, like nucleotide misincorporation, chimera formation and ado  <cit> .

in this work, we focused on ado-related artifacts and developed a bioinformatic methodology to manage such issue, in order to maximize the retrieved information from available sequencing data.

our findings suggest that about 14 % of the mutations per sample, identified via customized illumina panels, is potentially affected by this issue, since they fall on a primer matching sequence.

different approaches have been proposed to address such problems, based on the definition and standardization of pcr protocols  <cit> , on specific bioinformatic pipelines for the analysis of such data and on the development of ad-hoc tools .

although the presence of a single heterozygous mutation in a primer pairing sequence can be managed via primer sequence trimming, in presence of at least one additional amplicon covering the problematic region, more complex situations are not managed by these approaches.

issues related to the presence of a second mutation  have been addressed by chong et al.  by modifying the structure of the designed gene panel; while in a standard design one or two amplicons cover the region of interest, chong et al. designed custom primers to obtain overlapping, redundant amplicons to over-cover target regions. although this approach effectively manages such artifacts, more complex and expensive customized designs are required, thus imposing a trade-off between panel dimension and costs.

our work allows increasing the amount of information that can be retrieved from ngs data obtained with amplicon panels without modifying probe design and, for this reason, it cannot overcome intrinsic panel limitations . a trimming pipeline has been developed, based on two subsequent cycles of alignment and variant calling and has been compared to the proprietary custom amplicon workflow implemented on illumina sequencer .

we sequenced and analyzed  <dig> samples with four different newly designed illumina truseq custom amplicon gene panels for neurological diseases. the percentage of not covered regions  varies from  <dig>  % for col <dig> samples up to  <dig>  % for parkinson samples. non-covered regions should be targeted via other methods , thus constituting an additional effort to be accounted for to obtain the complete sequencing of the desired regions.

the performances of trimming and miseq pipelines have been compared in terms of number of identified variants and new discovery rate. similar performances in the identification of a new predicted damaging single point heterozygous mutations on cacna1a gene , affected by ado artifacts have been observed. the percentage of miseq mutations also identified via trimming pipeline is  <dig>  %, thus suggesting that no loss of information occurs when using trimming pipeline compared to miseq pipeline.

trimming pipeline has also been validated in silico on synthetic datasets, where a second mutation was introduced. here, trimming pipeline outperformed miseq pipeline, correctly identifying the mutation even if the percentage of ado-affected amplicons covering the region of interest rises up to 90 %. here a threshold effect arises with miseq pipeline, being able to detect the second mutation if ado-affected amplicons percentage is below 50 %.

although the here described configuration has not been encountered in the analysis of our data and is probably not frequent, it is mandatory to adopt analytical procedures to manage it, particularly in diagnostics applications to avoid the clinical reporting of false negatives.

although implemented for a specific platform  this method is suitable for all amplicon-based applications and can be used both for paired-end and single-end reads.

perl scripts for trimming pipeline implementation on truseq custom amplicon data are available for download at http://lab-bioinfo.unipv.it/index.php/it/dload.

additional file

additional file 1: supplementary figures and tables. 




abbreviations
adoallele drop-out

bambinary-sequence alignment format

daldiluted amplicon library

dlsodownstream locus specific oligo

dnadeoxyribonucleic acid

ngsnext generation sequencing

palpooled amplicon library

pcrpolymerase chain reaction

samsequence alignment format

ulsoupstream locus specific oligo

vcfvariant calling format

not applicable.

declarations
this article has been published as part of bmc bioinformatics vol  <dig> suppl  <dig> 2016: italian society of bioinformatics : annual meeting  <dig>  the full contents of the supplement are available online at http://bmcbioinformatics.biomedcentral.com/articles/supplements/volume-17-supplement-12


funding
this study and publication costs were funded by ministero della salute - ricerca corrente 2013- <dig> rc16013c.

availability of data and materials

http://lab-bioinfo.unipv.it/index.php/it/dload.

authors’ contributions
sz, cc and pm conceived the study. sg, gg and mva performed the sequencing experiments, under the supervision of cc. sz and mvi analyzed data and implemented the algorithm, under the supervision of pm. sz, cc and pm wrote the manuscript. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

authors’ information
not applicable.

competing interests
the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

consent for publication
not applicable.

ethics approval and consent to participate
samples were collected after obtaining written informed consent  from all the participants, approved by “c. mondino” national institute of neurology foundation .
