BACKGROUND
our knowledge on the evolutionary history of north temperate fishes has been fundamentally altered due to the advent and application of broad-scale phylogeography  <cit> . phylogeographic investigations of freshwater fishes in europe are numerous and inferences drawn on the history of intraspecific lineages often relate to how river courses and their accompanying catchment basins dynamically change through several glacial epochs . for cold tolerant fishes such inferences can be complex. genetic lineages can be distributed mosaically among basins, reflecting repeated population expansions and contractions across the shifting colonization corridors that have resulted from river capture events, the formation and dynamics of pro-glacial lakes and fluctuating levels and salinities of seas  <cit> . despite relatively sound knowledge of european glaciation and attempts to find common patterns, phylogeographic scenarios are often species specific.

there are few similar studies in siberia and far less certainty concerning the extent of glaciation and paleohydrological stability  <cit> . one of the first broad-scale phylogeographic studies in siberia reported that genetic lineages of grayling , corresponded to major siberian river systems   <cit> . the study also supported that grayling had been extirpated from lake baikal during the early to mid-pleistocene as the result of some climate-induced environmental perturbation. subsequently, grayling were able to recolonize lake baikal when its waters over spilled forming a new outlet into the enisei basin,  <dig>  to  <dig>  years ago  <cit> . the authors speculated that this event might relate to highly controversial hypotheses concerning the paleo-climate in siberia. most geologists consider siberian glaciation to have been rather limited based on the modeling of sparse precipitation during the pleistocene   <cit> . however, field evidence supports extensive glaciation along the polar continental shelves and coastal pacific lowlands   <cit> . such ice sheets would have blocked north flowing rivers and created a series of pro-glacial lakes. evidence for such blockage has been presented for the ob and enisei systems  <cit> .

furthermore, interior mountain regions  were glaciated perhaps above 1000– <dig> m. however, many potential refugia for cold tolerant organisms must have existed in central and east siberia, north of interior mountain systems, as supported by phylogeographic patterns found in grayling from the lena basin  <cit> . siberian glacial scenarios, however, are much in dispute, especially for the last glacial maximum   <cit> . recent studies reflect an appreciation for the region's paleohydrological dynamics and its effects on organismal history  <cit> . nonetheless, no study has of yet covered the majority of siberia where four of the world's ten largest rivers occur .

the asian endemic salmonid fish brachymystax lenok occurs in all major siberian river systems  and thus can serve as a phylogeographic model for assessing paleohydrological events. lenoks occur in two morphological forms, differing in the length and shape of their snouts as well as a number of external morphological and osteological characters. the so-called sharp- and blunt-snouted lenoks are viewed as either one species complex b. lenok represented by two infraspecies  <cit> , or as two nominal species. morphological variation within each form exists among major basins  <cit>  and in zones of sympatry f <dig> hybrids are found . interestingly, longitudinal clines in morphological characters led to the hypothesis of countercurrent dispersal, with sharp-snouted lenok expanding from the west and blunt-snouted from the east  <cit> . such dispersal, combined with character displacement in contact zones is thought to have resulted in the formation of clines  <cit> .

analysis of allozyme variation supported limited gene flow between the two forms  <cit> . several enzyme systems can distinguish sharp- and blunt-snouted lenoks within basins, particularly in sympatry, but no alleles are consistently diagnostic throughout siberia. moreover, the range-wide pattern of allelic distribution for di-allelic loci is complex with no consistency as to which alleles are fixed or found in high frequencies within a form among all river basins. these results were interpreted as evidence of extensive hybridization and gene exchange in the past, with the present structure of the genus formed via "multiple hybrid speciation"  <cit> , though such interpretation received criticism  <cit> .

considering the interesting evolutionary scenario of sharp- and blunt-snouted lenoks as well as their widespread distribution in siberia, we proposed a combined genetic and morphological approach to test the existing hypotheses of counter-current dispersal, hybridization and gene flow between the two forms. concomitantly, we aimed to use lenok as a phylogeographic model for further understanding the paleohydrological dynamics of the pleistocene in siberia.

RESULTS
the final alignment included  <dig> bp of the mtdna control region  ,  <dig> bp of the nadh- <dig> gene  , and  <dig> bp  with both genes combined. there was no significant deviation from base frequency homogeneity across taxa for either gene. in lenok the transition/transversion ratio was  <dig>  for the cr, which revealed one 2-bp and four 1-bp indels, with outgroup taxa included. for the coding nd <dig> there were no indels nor amino acid changes. neither transitions nor transversions were saturated in either gene segment, including third codon positions. there were  <dig> variable sites for the cr,  <dig> of which were parsimony informative  and  <dig> variable sites  for the nd <dig>  pairwise sequence divergence within b. lenok ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> %  to  <dig> to  <dig> % . in all analyses two monophyletic groups are identified corresponding to blunt- and sharp-snouted lenoks . net divergence between groups ranged from  <dig> %  to  <dig> % , while within lineage divergences ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> %. net divergences between outgroup taxa and lenok varied with the two genes:  <dig> %  or  <dig> %  for h. hucho,  <dig> % or  <dig> %  for h. taimen, and  <dig> %  or  <dig> %  for p. perryi.

the phenogram based on external morphological and osteological characters parallels the genetic results revealing two clusters corresponding to sharp- and blunt-snouted lenoks . similarly, a plot of the first two factors of a principal component analysis  reveals two clusters clearly representing the two forms . only the position of sharp-snouted lenok from the ob basin, intermediate along the first factor  between blunt-snouted lenok and all other sharp-snouted individuals prevents 100% diagnosis of all individuals to a form. size effects were assumed to be minimal as there was no correlation between pc <dig> and size  and mean total length of individuals analyzed in both forms was nearly identical . application of a discriminant function  produced from a 25% random sample of the data set resulted in  <dig> % and  <dig> % correct identification for the blunt- and sharp-snouted lenok, respectively. df values for the misclassified individuals  were intermediate to the ranges of values defining each form.

haplotype networks
the cr network revealed  <dig> haplotypes,  <dig> in blunt- and  <dig> in sharp-snouted lenok . maximum pairwise divergence was considerably less within blunt-snouted  compared to sharp-snouted  lenok . both forms revealed at least one haplotype shared between the lena and amur drainages supporting dispersal of some kind between these basins. both forms also revealed private haplotypes at the eastern  as well as western  edge of their distributions, supporting isolation of these drainages.

the addition of  <dig> genbank sequences  to the cr network revealed a significant finding. while several haplotypes from mainland china clustered with both our blunt- and sharp-snouted clades, the remaining haplotypes from korea and the paleo-yellow river formed a distinct cluster, a minimum of seven steps divergent from our sharp-snouted clade . despite the lack of morphological data it is likely that the first two groups of haplotypes represent blunt-snouted and sharp-snouted lenoks, respectively.

parsimony analysis of the nd <dig> gene revealed nearly twice the number of haplotypes  as the cr, suggesting a considerably higher substitution rate for this coding gene seqment. two separate networks were revealed, in addition to one highly divergent sharp-snouted haplotype from the ob basin . both networks revealed at least one star-like cluster of haplotypes, reflecting demographic expansions of populations primarily from the amur  and the amur and lena  basins. each network also revealed one or more highly divergent groups, spanning  <dig> steps in blunt- and  <dig> steps in the sharp-snouted lenok.

the blunt-snouted lenok nd <dig> network  contained no shared haplotypes between the lena and amur catchments in contrast to analysis with the more slowly evolving cr. some amur haplotypes were shared with the tugur river and/or one of the island populations, whereby the shantar islands also revealed a unique haplotype reflecting a degree of long-term isolation. considerably longer periods of isolation were suggested for both the extreme eastern  and western  regions of the blunt-snouted lenok's distribution. the ob basin revealed five unique haplotypes that were a minimum of two steps from either the lena's or amur's most common haplotype. in the sea of japan basin, two very distinct haplotypes  were found, both a minimum of eight steps from any other in the network.

the sharp-snouted nd <dig> network  revealed one presumably ancestral haplotype  shared among populations throughout the lena, as well as locations in the indigirka, kolyma and amur basins. this haplotype is central to a star-like cluster of  <dig> haplotypes, each one or two base pairs divergent from nd <dig>  unique haplotypes were found in the amur, tugur, enisei, and uda basins. three haplotypes from the selenga-baikal basin  form a highly divergent group, suggesting a refuge or isolation, not reflected in data sets from other salmonid fishes  <cit> . the ob basin is fixed for one, highly divergent haplotype  beyond the 95% parsimony limit defining the network, which, together with the results of the blunt-snouted lenok, demonstrate long-term isolation of this basin.

among basin comparisons 
for both lenok forms, the among group variance , representing differences between major ocean basins  was minimal  and statistically non-significant, while the largest and highly signficant component  represented the among river basin variance . a overview this among basin variability can be provided with a table of pairwise differences, which demonstrates relatively large average differences among most pairs of basins, except those that share some haplotypes , such as the amur and lena  or lena and enisey . within basin variation is mostly much lower, except for those basins harboring multiple divergent haplotypes such as the primor'ye and ob basins for blunt-snouted lenok, and the enisei or tugur/uda region for sharp-snouted lenok.

mismatch analysis
the cr pairwise mismatch distribution was uni-modal for blunt-, and bi-modal for sharp-snouted lenok . removal of regionally restricted haplotypes  in sharp-snouted lenok, reflecting population subdivision allowed analysis of uni-modal distributions for both forms, and these distributions both differed significantly from those expected for stable population sizes . additionally, using the least-squares approach, there was no significant difference between observed and simulated data under an expansion model for either form .

the nd <dig> mismatch distribution was multi-modal for both forms . similar to the cr analysis, removal of geographically distinct haplotype groups allowed analysis of uni-modal distributions, representing the amur and uda basins for blunt-snouted, and the amur and lena basins for sharp-snouted lenok. again, observed mismatch distributions were significantly different from that expected under stable population models , but the data did not fit the expansion model either.

using estimates for the expansion parameter tau, along with divergence rate estimates ranging from  <dig>  to 3% per million years for the cr and  <dig>  to 6% for the nd <dig>  we estimated the mean age of expansion for both genes in both forms . mean estimates of expansion times, regardless of the gene or presumed substitution rate clearly relate to periods in the mid- to late pleistocene  but in all cases earlier than the lgm .

microsatellites
microsatellite loci revealed significant deviations from hwe within populations across loci , most likely due to the sampling of spawning and post-spawning aggregates of individuals. a test of deviation from hwe across all loci and populations was also significant. the population tree reveals two groups  supported by a moderate das bootstrap value  and a lower value  for nei's genetic distance .

the bayesian population structure analysis for the entire data set resulted in the highest delta log-likelihood between k =  <dig> and k =  <dig>  representing the two groups of individuals corresponding to sharp- and blunt-snouted lenoks. strong structure was further revealed within forms , especially for blunt-snouted lenok corresponding to different sampling dates, providing the most plausible cause of deviations from hwe. that is, a wahlund effect is assumed caused by the pooling of distinct population units into single tests for hwe.

we further tested for introgression between forms by running the bayesian structure analysis on each sympatric sampling site individually, with k set at  <dig>  using this analysis there was little to no signal for a mixed ancestory for individual genotypes .

correlation between morphological and genetic distances
genetic  and morphological distances among populations were highly correlated in sharp-snouted lenok  but weakly correlated in blunt-snouted lenok . morphological analysis corresponds with genetic data as populations are almost exclusively grouped according to major river basins, except for divergence within the selenga basin, a phenomenon common to the genetic data set .

discussion
phylogenetic relationships and taxonomic inferences
extensive mtdna screening and comprehensive morphological analysis of brachymystax throughout its siberian range support that the two forms represent two independent evolutionary lineages, and analysis of  <dig> microsatellite loci in three sympatric populations  revealed no signs of introgression. thus, the hypothesis of "multiple hybrid speciation"  <cit>  is not supported with our selection of genetic markers.

the complete concordance between morphology and mtdna haplotype as well as no evidence of admixture in sympatric populations analyzed with microsatellite loci strongly suggests that introgression between the two forms is low or non-existent. nonetheless, hybrids exist , some evidence of introgression has been reported  <cit>  and in captivity, f <dig> hybrids and their progeny  are viable . thus, one or more mechanisms must be operating to prevent higher levels of introgression, such as selection against hybrids in nature. however, a pre-zygotic barrier, such as spatial segregation of spawning may be the primary isolating mechanism. despite widespread co-occurrence in the amur  <cit>  and lena basins  <cit>  blunt-snouted lenok are reported to prefer cooler water during summer months and use distinct spawning grounds. blunt-snouted lenok spawned both in mountain tributaries  and in the main channel  of a second-order amur tributary whereas sharp-snouted lenok spawned in the main channel only, typically in its more downstream reaches  <cit> .

the lack of correlation between genetic and morphological distances in blunt-snouted lenok may be due to the fact that they exist in smaller and more fragmented populations, which would result in higher genetic drift and more stochastic evolutionary change. likewise, strong genetic drift among basins, as well as fragmentation within basins could explain the range-wide incongruities in allozyme allele distributions between the two forms  <cit> , and thus more complex models of hybridization and introgression need not be invoked.

the data from china and korea are difficult to incorporate into our conclusions, although these populations may prove pivotal for understanding the evolutionary history of the genus. the divergent mtdna lineage in the yellow river basin for example, is only weakly supported as a sister group to the sharp-snouted clade . lenok from this region are known as b. lenok tsinlingensis  <cit> , but  <cit>  and  <cit>  place them together with siberian blunt-snouted lenoks based on external morphology.  <cit>  assigned the name b. lenok to the sharp-snouted form, and b. savinovi to the blunt-snouted, but the latter name was shown to be invalid  <cit> . alternatively the name b. tumensis  <cit>  first used for tumen river  lenok is currently used for the blunt-snouted lenok  <cit> . if the yellow river and korean lineage can be definitively defined as blunt-snouted lenok, then the strong correspondence between genetic lineage and form presented in our work would be eroded.

the taxonomy of sharp- and blunt-snouted lenok remains unresolved. the genetic proximity of the tumen river haplotype to the sharp-snouted lineage  casts serious doubt on the applicability of the name b. tumensis for blunt-snouted lenok. thus, taxonomic harmonization of brachymystax can only be achieved when both genetic and morphological  characters of chinese and korean lenoks are compared to material from the siberian range.

comparative phylogeography of blunt- and sharp-snouted lenok
both lenok forms revealed strong phylogeographic structure with some common patterns such as the existence of highly divergent mtdna lineages below 56° n and no such variation above 56° n. this suggests that extensive regions of contemporary lenok habitat in siberia may have been uninhabitable during one or more pleistocene glacial maxima. in contrast, high within or among basin diversity in more southern latitudes supports the existence of long-term refugia. interestingly, there has apparently been a complex history within several of these refugia, analogous to the concept of "refugia-within-refugia" promoted for the high lineage diversity of numerous taxa within the iberian peninsula in europe  <cit> . this "within-refugia" pattern can be seen for the ob and primor'e basin blunt-snouted lenoks as well as the enisey sharp-snouted lenoks. only the ob sharp-snouted lenoks run counter to this pattern, as only a single haplotype has been thus far found.

furthermore, as the most divergent groups within each form are not geographically congruent, different regions apparently served as refugia for each form during unfavorable paleohydrological conditions. for example, relatively divergent haplotypes in sharp-snouted lenok are found in the selenga/baikal portion of the enisei basin where blunt-snouted lenok are wholly absent. additionally, in contrast to the broadly distributed sharp-snouted lenok, blunt-snouted lenok above 56° n are only found in the lena basin, a very large system where at least its upstream regions are known to have served as a refuge for an endemic lineage of grayling thymallus  <cit> . these patterns imply that the two lenok forms, perhaps related to their spatial or temperature preferences differ in both dispersal ability and response to climatic change.

whereas the majority of genetic variance in both forms was distributed among major basins more specific mechanisms generating phylogeographic structure were inferred. both long distance dispersal  and contiguous range expansion  underscore the importance of the amur region as a center of radiation for blunt-snouted lenok. additionally, the morphological phenogram groups blunt-snouted lenoks from both islands together with those from the amur. that blunt-snouted lenoks from the tugur carry the most widespread amur haplotype, suggests that this river was a corridor between the amur and the shantar islands. this supports earlier conclusions of  <cit>  and  <cit>  and is concordant with geological data indicating that shantar and sakhalin islands were connected to the continent during glacial maxima. as both genetic and morphological divergences are greater between the uda and amur, than the amur and islands suggests that the uda may have been colonized during an earlier marine regression than the islands, which were presumably colonized during the lgm. this perspective was supported by the mismatch analysis, revealing expansion from the amur basin. the age estimate of this event clearly reaches back into the mid-pleistocene , based on moderate substitution rates of 1%/my for the cr, or moderately faster rates for the nd- <dig>  the earliest split within blunt-snouted lenok, however, is clearly between populations of the primor'e region and all others. coupled with their morphological distinctiveness, primor'e region blunts have clearly experienced a long isolation from the amur basin.

the demographic history of sharp-snouted lenoks is more difficult to describe. mismatch analysis supports exponential growth for the lena, amur and enisei data combined, and long distance dispersal was documented from the lena to the amur drainage, as well as continuous range expansion within the amur and into the enisei basin. the allopatric fragmentation in sharp-snouted lenoks involving the selenga-baikal lineage may correspond to the prior isolation of the baikal basin and subsequent connection to the enisei basin as discussed in relation to thymallus  <cit> , or about  <dig>  years ago according to geological data  <cit> . yet longer periods of isolation are clear for sharp-snouted lenok in the extreme east  and west .

in both forms, the cr network reveals haplotypes shared between lena and amur basins, as previously described  <cit>  and thus supporting paleohydrological exchange between these major basins. interestingly, this basin sharing is seen with the nd <dig> gene in sharp-snouted but not blunt-snouted lenok perhaps reflecting a longer period of allopatry between the two basins for blunts, allowing sufficient time for mutations to occur.

while data from china and korea adds some confusion to phylogeographic summary of siberia, a scenario suggesting that the chinese portion of the lenok's range was colonized by expansion from siberia southwards  <cit>  is unlikely, or at best oversimplified. chinese lenok populations contain diverse lineages, perhaps reflecting both long-term relictism as well as admixture from southward expansion.

demographic history
the primary demographic inference was that sudden expansions in both forms relate to paleo-climatic conditions much older than the lgm, and thus are better reflected in the more slowly evolving cr. moreover, signals of sudden expansions are limited to the amur, lena, or enisei, and were not evident in the extreme eastern or western areas of occurrence. these results appear incongruent with countercurrent dispersal  <cit> , as no signal of expansion from western or central siberia can be seen for sharp-snouted lenoks, but rather from the aggregated distributions across major basins. nonetheless, the occurrence of highly divergent lineages in the east for blunts and the west for sharps supports long-term residence, but there is a lack of genetic resolution for the deep past, so no inference concerning origins of either lineage can be made.

paleohydrological dynamics
although major basins account for a substantial percentage of both morphological and genetic variation, underscoring isolation, the inferred trans-basin expansions support repeated availability of paleohydrological dispersal  corridors. this implies a dynamic paleo-landscape with refugia perhaps in the form of periglacial lakes and shifting drainage patterns stemming from headwater captures and river flow reversals. more specific details concerning siberia's paleohistory remain highly controversial, and can not be addressed based on the moleulcar phylogeography of brachymystax alone. glacial reconstructions range from nearly complete coverage of northern siberia by a marine-based ice-sheet  <cit>  to individual ice caps centered on arctic archipelagos that advanced onto adjacent shelves  <cit> . it remains to be seen whether or not phylogeographic models, and especially comparative phylogeography could be used to support or refute one of these contrasting scenarios of paleo-siberian landscapes. while prior studies  <cit>  have invoked highy dynamic paleo-climatic events to explain the distribution of salmonid mtdna lineages in various siberian basins, we offer no further speculations on these scenarios. it is clear, however, that the level of resolution in understanding the effect of paleohydrology on current genetic diversity and distribution of freshwater fishes in siberia lags behind that of europe and north america.

CONCLUSIONS
to date, there have been no siberian-wide phylogeographic studies of aquatic organisms, and as well, an underestimation of the effects of paleo-hydrological dynamics on their current distributions. our data clearly identify a "northern" gradient in lineage diversity particularly evident across 56° n, multiple genetic imprints of inter-basin exchange, long-distance dispersal and sudden expansions across broad expanses of siberia in two evolutionarily independent lineages of the salmonid fish brachymystax lenok. genetic signals for these events clearly date to climatic periods prior to the lgm, and thus were better reflected by the more slowly evolving mtdna control region rather than the faster mutating nadh- <dig> gene segment.

several previous hypotheses concerning the evolution of lenok are not supported by our data. namely, multiple hybrid speciation  <cit> , countercurrent dispersal  <cit> , and a siberian source for lenok in the chinese portion of their current range  <cit> . while no inference can be drawn on the potential origins of the two forms of lenok, both exhibit highly divergent lineages located at opposite end's of the composite distribution range . a simple taxonomic division of two genetic lineages of lenok, corresponding to two phenotypically recognizable forms is compromised by the existence of a third mtdna lineage in china and korea where phenotypic data is lacking. our data support species recognition of the two forms, but taxonomic harmonization rests on the ability to integrate both genetic and phenotypic data from the china and korea.

