BACKGROUND
plants typically contain large gene families that have arisen through single, tandem, and large-scale duplication events  <cit> . in the model plant arabidopsis thaliana, about 80% of genes have a paralog in the genome, with many individual cases of redundancy among paralogs  <cit> . however, genetic redundancy is not the rule as many paralogous genes demonstrate highly divergent function. furthermore, separating redundant and non-redundant gene duplicates a priori is not straightforward.

mutant analysis by targeted gene disruption is a powerful technique for analyzing the function of genes implicated in specific processes . still, the construction of higher order mutants is time consuming and obtaining detectable phenotypes from knockouts of single genes generally has a low hit rate  <cit> . the ability to distinguish redundant from non-redundant genes more accurately would provide an important tool for the functional analysis of genes. furthermore, vast public databases are now available and can be used to quantify pair-wise attributes of gene pairs to help identify redundant gene pairs  <cit> .

here we develop tools to improve the analysis of genetic redundancy by  creating a database of comparative information on gene pairs based on sequence and expression characteristics, and,  predicting genetic redundancy genome wide using machine learning trained with known cases of genetic redundancy. the term genetic redundancy is used here in a wide sense to mean genes that share some aspect of their function .

different theories exist regarding the forces that shape the functional relationship of duplicated genes. one posits that gene pair survival frequently arises from independently mutable subfunctions of genes that are sequentially partitioned into two duplicate copies sometime after gene duplication, leading to different functions for the two paralogs  <cit> . however, at least some theoretical treatments show that even gene pairs that are on an evolutionary trajectory of subfunctionalization may retain redundant functions for long periods  <cit> . another set of theoretical models predicts that natural selection can favor stable genetic redundancy or partial redundancy under certain conditions, especially in large populations  <cit> . other formulations allow for simultaneous evolution of subfunctionalization, neofunctionalization, and redundancy in the same genome  <cit> . thus, despite varying models on the persistence of gene duplicates, none of these formulations preclude the possibility that gene duplicates may overlap in function for long evolutionary periods.

however, a simple lack of observable phenotype upon knockout is not necessarily caused by genetic redundancy. other causes include 1) phenotypic buffering due to non-paralogous genes or network architecture  <cit>  2) minor phenotypic effects in laboratory time scales but major effects over evolutionary periods  <cit> , or, 3) untested environments or conditions in which a gene is necessary  <cit> . this report is focused exclusively on redundancy through functional overlap with a paralogous gene.

thus, for the sake of training our methods, redundant gene pairs are defined as paralogous genes whose single mutants show little or no phenotypic defects but whose double and higher order mutant combination, when available, show a significant phenotype. thus, such gene pairs are redundant with respect to an obvious phenotype. genes that show single mutant phenotypes were used as a negative training set. these genes, together with their closest blast match in the genome, comprised the non-redundant gene pairs, a conservative bias against over-fitting on blast statistics. the training set consisted of  <dig> redundant and  <dig> non-redundant pairs for arabidopsis, which were compiled from the literature. preliminary data showed that the redundant and non-redundant sets possessed distinct properties with respect to pair-wise attributes of gene duplicates.

training sets can be used to learn rules to classify genetic redundancy, using common properties, or attributes, of gene pairs. the attributes compiled for this study compare different aspects of nucleotide sequence, overall protein and domain composition, and gene expression. since any gene pair can be compared using the same common attributes, these rules can then be applied to unknown cases to predict their functional overlap.

a set of "rules" for redundancy can be generated by machine learning, which uses the attributes of known examples of positive and negative cases in training sets to classify unknown cases  <cit> . machine learning has been applied to a range of biological problems  <cit> , including the prediction of various properties of genes such as function or phenotype  <cit>  and network interactions  <cit> . in arabidopsis, sequence expression attributes of individual genes have been used to predict gene function  <cit> . here a new dataset was compiled to test the novel question of learning the signatures of genetic redundancy on a genome-wide scale.

here we show that predictions based on a support vector machine achieved a precision of about 62% at recall levels near 50%, performing two-fold better than single attribute classifiers, according to withholding analysis. this performance is better than expected because positive examples are plausibly rare among all family-wise gene pairs and the causes of redundancy are apparently complex. the level of precision achieved permits reasonable estimates of trends in redundancy at a whole-genome level. the predictions show that more than 50% of genes are redundant with at least one paralog but typically no more than three in the genome. in many cases, the method predicts that redundant gene pairs are not the most closely related in a gene family. together, the results show that redundancy is a relatively rare outcome of gene duplication but any given gene is likely to have a redundant family member. this appears partly due the property that redundancy persists or re-establishes itself for complex reasons, meaning not only due to the age of a gene duplicate. for example, many redundant duplicate pairs appear to be greater than  <dig> million old, according to estimates based on synonymous substitution rates. in addition, gene pairs from segmental duplications have a dramatically higher probability of redundancy and certain functional groups, like transcription factors, show a tendency to diverge. the entire dataset, including attributes of gene pairs and svm predictions is available at http://redundome.bio.nyu.edu/supp.html.

RESULTS
training set evaluation
a threshold question in this study is whether a gene pair can be reliably labeled as redundant or non-redundant in the training set, given that different gene pairs often have different phenotypes. preliminary analysis showed that select attribute values had distinct distributions between the two groups. for example, blast e-values were, in general, lower in the redundant pairs than in the non-redundant pairs in the training set, indicating they share higher sequence similarity . a similar trend held for non-synonymous substitution rates between the two groups . similarly, on average, gene pairs in the positive training set exhibited higher expression correlation levels over the entire dataset  than gene pairs in the negative training set . thus, known redundant gene pairs appear to have a higher correlation than gene pairs identified as non-redundant, as expected . the disparate trends in the two groups of gene pairs sets do not prove that all training set examples are correctly labeled or that all gene pairs can be discretely labeled but it does indicate that the genes labeled redundant, in general, show distinct attributes from those labeled non-redundant. thus, there is a basis for asking whether combinations of gene pair attributes could be used to improve the prediction of genetic redundancy.

algorithm choice
instead of predicting binary labels for genes pairs, machine learning methods can quantify redundancy by posterior probabilities, which permit performance evaluation at different levels of confidence. the receiver operating characteristic  curve , which plots true vs. false positive rates at all possible threshold values, shows that svm, bayesian network, and stacking  performed better than decision trees, decision rules, or logistic regression. all machine learning algorithms dramatically outperformed a random, or betting, classifier , which also supports the hypothesis that the training set labels are not randomly assigned. svm was used for further analysis because of its good empirical performance and well-characterized properties  <cit> .

the roc curve analysis also permits an evaluation of an appropriate threshold for calling redundant vs. non-redundant gene pairs. using precision  and recall , the precision rate increased relatively sharply from  <dig>  to  <dig>  probability. the rate then saturated after  <dig>  while recall dropped sharply after that point . thus,  <dig>  was chosen as a balanced tradeoff between true and false positives for further analysis of svm.

machine learning performance
another critical question is whether machine learning, which considers multiple features of duplicate gene pairs, offers any advantage over the single characteristics commonly used by biologists to identify potentially redundant genes, such as sequence similarity or expression correlation. to address this question, predictions for single attributes were generated using information gain ratio. a 10-fold withholding approach was used to evaluate performance. roc curves  showed that sequence similarity and expression correlation, taken individually, have poorer performance than svm or decision trees. the area under the curve  and above the non-discriminating line measures performance over random guessing . the auc was  <dig>  for svm while the auc for blast e-values and correlation was  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. at every threshold cutoff, svm outperformed single characteristic approaches.

within gene families, the vast majority of pair-wise combinations of genes within gene families are expected to be non-redundant. in such a problem, a classifier could perform well  by labeling all comparisons as functionally non-redundant. thus, a critical feature of a useful predictor is achieving a good performance on redundant cases.

to evaluate directly the tradeoff between accuracy and coverage, we compared precision and recall among the different classifiers. at the  <dig>  probability cutoff established for svm, the machine learning approach achieved a precision of  <dig>  with a recall of  <dig> . in contrast, at the same recall rate, expression correlation achieved a precision of  <dig>  and blast e-values a precision of  <dig> . thus, in addition to roc curve analysis, the machine learning approach that utilized multiple attributes showed dramatically improved precision in labeling redundancy compared to using single attributes.

svm also performed well on predicting non-redundant gene pairs at the  <dig>  probability threshold, with a precision rate of  <dig>  and a recall rate of  <dig> . at the same recall level, expression correlation has a precision of  <dig>  and blast e-values had a precision of only  <dig> . thus, the svm classifier shows consistently high recall on negative cases with moderate levels of precision and recall on the difficult task of identifying scarce positive examples.

when tested with  <dig> new redundant and  <dig> non-redundant pairs published after the initial training of the predictor, the svm classifier predicted  <dig> pairs were redundant based on the  <dig>  probability threshold, with  <dig> of them true redundant cases. the precision on positive cases was >90% with a recall of about 63%. the precision on negative cases was 57% with a recall of 89%. thus, the classifier performs well on novel cases not used in withholding analysis.

the scale of predicted redundancy
at a probability score greater than or equal to  <dig> , svm predicted  <dig>  redundant pairs among  <dig>   pair-wise comparisons taken from genes that fell into annotated or ad-hoc gene families . the percentage of redundant pairs at various probability scores is shown in additional file  <dig>  at the  <dig>  cutoff,  <dig>  out of  <dig>  genes examined, or an estimated 47% of the genes tested, were predicted to exhibit high levels of redundancy with at least one other gene. extrapolating estimates of true and false positive rates at this probability, about  <dig>  genes, more than half the large set of genes tested, are predicted to have a highly redundant paralog. nonetheless, the number of redundant genes is likely an underestimate since  <dig>  genes could not be evaluated for redundancy because they were not on the ath <dig> microarray. many of the missing genes are likely to be closely related so this set may show higher redundancy rate than the background.

among the  <dig>  genes classified as redundant, many were labeled redundant with more than one paralog. however, the frequency distribution of redundant paralogs per gene is skewed to the left, meaning that the largest categories are genes with relatively few redundant paralogs . for example, the largest category  were predicted to have only one redundant duplicate. the majority of redundant genes  were predicted to have no more than two duplicates. while the false negative rate may mean that many duplicate pairs were not detected, the general trend indicates that most genes tend to have relatively few redundant genes associated with them. overall, these predictions suggest that redundancy in gene function is common in the arabidopsis genome but the number of functionally redundant genes for any given trait is relatively low.

the synonymous substitution rate  of gene pairs was used to roughly examine the age of gene duplications. as expected, redundant gene pairs had lower synonymous substitution rates on average, meaning that redundant gene pairs tended to be younger duplicates . however, the frequency distribution of predicted redundant gene pairs plotted against ks has a slow decline and a long tail, suggesting that many redundant pairs are quite old. for example, 41% of redundant pairs have a ks >  <dig>  which is commonly estimated to exceed  <dig> million years  <cit> . thus, predictions indicate that redundancy can persist for long evolutionary periods.

how attributes contribute to predictions
given that multiple attributes improve the predictability of redundancy, we asked which attributes contribute most to predictions. two measures were used to assess the informativeness of individual attributes on svm predictions: 1) the absolute value of svm weights, which are the coefficients of the linear combination of attributes that is transformed into redundancy predictions , and, 2) svm sensitivity analysis in which single attributes were removed and the overall change in predictions was quantified . the two analyses were largely in agreement in identifying the top ranking attributes  and an average of the two ranks was used as a summary rank.

several unexpected attributes ranked highly in the analysis, suggesting that functional information on gene pair divergence could be captured by attributes that are rarely utilized. the highest-ranking attribute was "isoelectric point" , which measures a difference in the ph at which the two paralogs carry no net electrical charge. thus, the measure is sensitive to differences in the balance of acidic and basic functional groups on amino acids, potentially capturing subtle functional differences in protein composition. similarly, "molecular weight" ranked fifth. an index of the difference in "predicted protein domains" ranked seventh, apparently providing functional information on the domain level.

it was noteworthy that typically summary statistics on protein or sequence similarity did not rank highly. for example, blast "score" , "e-value" , and "non-synonymous substitution rate"  were not among the top ranking attributes, although preliminary analysis showed they contained some information pertaining to redundancy. the low contribution of these attributes was partly due to the fact that gene pairs were already filtered by moderate protein sequence similarity  but this cutoff is relatively non-stringent. thus, measures that capture changes in protein composition like isoelectric points or predicted domains appear more informative about redundancy at the family level than primary sequence comparisons.

for gene expression, two types of experimental categories had a high rank for predictions, those that contained many experiments and those that examined expression at high spatial resolution. in the first category, "all experiments" , "pathogen infection experiments" , and "genetic modification experiments"  were among the top ranked categories. these categories all shared the common feature of being among the largest, comprised of hundreds of experiments each . thus, large datasets appear to sample enough expression contexts to reliably report the general co-expression of two paralogs for redundancy classification. the specific experimental context may also carry information.

in contrast to providing information over a broad range of experiments, tissue and cell-type specific profiles had relatively few experiments but appeared to provide useful information on a fine spatial scale. for example, "root cells," which is a compendium of expression profiles from cell types  <cit> , ranked 2nd for all attributes. at organ level resolution, "organism part" ranked 11th <cit> . similarly, the large-scale and spatially resolved expression data sets were not highly correlated to each other . thus, while attributes are not completely independent, they appear to provide different levels of information that machine learning can use to create a complex signature to identify redundancy.

in one example, four members of the plethora  family have been shown to be redundant in root development  <cit> . one member of the family, plt <dig> , was in the training set with redundant relationships specified between it and plt <dig>  and plt <dig> . however, our classifier also correctly predicted redundancy with a fourth member of the family, babyboom , which was not in the training set but has been shown to be at least partially redundant with plt <dig> for embryonic phenotypes  <cit> . interestingly, even though several members of plt family are more closely related in sequence to plt <dig> than bbm, they were not predicted to be redundant . thus, this example shows the properties of useful predictor for genetic redundancy, accurately delineating redundancy within a gene family in a non-trivial way; that is, the predictor does not simply label the most closely related genes as redundant.

in addition, we note that high probability predictions for redundancy  can be based on different sets of attributes. for example, while redundant pairs tended to have high gene expression correlation, many gene pairs classified as redundant have low correlation levels . in such cases, other attribute values that generally suggested redundancy influenced the redundancy prediction. additionally, we also generated separate predictions based on co-expression in specific categories of experimental conditions, such as root cell types or nutrient environments, leaving out overall trends in correlation across all experiments. such techniques could specifically address partial redundancy in conditions where a sufficient number of global gene expression experiments were available . thus, one advantage of machine learning approaches using multiple attributes is that they can discover multiple combinations of attributes that suggest redundancy or non-redundancy.

functional trends in predicted genome-wide genetic redundancy
the ability to identify redundancy at reasonable accuracy across the genome permits an analysis of genome-wide trends in the divergence of gene pairs. gene ontology was used to ask whether certain functional categories of genes were more likely to diverge or remain redundant according to predictions. to control for the number of closely related genes, paralogous groups of genes were binned into small , medium  or large  classes based on the number of hits with a blast cutoff of 1e- <dig> or less. in each class, gene pairs were split into redundant and non-redundant categories and each group was analyzed for over-represented functional categories .

we focused analysis on signal transduction since such genes are the frequent targets of reverse genetics and distinct trends in these categories emerged from the data. within this large-sized paralog group, non-redundant genes were over-represented in the category of regulation of transcription . these included members of the ap2-erebp , basic helix-loop-helix , myb , mads-box , bzip , and c2h <dig>  transcription factor families . similarly, in the small-sized families, the same term was also over-represented among non-redundant genes  with subgroups of many of the same gene families mentioned above. in the large gene family class, the frequency of transcriptional regulators with at least one redundant paralog was only 30% compared to a background of all genes with 50%. similar trends were observed in the distribution of predicted probabilities of redundancy, with transcription factors skewed toward lower values 

we examined the average values of attributes among redundant and non-redundant pairs to ask how attribute values contributed to classifications. on the gene expression level, gene pairs in the transcriptional regulator category showed a distribution of correlation values that was skewed toward lower values . for sequence attributes, transcriptional regulator gene pairs also showed higher differences in isoelectric points compared compared to all genes in large family size class . in summary, transcriptional regulators in large gene family classes show a trend of functional divergence of gene pairs, with tendencies to diverge in expression pattern and in subtle protein properties.

in contrast, genes predicted to be redundant were dramatically over-represented in the category of kinase activity, another category of signal transduction . the term included many members of the large receptor kinase-like protein family . the distribution of redundancy probability for gene pairs in the kinase category was skewed toward higher values compared to all genes in the same large family class . in contrast to the transcriptional regulator category, about 85% percent of kinases had at least one predicted redundant paralog. in general, the redundant kinases show the typical trends of redundant genes from other categories, with high correlation over a broad set of experiments . interestingly, despite the high level of predicted redundancy, gene pairs in the kinase category also showed a high divergence in isoeletric points , showing that this attribute trend of kinases, which typically signified non-redundancy, was overcome by other attributes. overall, the redundancy analysis suggests that genes at different levels of signal transduction show distinct trends in redundancy, which has intriguing implications for the general role of different signaling mechanisms in evolutionary change.

it is important to note that not all attributes showed the same trends in each functional category. for example, other functional categories with redundant genes showed different trends in attributes relative to the background, as noted above for the isoeletric point attribute for kinases. this means that, as noted above, the attributes display some independence and machine learning can rely on different attributes to call redundancy in different genes.

duplication origin and predicted redundancy
we also asked whether there were trends in redundancy stemming from either single or large-scale duplication events. to compare redundancy trends by duplication origin, gene pairs were labeled according to previous genome-wide analyses that identified recent segmental duplication events in arabidopsis  <cit>  as well as tandem and single duplications  <cit> . to minimize bias that might be caused by a correlation with the age of a duplication event, only gene pairs with a synonymous substitution rate  below  <dig> were used. the cutoff, in addition to the fact that many very recent duplicates were not included on the microarray and could not be analyzed, made the distribution of ks values in recent and single duplication events highly similar . thus, the comparison of these two groups was not confounded by differences in the apparent ages of duplication events in the recent segmental vs. single duplication events.

the average probability of redundancy was significantly higher among gene pairs in the most recent duplication event than among gene pairs resulting from single duplication events . despite the equilibration of neutral substitution rates, gene pairs in the two groups differed dramatically, on average, in molecular weight difference  and isoelectric point difference . in addition, expression correlation between gene pairs was generally two-fold higher in recent duplicates than in single duplication events. higher predicted redundancy among segmental duplicate pairs was not trivially due to larger gene families in that class, as the number of closely related genes for gene pairs in the single, old, recent, and tandem events is  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. it is possible that synonymous substitution rates do not accurately reflect relative divergence times but it is not apparent how one group would show bias over the other. thus, the predictions suggest that duplicates from large segmental duplications diverge more slowly in function, as is evident in low divergence in expression and protein-level properties.

CONCLUSIONS
identifying redundancy is a complex problem in which gene pairs may be redundant in some phenotypes but not others. however, the results indicate that there is enough generality in the outcome of gene duplication to classify redundancy based on evidence from disparate phenotypes. among the gene pairs that the svm classified as redundant, 62% were correct in withholding analysis. at this level of precision for redundancy predictions, svm was able to correctly label 48% of all known cases of redundant gene pairs. the best single attribute classifier achieved a precision of only 36% at a cutoff that correctly labeled 48% of known cases of redundancy. the roc curve analysis showed that no single attribute classifier performed better than svm at any point in the analysis of true positives vs. false positives. overall, the performance of the machine learning using multiple attributes was about twice as high as single attribute methods. the ability to predict redundancy at reasonable precision and recall rates constitutes a resource for studying genome evolution and redundancy in genetics.

informative attributes
the strength of the machine learning approach is that it can take advantage of multiple types of information and give each type a different weight. while more than  <dig> attributes were used in the analysis, the effective number of gene pair attributes was likely much smaller due to correlations among attributes. however, four or five distinct sets of attributes showed low correlation to each other and were shown to be informative for classification.

among attributes related to sequence composition, the most informative ones were not those typically used to assess genetic redundancy. the highest-ranking attribute was an index of the difference in isoelectric points. the fifth highest-ranking attribute was an index of the difference in molecular weights. an index of predicted domain sharing also ranked highly, largely because results were sensitive to its removal from the machine learning process, indicating that it provided relatively unique information. it was surprising that blast e-values provided little information at values lower than 1e- <dig>  the cutoff for the pairwise comparisons. this implies that, within gene families, other measures such as changes in the charge, composition of proteins or alterations in the domain structure are better indicators of functional redundancy than direct sequence comparison metrics.

two types of expression-based attributes were informative, including those comprised of many experiments and those that resolved mrna localization into specific tissues or transcriptional response to an environmental stimulus. while the large expression datasets were highly correlated , they were much less correlated with the high-resolution data . thus, it appears that different types of expression data are contributing at least some distinct information, with high spatial resolution datasets providing informative contextual information and larger datasets tracking the broad behavior of duplicate genes.

functional trends in redundancy
genes annotated with roles in transcriptional regulation, including many transcription factors, showed a tendency toward functional divergence. the opposite trend occurred at another level of signal transduction with kinases showing a tendency toward redundancy. interestingly, divergent redundant transcriptional regulators showed, on average, a divergence in isoelectric points compared to the background or even other redundant categories. this global trend fits arguments, based on case studies, that modular changes in transcription factor proteins are plausible mechanisms for evolutionary change  <cit> . for example, it has been postulated that subtle changes in proteins such as insertions of short linear motifs that mediate protein-protein interactions and simple sequence repeats of amino acids could play a role in functional divergence of transcription factors outside of dramatic changes to the dna binding site <cit> . still, a more systematic examination of protein interactions among transcription factors is needed to corroborate these findings. in general, the ability to classify large groups of genes enables an analysis of the functional trends that shape redundancy in a genome.

implications for genome organization
the high level of redundancy predicted in this study is in accordance with low hit rates in reverse genetic screens in arabidopsis and the high number of studies that have shown novel phenotypes in higher order mutants. however, the estimated redundancy rates still leave room for other explanations to account for the lack of single mutant phenotypes. for example, the machine learning approach predicted that 50% of genes are not buffered by paralogous redundancy but reverse genetic screens rarely achieve such a high rate of phenotype discovery. the predicted redundancy rate may be an underestimate, as about 23% of all gene pairs identified in the study could not be analyzed. still, one implication of our results is that other prevalent phenomenon are likely to buffer gene function including, for example, network architecture or non-paralogous genes. machine learning could eventually be applied to these other forms of redundancy but a comprehensive training set for these phenomena is currently lacking.

while the machine learning approach predicted that half the genes in the genome had a redundant paralog, most genes had no more than two other highly redundant paralogs. this leads to the paradoxical conclusion that, while the function of many or even most genes is buffered by a redundant paralog, redundancy is a relatively rare outcome of gene duplication. in addition, the forces that shape redundancy appear to be complex and not strictly a function of time. for example, a large proportion of predicted redundant gene pairs were quite ancient in their origin. and, the mode of duplication, by either single or large segmental duplication, also strongly influenced the tendency for gene pairs to diverge, according to predictions. together, these findings suggest that redundancy between pairs is a relatively rare but targeted phenomenon with complex causes, including mode of duplication, time, and gene function.

implications for genetic research
from a practical standpoint, svm predictions still carry enough uncertainty of false positive and false negative calls that they should be considered a guide to be used with researcher knowledge rather than a certain prediction. we envision that geneticists who are already interested in conducting reverse genetic studies of a gene of interest will often want to explore the possibility of redundancy within the same gene family. the gene of interest can then be queried in our predictions to first evaluate the number of predicted redundant genes. a large number of predicted redundant genes may be grounds for prioritizing another gene. if a small number of gene family members are implicated in redundancy and single mutants fail to display a genotype, researchers can use predictions to guide the construction of double or higher mutants. quite often the most sequence-similar gene is not the one predicted to most likely be redundant.

in the future, predictions can be improved by having more training data to learn redundancy in more narrowly defined phenotypes. in addition, a more objective and quantitative definition of redundancy would likely improve the quality of the training set. for example, the set of downstream targets for transcription factors could provide a standardized quantitative measure for single and double mutant phenotypes. these types of data would require significant work from any individual research group. however, the training set is continuously under expansion due to the efforts of the genetic research community as a whole. studies investigating direct targets of transcription factors are also increasingly common. thus, the predictions of the machine learning approach will improve over time. we view this report as a first generation approach to exploring the genome-wide outcomes of gene duplications using machine learning approaches, where reasonable predictions are now feasible.

