BACKGROUND
the occurrence of overlapping genes in higher eukaryotes has long been considered a rare event  <cit> , but the completion of genome sequencing efforts and whole-transcriptome analyses have instead revealed that mammalian genomes harbor a high number of overlapping transcriptional units  <cit> . the majority of detected overlaps occurs between genes transcribed from opposite strands of the same genomic locus and often involves non-coding rnas  <cit> . these antisense transcripts participate in a number of cellular processes, such as genomic imprinting, x chromosome inactivation, alternative splicing, gene silencing and methylation, rna editing and translation  <cit> . comparatively, very little is known about overlapping genes lying on the same dna strand, apart from a few cases reported in the literature  <cit> . overlap is estimated to involve around 10% of protein-coding genes  <cit> , raising to 20%–60% when non-coding rnas are included  <cit> . despite their abundance, the origin and evolution of overlapping genes in eukaryotes remain unclear, and different comparative studies have often led to discordant results  <cit> . the inclusion of non-coding rnas and poorly annotated transcripts in these analyses, together with protein-coding genes, may have contributed to the conflicting results, as protein-coding genes and functional non-coding rnas evolve differently  <cit> . in order to investigate the evolution of gene overlap in metazoa we decided to use a dataset restricted to well-annotated protein-coding genes. we retrieved overlapping protein-coding genes in  <dig> representative species , and compared the observed cases with a random distribution expected in case of functional neutrality. we identified features and conservation of protein-coding overlapping genes, and inferred possible mechanisms responsible for overlap formation. finally, to evaluate the possible relationship between overlap and gene expression, we analyzed the expression of our set of overlapping genes in a human breast cancer cdna library derived by  <dig> deep sequencing.

RESULTS
non-random retention of protein-coding overlapping genes in metazoa
the sequences of known protein-coding genes for five fully sequenced metazoan genomes  were retrieved from several sources . from each dataset, we filtered splice variants and removed non-coding transcripts, pseudogenes and purely computational gene predictions, and mapped each cdna on the corresponding genome to extract the overlapping gene clusters . ogcs were detected when there was partial or total overlap between the genomic coordinates of two or more genes. gene boundaries were defined as the start and the end of the longest transcript . our selection criteria allowed the detection of ogcs laying both on the same  and on opposite  dna strand . although we started from restrictive datasets, our estimates of overlapping protein-coding genes  were consistent with previous analyses in human, mouse and drosophila  <cit> . according to our results, overlap involves 4–8% of protein-coding genes, with the exception of drosophila, where the percentage of ogcs is higher .

unique genes refer to the actual number of sequences used in the analysis, after filtering for splice variants. for each species, the counts of overlapping genes , overlapping gene pairs , and overlapping gene clusters  coming from both real data and random simulations are shown. in the latter case the average number over ten simulations is reported together with the standard deviation . abbreviations: hs, homo sapiens;mm, mus musculus;dr, danio rerio;dm, drosophila melanogaster; ce, caenorabditis elegans.

we compared the observed data on overlapping genes to a null model that simulates the distribution of expected events in case of neutrality. for each species, we re-assigned random positions to the individual genes within each chromosome and counted the resulting number of overlaps.

in all species the overall number of observed ogcs was significantly lower than randomly expected , suggesting selection against the retention of overlap as a general mechanism of gene arrangement. there are at least two reasons possibly explaining the counter selection of gene overlap in metazoa. first, each mutation occurring within the overlapping regions would affect two or more sequences at the same time, and would likely reduce the ability of the involved genes to become optimally adapted  <cit> . second, overlap can result in transcriptional  <cit>  or translational  <cit>  interference between overlapping reading frames. both these reasons help to explain why ogcs formed by several genes, as well as those involving coding sequences, are particularly selected against .

although overlap of protein-coding genes is generally counterselected, some classes of overlap are preferentially retained. comparison to random expectation showed that observed ogcs display a non-random distribution in terms of their abundance, reciprocal orientation, and overlap pattern .

while the number of random ogcs varied according to the different gene density of the analyzed species , this tendency was not maintained in the observed data. observed ogcs in human and mouse were around 4– <dig> times less than expected, while they were ~ <dig> times less in fly and ~ <dig> times less in worm. in agreement with our observation, a remarkable abundance of antisense transcripts in fly and a paucity in worm have been recently reported  <cit> . the different rates of overlapping genes in fly and worm could be due to species-specific features. the higher proportion of overlapping genes in fly might be partly explained by the high gene density and the extended utr length . the low number of ogcs in worm may be instead a consequence of the presence of operons, which involve at least 15% of c. elegans genes  <cit> . each operon contains from two to eight genes which are cotranscribed from the same strand as a polycistronic rna and trans-spliced  <cit> . it is conceivable that such feature might place a constraint on the plasticity of the worm genome, disfavoring the retention of specific overlap types, such as antiparallel and partial arrangements. similar genomic constraint has been recently proposed to explain the paucity of duplicated genes in operons  <cit> .

in all genomes except zebrafish, ogcs formed by two genes occurred at a frequency significantly higher than expected . in addition, ogcs in human, mouse, and fly were mostly formed by antiparallel convergent pairs which overlapped only partially, while in zebrafish and more markedly in worm nested overlaps were preferred . however, the results in zebrafish should be taken carefully, since they are probably affected by the poor coverage of the corresponding gene set. likewise, the annotation of 5' and 3' untranslated regions appears particularly incomplete in worm , which may contribute to an underestimation of some overlap classes . in all species overlaps between genes lying on the same strand and those sharing coding regions are strongly selected against . overlap between utrs is preferentially retained in all organisms, while the overlap between coding regions and introns is common in zebrafish, drosophila and worm . the non-random features of observed ogcs suggest that different overlap types are under different selective pressures. the retention of specific overlapping classes might be allowed when it provides selective advantages: in the case of genes on opposite strands the advantage could be represented by antisense regulation. human, mouse and fly are significantly enriched in overlapping pairs potentially able to form antisense, which include all antiparallel overlaps sharing exons . this result suggests that, at least in these species, positive selection might act to preserve antisense regulation. it cannot be excluded, however, that part of the positive effect could be a consequence of the negative selection towards parallel and cds/cds overlaps.

poor evolutionary conservation of ogcs in metazoa
we next evaluated the conservation of ogcs across metazoan evolution by verifying both the presence of orthologous genes and the overlap conservation. for each pair of analyzed species, we assigned pairwise orthology for all sequence entries, extracted the orthologs involved in ogcs, and verified whether the overlapping arrangement was conserved . most overlapping genes in one species had their corresponding orthologs in the others , but very few overlaps were maintained . in total, ~40% of human ogcs were also present in mouse -a higher percentage than previous estimates   <cit> , but lower than the rate of orthologous genes between the two species .

among ogcs conserved between human and mouse, the antiparallel arrangement was represented the most , highlighting again the tendency to maintain possible sense-antisense regulation. interestingly, convergent and nested antiparallel arrangements were significantly enriched in the conserved set , when compared to divergent overlaps . this result supports previous observations that 3'-3'  overlapping pairs are significantly more conserved than 5'5'  ones, and indicates a prevalent role for 3'utrs in antisense regulation  <cit> .

conservation of overlapping gene  pairs according to their reciprocal arrangement.

parallel ogcs did not show any significant enrichment in the conserved set . since same-strand overlaps are strongly selected against , we investigated whether the ones that are conserved are more likely to be functional. indeed, we found that several parallel ogcs conserved between human and mouse might be functionally related on the basis of the available literature data .

although the vast majority of overlap is not conserved over long evolutionary distances, we found evidence of few ancient overlaps. overall, three ogcs were conserved between ecdysozoa  and deuterostomia . interestingly, the only ogc that is conserved from c. elegans to human was lost in arthropods, while two different ogcs are conserved from d. melanogaster to human. all of these ogcs are formed of two genes with a nested antiparallel arrangement. one of the two clusters conserved in d. melanogaster  involves the synapsin  and an inhibitor of metalloproteinase  genes. according to the model proposed for the evolution of the syn-timp cluster  <cit> , the locus containing the ancestral nested genes has undergone gene duplications and losses in vertebrates, followed by function partitioning among the resulting paralogs. a comparable succession of events is compatible also with the evolution of the only ogc conserved between vertebrates and worm . in this case, the ancestral ogc locus seems to have undergone duplication after the split between protostomia and deuterostomia, followed by function partitioning among the resulting paralogs .

the poor evolutionary conservation of gene overlap in metazoa suggests that its occurrence is species-specific. such species-specificity was not due to a recent origin of the overlapping genes, as previously suggested  <cit> . we found that most overlapping genes in one species had orthologs in the other species, although they did not overlap . in addition,  <dig> % of human overlapping genes and  <dig> % of mouse overlapping genes remained physically adjacent in the compared genome, although the superimposition was lost .

there are examples of functional processes whose poor conservation during evolution is part of their functional role, alternative splicing being the most striking one  <cit> . although approximately two-thirds of human genes are alternatively spliced  <cit> , only 10–20% of them conserve the spliced exons in the orthologous genes in mouse  <cit> . hence we can propose a species-specific usage of gene overlap similarly to what seems to happen for alternative splicing  <cit> .

gene structure modifications associated with overlap formation
in order to infer possible mechanisms for overlap formation, we compared the gene structure  of conserved and non-conserved overlapping genes in human and mouse. in particular, we analyzed the gene structure of human and mouse overlapping genes whose orthologs lie adjacent  but do not overlap in the other genome. we found that  <dig> human overlapping gene pairs  and  <dig> mouse overlapping gene pairs  had orthologs that do not overlap but remain adjacent in the genome of the other species . the  <dig> human overlapping gene pairs were significantly longer  and had more exons  than the mouse orthologs, when compared to the set of conserved overlapping genes . similarly, the  <dig> human orthologs of mouse overlapping gene pairs were shorter  and were formed with fewer exons  than the conserved overlapping pairs. in addition, non-conserved overlapping gene pairs tended to significantly overlap in their utrs for both human  and mouse , when compared to the conserved set .

the number of overlapping gene pairs in each analyzed dataset is reported in brackets. cds overlaps refer to the overlapping genes whose cds coordinates are superimposed, while utr overlaps refer to those cases where the gene coordinates  are superimposed.

the structural analysis of orthologs of human and mouse overlapping genes that remain adjacent but lack the superimposition shows that the overlap formation is frequently associated with an increase in gene size and exon number. we therefore suggest that the overlap between adjacent genes may originate by species-specific acquisition of additional, non-coding exons. in agreement with our results, most of the loci analyzed by the encode consortium were found to possess distal 5' non-coding exons which map into neighboring genes and tend to be tissue- or cell-line-specific  <cit> .

expression patterns of overlapping gene pairs
in order to evaluate whether the presence of overlap is a mechanism for regulation of gene expression, we used the human ogc dataset to cross-examine a human breast cancer transcriptome obtained by massive pyrosequencing  <cit> . to be able to detect the expression of transcripts normally expressed at low levels, we used a normalized cdna library . for this reason, our analysis is mostly qualitative and aims to detect the reciprocal expression of genes involved in overlap. although global gene expression can result quantitatively altered by the tumorous condition, a significant modification in the pattern of reciprocal expression between overlapping genes is unlikely. we defined three patterns of reciprocal expression: co-expression, when both genes were represented in the library; discordant expression, for og pairs in which expression is observed for only one gene in the pair; and no expression, for ogs whose expression was not detected. figure  <dig> shows the frequencies of these three expression patterns in the breast cancer library, by grouping the og pairs according to the type of overlap.

the observed rate of co-expression in the whole dataset was  <dig> %, while the percentage of discordant expressed ogs was  <dig> %. taking into account the overall coverage of known genes in our cdna library, the co-expression rate is four times higher than expected by the random probability of having any two genes expressed at the same time in the library . therefore, ogs showed a significant tendency to be co-expressed . it should be noted that we obtained significant co-expression even though we removed all sequences mapping to more than one gene in the same cluster . such filtering step likely led to an underestimation of the level of co-expression of overlapping genes, but it did not influence the final result. by contrast, the percentage of discordantly expressed genes is not significantly different from random expectation . previous studies reported higher co-expression rates, ranging from  <dig> % to  <dig> %  <cit> , with the differences likely due to experimental design  and in the number of analyzed tissues.

considering the different overlapping arrangements, we also observed that co-expression was significantly higher for both convergent  and divergent ogs , when compared to the frequency of the complete overlaps. on the opposite, we observed no statistically significant differences among overlapping arrangements when considering discordantly expressed ogs. taken together, these results further support the hypothesis that gene overlap might be used to co-ordinate expression of adjacent genes.

CONCLUSIONS
our work shows for the first time that overlap between protein coding genes, although widespread, is counterselected during metazoan evolution. we also show that overlap retention does not occur randomly, since it preferentially involves gene pairs lying on opposite dna strands and sharing non-coding regions. the features of retained ogcs suggest a likely role for overlap in the reciprocal regulation of neighboring genes. the evidence that ogs are significantly co-expressed in the breast cancer transcriptome further supports this hypothesis. in addition, the poor conservation of overlap during evolution, and the fact that formation/loss of the overlapping arrangement is related to changes in gene structure, mostly occurring within non-coding regions, points to this as a species-specific mechanism. as non-coding regions generally have fewer constraints on their primary sequence, the tendency to confine the overlap to non-coding regions may achieve co-regulation without forcing two functional protein-coding genes to co-evolve. we might speculate that this tendency would ultimately result in the evolution of overlapping non-coding transcripts optimized for the regulation of their protein-coding partner.

