BACKGROUND
modern human populations and their activities have had a significant, and frequently negative, impact on other organisms  <cit> . human populations exert a tremendous ecological and evolutionary pressure on native species, comparable in total effect to that of glaciations on temperate species but operating over much shorter timescales . the effect of human activities on native species is not easily predictable, and in some instances human activities have benefited native wildlife, often through increasing habitat or food availability  <cit> . genetic methods are starting to prove useful for linking demographic processes in animal species to human activity, with recent studies attributing decreasing effective population size and increasing population fragmentation to anthropogenic deforestation, the expansion of agriculture, road construction and the presence of human settlements  <cit> . here, we use genetic analyses to investigate whether anthropogenic forces, specifically the spread of agriculture, or non-anthropogenic forces such as the retreat of the laurentide and cordilleran glaciers, have driven the population expansion of a north american bat.

roosting colonies of mexican free-tailed bats  are some of the largest and most conspicuous aggregations of bats in north america. while historic colony counts numbered in the tens of millions  <cit> , more recent, and likely more accurate, exit counts using thermal imaging and infrared tracking methods estimate the total census size of free-tailed bat colonies throughout the entire southwestern united states at  <dig> million individuals  <cit> . however, when the southwestern united states and mexico are considered together, the census population size of this species may easily reach 107- <dig> individuals, making it one of the most numerous known non-human mammals. the largest known aggregations of mexican free-tailed bats are in nursery colonies, primarily hosting reproductive adult females and their young. during the energetically demanding period of pregnancy and lactation, females ingest up to two-thirds of their body weight in insects every night  <cit> . these colonies thus depend upon a large and reliable base of insect prey to maintain their considerable population sizes.

a number of studies have documented strong links between mexican free-tailed bats and important agricultural pest insects, especially helicoverpa zea and spodoptera exigua . the adults of these moth species migrate northwards in the spring from mexico to the united states, often flying at high altitudes to take advantage of prevailing winds  <cit> . high-altitude echolocation surveys show that tadarida feeding calls are coincident in time and altitude with these migrating insect populations  <cit> . molecular analyses also document significant levels of h. zea and s. exigua dna in the feces of mexican free-tailed bats  <cit> , thus further verifying this predator-prey relationship. although the diet of mexican free-tailed bats is not restricted to agricultural pest insects  <cit> , the development of human agriculture likely resulted in predictable swarms of pest insects caused in part by increasing levels of plant cultivation. mexican free-tailed bats now exploit this resource heavily, especially during pregnancy and lactation  <cit> .

this predator-prey relationship between mexican free-tailed bats and agricultural pest insects suggests that we should observe population growth in bats coupled to increases in insect prey in connection with human agricultural practices in the americas. population growth would most likely be associated with the widespread expansion of european agriculture during the last few centuries, or as an outside possibility, with the emergence of native american agriculture during the last few thousand years  <cit> . more concretely, population growth of mexican free-tailed bats cannot be linked to anthropogenic processes if it occurred before humans arrived in the americas around 9- <dig> thousand years ago   <cit> .

population growth leaves distinct patterns of variation in genetic data, and these patterns can be used to infer effective sizes and growth rates, as well as estimate the time at which growth commenced  <cit> . genetic variation in t. b. mexicana is consistent with population growth; mismatch distribution analyses of mitochondrial dna sequence data are suggestive of population expansion occurring in concert with the development of human agriculture . however, these analyses lack statistical power to distinguish between anthropogenic and climatic drivers of population growth, and this particular test often exhibits high false positive rates  <cit> . in this paper we take advantage of more statistically rigorous methods to infer these demographic parameters and evaluate the anthropogenic influence hypothesis. here, we explore the rate and time of population growth in mexican free-tailed bats using one of these advanced inferential methods, approximate maximum likelihood. a quantitative analysis of the rate and timing of population growth in t. b. mexicana can help us understand the response of wildlife species to major innovations in human cultural evolution such as the development of agriculture.

RESULTS
approximate maximum likelihood
summary statistics suggest that mexican free-tailed bat populations have experienced growth , as do published neutrality tests and mismatch distributions  <cit> . genetic diversity is particularly high for the mtdna locus , whereas diversity for the rag <dig> gene is an order of magnitude lower . however, this disparity primarily reflects differences in the mutation rates of these two loci . more tellingly, singleton polymorphisms - a signal of population growth - are frequent in both datasets, accounting for 40% of all polymorphisms in the mtdna control region and 32% of all polymorphisms in the rag <dig> locus. reflecting these high levels of singletons, tajima's d is negative for both loci . although such values are broadly indicative of growth, more sophisticated analyses are necessary to statistically exclude the possibility that mexican free-tailed bat populations have actually remained constant in size and, if such a model can be rejected, to infer the rate and time of onset of their growth.

we turned to approximate maximum likelihood to explore a two-phase population growth model . we applied this method to our empirical dataset, first, to the two loci individually, and subsequently, to the two loci together . considering the mtdna control region alone, the maximum likelihood estimate  suggests an ancestral effective population size of ~ <dig> thousand, a modern effective population size of ~ <dig> million, and an onset of growth of ~ <dig> kya . considering rag <dig> alone, the mle suggests an ancestral effective population size of ~ <dig> thousand, a modern effective population size of ~ <dig> million, and an onset of growth of ~ <dig> kya . importantly, however, the actual demographic history that produced the observed data must be compatible with both loci taken together; thus, to determine the demography that best fits both of our genetic loci, we considered the combined likelihood for the mtdna control region and autosomal rag <dig> locus . our combined mle favors an ancestral effective population size of ~ <dig> thousand, a modern effective population size of ~ <dig> million, and an onset of growth ~ <dig> ka. only  <dig> grid points  within the 3-dimensional parameter space of na, n <dig>  and τ are significantly likely  . this set includes ranges of ~120- <dig> thousand for na, ~6- <dig> million for n <dig>  and ~120- <dig> kya for τ. we note that the point representing constant effective size  is rejected with strong statistical significance. in general, the ancestral effective size na and the time of onset of growth τ were inferred with some certainty. the haploid locus contains more information about time , whereas the autosomal locus, with its larger effective size and thus older time to the most recent common ancestor , carries more information about the ancestral effective size . we had less power to infer the modern effective size n <dig>  as is evident from the profile likelihood curve derived from the combined likelihood surface . however, this uncertainty in n <dig> is accommodated naturally by the likelihood function, and is thus accounted for in all the demographic values that we present here.

demographic
note too that our three demographic parameters  are not independent, but are instead correlated to various extents. considering grid points within the 95% confidence interval of our combined likelihood surface , the two effective sizes  are weakly correlated . this explains ~11% of the observed variance. however, the interdependence of the effective population sizes and the time of onset of growth is more pronounced. we find that τ is very strongly, negatively correlated with na  and n <dig> , thus explaining ~46% and ~58% of the observed variance, respectively. both associations are non-linear, and in each case, the time of onset of growth appears younger as the effective size increases. this suggests that development of new summary statistics with increased power to distinguish effective population sizes and/or the time of onset of growth would help to reduce the size of our 95% confidence interval by decoupling this parameter dependence.

validation
even though we used only standard methods, we still validated our inference technique using data simulated under known demographic histories. to do so, we generated coalescent trees and ancestral recombination graphs  at  <dig> values of na, n <dig>  and τ drawn randomly from a uniform distribution across the parameter space, and calculated the values of s, η <dig>  and h returned by each of these simulations. for each dataset, we then applied the approximate maximum likelihood algorithm described above, and calculated 95% confidence intervals for na, n <dig>  and τ. we considered individual test cases to be successful when our inferred demography included the known  values of na, n <dig>  and τ within its 95% confidence intervals. by setting the type i error rate at  <dig> , we would just by chance expect to infer na, n <dig>  and τ incorrectly for ~5% of our simulated datasets. in practice, we observe a somewhat higher type i error rate of 9% . we suspect that this small difference, which causes our demographic estimates to appear slightly conservative, probably occurs because we must calculate likelihoods at points along a grid of parameter values, rather than inferring them freely across the entire likelihood surface. although decreasing the grid spacing  would then systematically reduce our observed type i error rate, this option is not currently computationally feasible. the existing likelihood surface based on a  <dig> ×  <dig> ×  <dig> grid required approximately three thousand cpu hours to calculate on a fast distributed-computing system. in comparison, a larger  <dig> ×  <dig> ×  <dig> grid would take an impossible three million cpu hours to compute . we note, however, that the algorithm applied here varies only very slightly from expectations, and furthermore, because these small errors are conservative, they do not materially affect any of our main conclusions.

discussion
we set out to determine whether mexican free-tailed bat populations have experienced population growth and, if so, whether their onset of growth was concurrent with the expansion of human agricultural activity. the approximate maximum likelihood method applied here is a flexible and powerful analytical tool for testing hypotheses about historical demography. similar methods have been applied previously to demographic analyses of human populations  <cit> , and have relied on large datasets to infer complex demographic models  <cit> . here, we employ these methods to address a specific aspect of the historical demography of mexican free-tailed bats, namely, the time of onset of population growth. using coalescent-based inferential statistics, we directly address our hypothesis while ensuring that our data have sufficient power. further, we address our hypothesis using amounts of sequence data that are typically available for many non-model organisms . we find that these bat populations have grown, but that their population growth began long before the arrival of humans in the americas.

several key points emerge from our analyses. first, a scenario whereby mexican free-tailed bat populations are not growing  is statistically unlikely. considering the data points contained within the 95% confidence intervals for the demographic parameters , modern effective sizes were always estimated to be larger than ancestral effective sizes . we therefore have statistical confidence that mexican free-tailed bat populations have increased in size. second, growth rates are not particularly large. the mle of the combined likelihood surface suggests ~48-fold growth from the ancestral to modern effective population size . this rate of increase  is equivalent to a doubling of the bat population approximately every  <dig> kyr . such values do not suggest the extremely rapid growth that would be expected if mexican free-tailed bat populations expanded from a small population size to their current numbers in response to human agricultural activity during the last few hundred years. third, although we have little statistical power to place an upper bound on the time of onset of growth, our analysis has considerable power to infer the lower bound . our mle suggests that population growth in mexican free-tailed bats began ~ <dig> ka, and the 95% confidence interval indicates a time for the onset of growth no younger than ~ <dig> kya . because we infer such old times for the onset of growth in these bat populations, anthropogenic causes, which began no earlier than 9- <dig> kya  <cit> , are statistically highly unlikely.

several factors might confound our analysis, although none of these materially affect our main conclusions. first, coalescent analyses assume selective neutrality. there is no evidence for balancing selection  in our dataset; in such cases, tajima's d trends towards positive values. positive, directional selection could produce the negative values of tajima's d that we observe, as well as elevate the number of singleton polymorphisms. however, levels of genetic diversity for our loci  are not consistent with positive, directional selection, which tends to considerably reduce genetic diversity  <cit> . studies in other bat species also fail to reveal consistent evidence of positive selection at these two loci  <cit> . finally, we note that strong positive, directional selection would lead us to infer high rates of growth and a very recent time of onset - the opposite of what we find here.

second, both visual inspection of the sequence alignment and tests of the four-gamete rule  <cit>  indicate that the mtdna locus  have been affected by homoplasy . because it recreates polymorphism that is already present in the population, homoplasy tends to reduce the number of segregating sites and singleton polymorphisms that can actually be identified. however, the mutation rates of the two loci studied here - on the order of 10- <dig> and 10- <dig> - are sufficiently small that homoplasy should have only minor effects on either dataset, and consequently, on the demographic parameters that we infer.

third, we may have over- or underestimated generation times. if the average generation interval is actually larger than we assume , then the time of onset of growth will be proportionally and linearly older than the values we report. conversely, if the average generation time is less , then the time of onset of growth will be proportionally and linearly younger. however, even if the average generation time were  <dig> year, which is not supported by demographic studies in this bat species, our analyses would infer growth beginning no earlier than ~ <dig> kya. this date still long precedes the arrival of humans in the americas, let alone the emergence of widescale agriculture in north america.

CONCLUSIONS
our analyses firmly support population growth in mexican free-tailed bats, but reject a direct co-evolutionary connection with the development of human agriculture. we are then left asking what may have caused this increase in mexican free-tailed bat numbers. the question is complicated by the fact that our data lack sufficient power to place an upper bound on the time of the onset of growth. however, since we are able to confidently infer a lower bound for this parameter , we find it likely that the signals of population growth observed in our data may be attributable to range expansion out of pleistocene refugia. t. b. mexicana is a subtropical species, and typically migrates south to overwinter in mexico . in glacial periods during the pleistocene, its range would have been restricted to central america and mexico, while interglacial periods would have seen a substantial range expansion and, we expect, concomitant population growth.

finally, we cannot completely exclude the possibility that growth rates of mexican free-tailed bat populations may have increased  relative to previous levels in response to extremely recent human activity, such as the development of large wind farms or the advent of wide-scale industrialized agriculture following the second world war. a very recent uptick in the rate of growth on the background of a population that is already growing is extremely difficult to detect  <cit> . similarly, it is also difficult to detect very recent decreases in effective population size. with only two genetic loci, we lack sufficient power to detect extremely recent deviations of this nature. simulation studies indicate that hundreds to thousands of independent loci may be necessary to detect such recent events using sequence data  <cit> . identifying very recent changes in population growth is difficult largely because the rate at which such demographic changes are recorded is constrained by low rates of mutation. it remains possible that such recent timescales might be more accessible by studying rapidly evolving microsatellites. nevertheless, two key points are clear from our analyses: i) mexican free-tailed bat populations have grown substantially in the past, and ii) this growth began well before humans arrived in the americas. given current evidence, it seems most parsimonious to assume that human agricultural activities have not driven this growth process to any major extent.

