BACKGROUND
the prediction of protein structure from purely sequence data has posed a challenge over many years. with the increasing numbers of known structures, many recent methods have turned to the use of structure-based sequence alignment   <cit>  or fragment assembly  <cit> , including various hybrid combinations  <cit> . although some of these methods are referred to as ab initio, they all rely on having a database of known structures and are better classed as de novo to distinguish them from a pure physico-chemical approach.

following some of the earliest attempts at protein structure prediction  <cit> , it became clear that the use of external biochemical constraints on residue proximity could provide a very powerful filter on the permitted structures, whether these were simple pairwise positions  <cit>  or whole motifs  <cit> . biochemically important residues are typically found in close proximity and are also highly conserved. with a view to using such information to constrain predictions, attempts were made to predict active site residues from a multiple sequence alignment  <cit> . this approach relies on finding residues that are conserved for no apparent structural reason and some recent methods also combine this with the requirement to form a cluster in space when the protein structure  is known  <cit> . .

in this work we use the method of chelliah et al.,   <cit>  to predict residues that are likely to be located in an active  site and to evaluate their proximity in the context of a model for the protein. we do not address the generation of the models but rather take a series of 'decoy' models constructed by a de novo protein structure prediction method . unlike some collections of decoy models, the ones we use were generated from abstract secondary structure lattice frameworks  which has the advantage that we know, by definition, whether the model has the native fold. rather than use an ambiguous root mean square deviation  based measure, we can then evaluate our model scores by a true/false criterion.

we begin our study using a small sample of five α/β/α proteins for which a large number of decoys had been previously generated. these proteins, with length under  <dig> residues, are a mix of both topological and functional types, including enzymes and non-enzymes. we then develop a score termed "fold score" based on the proximity of predicted active  site residues to rank the different folds on their functional potential. without change, the method is then applied to a variety of other proteins of the same structural class but ranging in size up to almost  <dig> residues in length.

RESULTS
training-set of five proteins
the method was tested initially on a set of five small β/α proteins, with a central β-sheet packed either side by a layer of α-helix giving a three-layered α/β/α architecture . for each protein,  <dig> decoy models that contains folds of different types  were taken and were classified based on their fold-type and the models of same fold-type were clustered . as an example, table  <dig> gives the details of number of fold-types in the  <dig> models for one of these proteins with the others having a similar distribution. the scores calculated by the crescendo method were analysed on each model by measuring the spatial proximity of different sized subsets of the highest scoring positions. a score  was devised to measure how compact each subset was and plotted against increasing subset size. . these "proximity plots" for the predicted site residues for each protein showed a clear overall trend for the smaller subsets of the most highly predicted residues to be in closer proximity. however, differences in loop conformation and strand or helix shifts can have major effect while looking at the proximity of the functional site residues. even models with the same fold-type do not always have all their residues in the same spatial location and hence the "proximity plots" contains a degree of noise. figures 3a and 3b shows the "proximity plots" of the best models in each fold-type for chemotaxis y protein  and thioredoxin . when the sample of site residues was small  there was more noise in the data and when the sample was large  the plots all decayed to an uninformative level of discrimination. for proteins that have multiple active sites, the top scoring pairs of residues could be from two different binding sites and may not be within the distance cut-off . some of the noise in the "proximity plots"  for the smaller subsets  is due to this reason. for example, crescendo predicted two clusters of binding site residues for the chemotaxis y protein , one being the active site and other being the oligermic interface. the top scoring few pairs belong to both these two sites and were not in close proximity to each other. this is the reason for this protein having only 40% of the top  <dig> pairs of residues being within the  <dig> Å distance cut-off . by contrast, crescendo predicted one binding site for the thioredoxin protein  and 100% of the top  <dig> pairs of residues are within  <dig> Å distance . to minimize the effect of noise in the plots, we used a score based on a range of subsets up to  <dig> positions to provide a summary score for each plot. . using this measure, the method efficiently discriminates the correct models from the incorrect models in both these cases.


                              
                                 native structure
                              
                              
                                 hi ;sii;hiii 
                              
                              
                                  <dig> 
                              
the "summary score" for each plot can then be plotted against a measure of deviation from the native structure.

as the decoy models went through a threading phase in their construction, they can contain errors both in 3d geometry and in the register of the sequence mapped to the structure. to combine both these aspects in a single score, we plotted the percentage sequence identity  of the structural superposition of the model with the native crystal structure divided by 5+rmsd  to be plotted with a reasonable spread). this produces plots in which each model appears as a point, allowing those with the correct fold to be compared to other decoys. . while there is a slight trend for the correct folds to have a better rmsd and alignment , the important aspect of the models is whether they have the correct fold or not. with the range in structure over the decoy sets, changes in loop position can make as big a difference to rmsd as the exchange of two β strand positions. the latter topological difference is considered important in this work while 'random' variations in rmsd over models of same fold are not. table  <dig> summarises the results shown in figures 4a to 4e. the strength of the method in discriminating the correct and the incorrect models is also shown as roc plots in figures 5a to 5e for each of the five proteins. it can be seen from figures  and table  <dig>  that proteins with the correct fold invariably score higher than those with the non-native fold. the only exception to this is a single fold  from the flavodoxin set of decoys. as the flavodoxin is the largest of the five, with longer loops it might be expected to be the most likely to perform poorly. .

independent test-set of larger proteins
the method was applied to the set of seven larger α/β/α proteins . these ranged in length from  <dig> residues up to  <dig> residues thus covering a span from the previous test set up to a size well beyond any successful de novo or ab initio prediction. to evaluate success we report only the simple 1: <dig> rmsd value over all positions since at this size we are interested only in whether the correct fold  has been selected and not in the exact register of the sequence over the structure as captured by the previous measure. for each protein, the four highest ranked decoy folds were considered and the rmsd value to the native was reported. .

for the smallest protein in this set, 1v9w  the fourth ranked fold corresponds to the native with a rmsd value of  <dig>  Å and the third rank model has two β-strands swapped between adjacent positions at the edge of the sheet. for the slightly larger 1rlj  the second ranked fold corresponds to the native with a good rmsd value of  <dig>  Å. at almost  <dig> residues, 1kjn was almost as good across all four top ranked models  and the first ranked fold corresponds to the native. for the above three proteins, the correct fold was selected. the remaining four proteins has no native-like fold in the  <dig> decoy models taken from the de novo protein structure prediction method and so, the top ranked models were checked for them being a closer variant to the native structure. 1vq <dig> was considerably larger  but for this size, the rmsd values around  <dig> or  <dig> Å on the third and fourth ranked models were acceptable. the main error in the best model was found to be caused by two adjacent β strands lying in swapped positions on the edge of the sheet. indeed, neglecting strand swaps, all four models otherwise correspond to the native fold.

the remaining three proteins were close in size at 186/ <dig> residues. at this size the two single figure rmsd values of  <dig>  for 1uxo and  <dig>  for 1t <dig> constitute good approximations to the native fold. 1t <dig> had a pair of swapped β-strand positions in the middle of the sheet and 1uxoa had a minor helix displaced to the opposite face of the sheet.

the largest protein  had a best rmsd value over  <dig> Å which does not correspond to a native-like fold. the models with rmsd values  <dig>  and  <dig>  are not too far from the native structures. the model with rmsd  <dig> , had  <dig> pairs of adjacent swapped β-strands in the middle of the sheet and a pair of helix swaps between the opposite faces of the sheet. the model with rmsd  <dig> , had  <dig> pairs of adjacent swapped β-strands  and a pair of helix swaps between the opposite faces of the sheet. the bigger rmsd in these models are due to longer loops and helix displacments between layers.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that consideration of the requirement of proteins to form a functional site, either enzymic or binding, can be used to select the correct protein fold from a large number of well constructed decoy models. our method uses only sequence data to do this in combination with the model structures and involves no information derived from the known structures. a test set of five small β/α type proteins were used to determine the best formulation of the crescendo method, with a clear choice being indicated that the use of a reduced number of residue environments was best. this difference from the application of the method to native protein structures arises because we are applying the method to rough cα models from which the constructed side-chain orientations are unreliable.

this protocol was then applied to a set of larger proteins with the correct fold, or a close variant being selected in six of the seven proteins. the type of error most commonly seen in this test set was the swapping of adjacent strand positions in a β-sheet. with hindsight, this is not an unexpected error, since these strands still have the same orientation and any functional residues that they, or their flanking loops, carry will remain in close proximity and be scored equally well by our method. not only will our evaluation method be blind to such variation but if elements of structure carry no functional sites then they will be equally unconstrained. the method is more sensitive to discrimination between models that have secondary structure elements oriented in the opposite direction . for example, chemotaxis y protein , has the c-terminal helix  involved in binding. the fold-type f <dig> , has this helix in the opposite direction, which is the lowest ranked fold for this protein. similarly, thioredoxin has the fourth strand involved in binding, but is in the opposite direction in one of the fold-types and ranked last. for the smaller proteins almost all loops on a face will be involved in a binding site but for the larger proteins, there is a greater chance that some loops will be unconstrained. despite these fundamental limitations, if the number of allowed topologies can be reduced, even to single figures, then more detailed modelling methods can be applied to reconstruct the geometry of the binding site. if the nature of the substrate, or just what is bound in the site, is known then some stereo-specific constraints may provide further selection criteria.

