BACKGROUND
recent genome analyses have shown that the genomes of intracellular obligate symbionts, which are vertically transmitted to the next generation of their hosts, have a tendency to reduce in size during evolution  <cit> . generally, smaller genomes have a lower g+c content   <cit> , although there are some exceptions, e.g., a symbiont of cicadas, ca. hodgkinia cicadicola has a very small genome  with a relatively high g+c content   <cit> . genes for dna recombination and repair, i.e., reca and uvra to c, are deleted in many intracellular symbiont genomes  <cit> .

reductive genome evolution  has been extensively studied in insect symbionts. buchnera strains, which are intracellular heterotrophic symbionts of aphids, have small genomes . although the genome architectures of the extant buchnera strains are stable, rge is ongoing with small deletions at a slower rate than in its early stage  <cit> . however, the earlier stages of rge are still largely unknown.

intracellular symbiotic chemoautotrophic bacteria are ubiquitous in deep-sea invertebrates such as calyptogena clams  <cit> . calyptogena clam symbionts are thought to be vertically transmitted via eggs  <cit> . the similarity between the phylogenetic topologies of calyptogena clams and their symbionts indicates their co-evolution  <cit> , although the possibility of lateral acquisition of the symbionts in some calyptogena clams has been reported  <cit> . the genomes of symbionts in calyptogena magnifica  and in c. okutanii  have been reported  <cit> . they lack large-sized repeated sequences , phage and mobile genetic elements  <cit> . a comparative analysis of these genomes showed that the rge in calyptogena symbiont genomes is currently ongoing and is still in an earlier stage than that in the buchnera strains  <cit> . further, it has been reported that both of the calyptogena symbionts lack genes for dna recombination and repair such as reca and muty  <cit> .

recombinase reca is a key enzyme for homologous recombination  <cit> . it requires relatively long repeated sequences  for recombination  <cit>  and is a possible driving mechanism of dynamic genome rearrangement including large deletions. in rge in symbionts of calyptogena clams, reca probably functioned to delete large gene sequences by recombination, consuming the long repeated sequences in the early stage of rge  <cit> . on the other hand, muty is known to repair a-g mispairs to c-g pairs  <cit> . thus, the loss of muty is thought to cause decreasing g+c content of the genome.

while losses of genes for dna repair and recombination may occur spontaneously, they affect the later stage of rge by increasing mutation rates, affecting the gc bias and regenerating short repeated sequences  <cit> . after the loss of reca, the genome architecture probably stabilized in the clam symbionts  <cit> . in the insect symbiont buchnera, reca was reported to be lost in its early evolution  <cit> . the contribution of reca to rge in intracellular symbionts is still controversial. it was shown that small deletions with a size of up to  <dig> kb occur without recognizable repeats via reca-independent recombination events in salmonella  <cit> . to understand the roles of reca-dependent and -independent recombination events in rge in intracellular symbiosis, it is important to determine when and how reca was lost in their lineages and the effects of its loss on their rge. however, little is known about the relationship between the loss of dna repair/recombination genes and rge. to understand the effects of their loss on rge, we posed the question of whether these genes had been lost before the divergence of the calyptogena clam symbionts or whether they remained in some symbionts thereafter. to address this question, we searched for reca, muty and/or their remnants in the genomes of  <dig> calyptogena clam symbionts in addition to rma and vok.

RESULTS
phylogenetic relationships of calyptogena clam symbionts
before screening the genes for dna recombination and repair, we analyzed the phylogenetic relationships of  <dig> symbionts of calyptogena clams . because the resolution of the 16s rrna tree was too low, we amplified and sequenced the 23s rrna genes  from the symbionts and reconstructed trees using the concatenated 16s and 23s rrna gene sequences . two clades well supported with high bootstrap values and posterior probabilities were identified. symbionts of c. kawamurai, c. laubieri, c. kilmeri, c. soyoae and c. okutanii  formed clade i, and those of c. pacifica, c. fausta, c. nautilei, c. stearnsii, c. magnifica , c. fossajaponica and c. phaseoliformis formed clade ii . the bootstrap support for clade ii  was slightly less than that for clade i . in clade ii, the symbionts of c. phaseoliformis and c. fossajaponica formed a subclade with rma, and the symbionts of c. stearnsii, c. nautilei, c. fausta and c. pacifica formed another subclade with a high bootstrap value . it is noteworthy that the branch length from the node of clade ii  to rma was longer than those of other branches in clade ii, and that the branch length from the node of the radiation of the calyptogena clam symbiont  to the node of clade i radiation  was longer than that to clade ii . in clade i, two subclades respectively containing symbionts of c. kilmeri, c. soyoae and c. okutanii  and those of c. kawamurai and c. laubieri were not robust .

hpd, hyper dolphin; 2k, shinkai 2000; 6k, shinkai 6500; rov, remote operated vehicle; 10k, rov kaiko.

*accession number ap <dig> 

**accession number cp <dig> 

ip, internal primer; ep, external primer.

16s, small subunit rrna gene; 23s, large subunit rrna gene.

#gene region amplified with primers reca_f and reca_r.

$gene region amplified with primers muty_f and muty_r.

n.d., not determined in the present study.

*not determined in the present study but retrieved from a database.

dna recombinase gene, reca, in calyptogena clam symbionts
using pcr with an internal primer set designed from the conserved sequences of recas of several gamma-proteobacteria , we obtained an amplicon from the genomic dna of a c. phaseoliformis symbiont . the sequence obtained was shown to be a part of reca by a blastx search in the ddbj/genbank/embl. a search for a residual reca in the rma and vok genomes using this sequence and the escherichia coli reca sequence revealed that the rma genome contains a dna fragment similar to reca between rmag_ <dig>  and rmag_ <dig> , but the vok genome does not. the entire reca sequence and its flanking sequences from the c. phaseoliformis symbiont were amplified in pcr using the primers reca_f and reca_r , which were designed from the franking conserved sequences of the reca-like sequence in rma  and their respective corresponding sequences in vok . while rmag_ <dig> and cosy_ <dig> are annotated with different gene names, they are homologous to each other.

in pcr using the primers reca_f and reca_r, amplicons with different lengths were obtained from  <dig> symbionts and sequenced . these amplicons were designated as reca-amplicons. in open reading frame  analysis, we detected intact reca coding for 344-amino acid reca in the symbiont genomes of c. pacifica and c. fossajaponica as well as c. phaseoliformis . their amino acid sequence identities to that of e. coli were  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively. however, rma and the symbionts of c. stearnsii, c. fausta and c. nautilei were shown to have defective recas. in rma, highly degraded remnants of the reca gene were detected . in the symbionts of c. fausta and c. nautilei, the reca was found to be degraded into a few apparent orfs . in both of the symbionts, the 52nd codon "ggt" was replaced with a stop codon "tag." this was found to be caused by the same insertion of "cc" at the 151st-152nd base from the initiation codon of the original reca sequences .

in the symbiont of c. stearnsii, the coding region of reca was found to be fragmented by many stop codons, which were caused by substitutions and a few base insertions, i.e., the substitution of "c" with "t" makes the stop "tga" at the 343rd  and the insertion of "a" between the 427th and 428th base makes the stop "taa" at 438- <dig> in additional file  <dig> figure s <dig> . no common insertion, deletion or substitutional mutation was detected between the symbiont of c. stearnsii and those of c. nautilei and c. fausta. in the symbionts of c. pacifica, c. fossajaponica, c. phaseoliformis, c. fausta and c. nautilei, an apparently intact orf coding recx was found downstream of reca . however, the symbiont of c. stearnsii was found to contain a pseudogene of recx .

we performed multiple alignments of the reca-amplicons of the symbionts and analyzed the deletion profiles . the longest amplicon was that of the symbiont of c. phaseoliformis or c. fossajaponica. they were thus thought to be the most similar to that of the common ancestor of clade i and ii symbionts. in clade ii symbionts, the nucleotide sequence of the reca-amplicon of the c. fossajaponica symbiont was the most similar to that of the c. phaseoliformis symbiont, or vice versa. however, the sequence identity of the reca coding region between symbionts of c. phaseoliformis and c. fossajaponica  was lower than the identities of those of symbionts of c. fausta, c. nautilei and c. pacifica compared with that of the c. phaseoliformis symbiont . to compare the sequences of reca-amplicons, we selected that of the c. phaseoliformis symbiont as a reference.

compared with the reca-amplicon of the c. phaseoliformis symbiont, that of rma had several deletions . deletions of almost the same size were found in symbionts of c. fausta  and of c. pacifica , while no such deletion was found in the symbionts of c. stearnsii, c. nautilei or c. fossajaponica .

in clade i symbionts, reca was not recognized in their reca-amplicons. however, large deletions of a similar size were found in their respective reca-amplicons . while some dna fragments corresponding to the n-terminal reca remained, reca was markedly disintegrated due to the large deletion .

dna repair gene, muty, in calyptogena clam symbionts
by performing a blast search of unannotated orfs and pseudogenes in the rma genome  <cit> , we found that a translated amino acid sequence of rmag_ <dig>  was homologous to muty of other bacteria , but this gene was found to be a pseudogene due to the amber mutation "uga" at codon  <dig>  no such orf was recognized in the vok genome. a primer set, muty_f and muty_r, was designed to amplify the genomic region containing muty . the pcr products were designated as muty-amplicons. an apparently intact muty was found in each muty-amplicon of the genomes of clade ii symbionts except for rma, i.e., symbionts of c. phaseoliformis, c. fossajaponica, c. pacifica, c. stearnsii, c. fausta and c. nautilei , of which the gene product showed significant similarity to muty of other bacteria. dna sequence homology analysis with multiple alignment showed that the nucleotide sequences of muty-amplicons from symbionts in clade ii except for rma showed greater similarity to that of the c. phaseoliformis symbiont , while the identity with rma was lower  . in addition, two small inframe deletions  were found in the nucleotide sequences of rma muty. on the other hand, the muty-amplicons from clade i symbionts were much shorter than that of the c. phaseoliformis symbiont, showing that it was highly degraded by deletions and substitutions .

because muty was expected to contribute gc bias to the genomes of the calyptogena clam symbionts, we analyzed the g+c contents of their 16s and 23s rrna genes . the mean g+c content of the 16s rrna genes in clade i symbionts and rma, which lacked intact muty, and that in clade ii symbionts except for rma were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , respectively. this difference was significant in the t-test  . those of 23s rrna genes in the symbionts lacking muty  and in the symbionts with muty  were  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , respectively, and the difference was significant  in the t-test. the g+c contents of the 16s and 23s rrna genes of rma were  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, which were intermediate between those of the symbionts with or without muty . this may indicate that muty in rma became a pseudogene relatively recently.

*ca. ruthia magnifica 

#difference between g+c contents of 16s rrna genes of clade i symbionts+rma and of clade ii symbionts except rma was significant  in the t-test.

$difference between g+c contents of 16s rrna genes of clade i symbionts and of clade ii symbionts except rma  was significant in welch's test.

§differences between g+c contents of 23s rrna genes of clade i symbionts+rma and of clade ii symbionts  was significant in the t-test.

!difference between g+c contents of 23s rrna genes of clade i symbionts and of clade ii symbionts  was significant in the t-test.

discussion
previously, we reported that reca was probably lost in the early stage of rge in calyptogena clam symbionts  <cit> . the present study showed that some of the extant clam symbionts still have intact reca . we hypothesized that in the early phase of rge of the clam symbionts before the loss of reca, large-sized deletions occurred due to reca-dependent recombination  <cit> . this type of deletion requires repeated sequences larger than  <dig> bp, which have been depleted from the genomes of rma and vok  <cit> . it is still not clear whether the genomes of the calyptogena clam symbionts containing reca have large-sized  repeated sequences. the presence of intact or of nearly intact reca and of muty in clade ii symbionts except for rma suggests that the genomes of clade ii symbionts are larger than those of clade i symbionts and that their rge is in an earlier stage than in clade i symbionts. to resolve these questions, we must await their genome sequence analyses.

the coding region of reca was shown to be mostly deleted in rma and clade i symbionts . a similar large-sized deletion was found in each of the reca-amplicons of clade i symbionts . this indicates that the shared part of their deletions occurred in the common ancestor of clade i symbionts after divergence from that of clade ii symbionts . while both rma and clade i symbionts lack reca, the phylogenetic tree strongly suggests that these losses occurred independently in both the ancestral rma and the common ancestor of clade i symbionts .

degradations of the orfs for reca in rma and in the symbionts of c. stearnsii, c. fausta and c. nautilei indicate that rge in the extant clade ii symbionts of calyptogena clams is in the transitional stage of reca loss. the loss of reca may start with the degeneration of its orf by point mutations or a few base insertion/deletion mutations like those in the symbionts of c. fausta, c. nautilei and c. stearnsii , then continue in the next stage with larger deletions, e.g., those in rma and in clade i symbionts , generated by successive illegitimate recombinations or replication slippages without reca  <cit> . this also suggests that the longer  repeated sequences were depleted in the symbiont genome, and that as a result reca was not able to function as a recombinase or a deletion generator in the genome before losing this gene.

a three-dimensional  homology model of reca reconstruction using the crystal structure of e. coli reca  <cit>  as a template showed that the 3d structure of reca in the symbiont of c. phaseoliformis was similar to that of e. coli . reca consists of three domains: the n-terminal domain functions as a monomer-monomer interface; the central domain is responsible for atp binding; and the c-terminal domain is responsible for dsdna binding  <cit> . this indicates that reca in the symbionts of c. phaseoliformis, c. fossajaponica and c. pacifica are functional, and that the truncated reca in c. fausta and c. nautilei symbionts having only the n-terminal  <dig> amino acids is functionless .

in the symbiont genomes of c. fausta and c. nautilei, the truncations of their recas were respectively caused by the same two-base  insertion mutations at the same position of the gene . it is not clear whether the insertion occurred in the common ancestor of the symbionts of c. fausta, c. nautilei and c. pacifica  and the inserted sequence was removed later in the symbiont of c. pacifica, or whether the insertions occurred independently in the two symbiont lineages of c. nautilei and c. fausta . if an insertion occurs randomly at any position of the genome, the identical two-base insertion would not likely have occurred independently at the same position of two different genomes at approximately the same time. this question should be addressed in future studies of their genomes.

because no common insertion/deletion or substitutional mutation making a stop codon was detected among the symbionts of c. stearnsii, c. fausta and c. nautilei, the mutations in the c. stearnsii symbiont occurred independently in its lineage .

the recas of c. fausta and c. nautilei symbionts were shown to have additional insertions . these insertions may have occurred after the loss of the function of the gene by the insertion of "cc" as a result of the relaxation of selective pressure. while reca is known to be important for recombination and repair mutations, like double-strand breaks of dna, intracellular symbionts tend to lose it  <cit> . the selective pressure to retain reca probably remained in the early evolutionary stages of the calyptogena clam symbionts. however, after the loss of large-sized repeated sequences, the selective pressure for retaining reca may have decreased.

in clade ii symbionts, the present data indicate that their recas are currently deteriorating. this also supports the above hypothesis that the rge stage due to reca-dependent deletion is probably ending in these extant genomes.

the dna repair gene muty was found in the genomes of clade ii symbionts except for rma . in rma, muty was found to be split into two orfs  by a substitution of the 501st g with a, making a new stop codon . the phylogenetic tree indicates that this mutation occurred in the rma lineage after divergence from the symbionts of c. phaseoliformis and c. fossajaponica . muty has been shown to be composed of the n-terminal and c-terminal domains   <cit> . substrate dna binds to the cleft between these two domains  <cit> . while 3d homology modeling showed that muty of c. phaseoliformis, c. fossajaponica, c. fausta, c.nautilei and c. pacifica symbionts seemed to have an intact 3d structure and to be functional , the split gene products of the rma muty fragments are functionless . the evidence that the gene encodes an almost intact amino acid sequence/architecture indicates that rma lost the functionality of muty relatively recently.

the g+c content of genomes generally tends to decrease in obligate intracellular symbionts with decreasing genome size  <cit> . muty is known to repair a-g mismatches to c-g  <cit> . the loss of muty in a genome is expected to decrease the g+c content  <cit> . however, many insect intracellular symbionts such as buchnera spp. with genomes that have low g+c content still have muty  <cit> . in addition, a recently found very small genome of the insect symbiont ca. hodgikinia cicadicola lacking muty has a high g+c content  <cit> . these may contradict the above view and indicate that the loss of muty does not significantly contribute to the decrease in the g+c content of the genome. however, in this study, the g+c content in the 16s and 23s rrna gene sequences was significantly lower in the calyptogena symbionts without muty than that in the symbionts with muty . this supports the hypothesis that the loss of muty contributes to the gc bias of the genome  <cit> . the g+c content of rma was intermediate between the two symbiont clades. this agrees with the view that it lost functional muty more recently than clade i symbionts during evolution. this result also coincides with the data showing that the g+c content of the rma genome  is higher than that of vok   <cit> . stewart et al. have recently reported that the g+c contents of  <dig> genes including 16s and 23s rna genes of the symbionts in the gigas/kilmeri clade that corresponds to clade i in the present study were significantly lower than those of another clade that corresponds to clade ii in the present study   <cit> . although it was not clear whether the symbionts in the other clade reported by stewart et al.  <cit>  had muty or not, the present results suggest that they do and thus the g+c contents of their genes are higher than those of the symbionts in the gigas/kilmeri clade.

it has recently been shown that mutational bias of gc→at is a general trend in bacteria, and this trend may be counterbalanced by biased gene conversion and natural selection to maintain the g+c contents  <cit> . in intracellular symbionts, relaxation of natural selection, lower recombination frequency, small effective population size, codon usage, availability of nucleotides in the cytoplasmic pool and loss of dna repair genes may contribute to lower g+c content  <cit> . in addition to the loss of muty, any of these factors may have also contributed to a greater reduction of the g+c content in symbionts in clade i compared with those in clade ii. however, this remains to be studied in future.

the present phylogenetic tree shows that both muty and reca have been lost in rma and in clade i symbionts . were the losses in clade i symbionts and rma accidental coincidences or related phenomena? the loss of reca may increase the mutation rate of the genome and hence increase the possibility of losing other genes such as muty. it is also noteworthy that the branch length of rma is longer than other branches in the clade ii lineage, and the branch length from the node between clade i and ii symbionts  to the node of clade i symbiont radiation  is longer than the length to the node of clade ii symbiont radiation . as a result, the loss of reca which occurred in rma and clade i symbionts independently may have increased the mutation rate and elongated these branch lengths. this may also increase the probability of losing other genes including muty.

once genes lose their functions, their selective pressure must be relaxed and their mutation rates are expected to increase  <cit> . in the functionless recas of c. fausta and c. nautilei, one additional mutation was found in each . two additional deletions were also found in the rma muty . these may be the result of the decreased  selective pressure after the losses of the functions of the genes.

while an evolutionary event like the loss of a gene for dna repair or recombination may occur spontaneously in a certain lineage, it must greatly affect the later evolutionary fate of that lineage. we previously suggested that the loss of reca probably stabilized the genome architecture in calyptogena clam symbionts  <cit> . the present data raise the possibility that the loss of muty affected the g+c content of the genomes of the calyptogena symbionts. the effect of losing genes for dna recombination and repair on their rge will be analyzed by sequencing the genomes of other calyptogena clam symbionts, which is now in progress and will be published elsewhere.

CONCLUSIONS
the apparently intact genes for dna recombination and repair reca and muty were found in some clade ii symbionts, i.e., symbionts of c. phaseoliformis, c. fossajaponica and c. pacifica. those of c. stearnsii, c. nautilei and c. fausta had intact muty but their reca was found to be a pseudogene due to insertion/deletion and/or substitution mutations. these genes were disintegrated and lost in rma and in clade i symbionts. most of the reca coding region was lost in the common ancestor of clade i symbionts and in the rma lineage as a result of deletions. in the symbionts of c. stearnsii, c. fausta and c. nautilei, reca became functionless due to small base insertions and substitutions. the muty gene of rma was disintegrated by a substitutional mutation. muty was also lost through deletions in the common ancestor of clade i symbionts. the coinciding losses of both reca and muty in rma and clade i symbionts are thought to have occurred independently in the respective lineages.

the g+c contents of the symbionts with muty were significantly higher than in those without muty. this indicates that the loss of muty probably decreased the g+c contents of the descendant symbiont genomes. this suggests that gene degradation, which occurs by chance in some lineages of symbionts, greatly affects the genomes of later descendants of the lineage.

