BACKGROUND
chaos game representation was proposed as a scale-independent representation for genomic sequences by h.j. jeffrey  <cit> . a cgr of a dna sequence is plotted in a unit square, the four vertices of which are labelled by the nucleotides a-, c-, g-, t-. the plotting procedure can be described by the following steps: the first nucleotide of the sequence is plotted halfway between the centre of the square and the vertex representing this nucleotide; successive nucleotides in the sequence are plotted halfway between the previous plotted point and the vertex representing the nucleotide being plotted.

mathematically coordinates of the successive points in the chaos game representation of a dna sequence is described by an iterated function system defined by the following equations

xi= <dig>  yi= <dig>  }     
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=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@58ff@

where gix and giy are the x and y co-ordinates respectively, of the corners corresponding to the nucleotide at position i in the sequence. for example if the ith nucleotide is c,

gix =  <dig> and giy =  <dig> 

cgrs of dna sequences were shown to exhibit interesting patterns. these interesting features relevant to the dna sequence organization attracted immediate further research  <cit> . cgr has been used in various kinds of investigations of dna sequences. the first potential of cgr to be recognized was its capability to depict genomic signatures. hill et al.  <cit>  examined the cgrs of coding sequences of  <dig> relatively conserved alcohol dehydrogenase genes from phylogenetically divergent species. they found that cgrs were similar for the genes of the same or closely related species but were different for the genes from distantly related species. oliver et al.  <cit>  used the density of cgr points to derive entropy profiles for dna sequences that showed a different degree of variability within and between genomes. using cgr for making, oligomer frequency counts deshavanne et al.  <cit>  observed that subsequences of a genome exhibit the main characteristics of the whole genome, attesting to the validity of a genomic signature concept.

cgr research received a setback when goldmann  <cit>  asserted that simple markov chain models based solely on di-nucleotide and tri-nucleotide frequencies can completely account for the complex patterns exhibited in cgrs of dna sequences. however almeida et al.  <cit>  showed that markov chain models are in fact particular cases of cgrs. they showed that the distribution of points in cgr is a generalization of markov chain probability tables that accommodates non-integer orders. wang et al.  <cit>  proved that while nucleotide, di-nucleotide and tri-nucleotide frequencies are able to influence the patterns in cgrs these frequencies cannot solely determine the patterns in cgrs. they showed that cgr is completely determined by frequencies of oligonucleotides of all lengths. the work of almeida et al. positioned cgr as a powerful sequence modelling tool that has the advantages of computational efficiency and scale independence.

sequence comparisons can be made using two different aspects of the cgr:

 <dig>  the frequency matrices of oligonucleotides of different lengths, that are derivable from cgr by resolving the cgr using grids of different sizes

 <dig>  the co-ordinates of the cgr points of the two sequences

in the cgr, a point corresponding to a sequence of length 'n' is contained within a square with side of length 2-n  <cit> . the frequency of appearance of any oligomer in a sequence can be found out by partitioning the cgr space into squares of appropriate sizes. thus counting the cgr points in the squares of a 2n × 2n grid gives the number of occurrences of all possible n-mers in the sequence. this representation is called frequency chaos game representation  where frequency of an oligomer is the number of points in the corresponding square. it is also possible to calculate oligonucleotide frequencies of non-integer lengths by resolving the cgr using grids of sizes other than powers of two.  <cit> 

most applications of cgr have been based on point counts calculated at various grid resolutions . sequence comparisons based on cgr co-ordinates have been left relatively unexplored. almeida et al.  <cit> , pointed out that, regions of local similarity between two sequences is reflected in the distance between cgr points. cgr points come closer together as sequence similarity increases. they defined a measure of local similarity as length of similar sequence nh calculated as a function of the maximum absolute difference between either cgr coordinate. however no attempt was made to use the information for developing an algorithm for aligning and comparing whole genomes.

as more and more genomes are being sequenced it has become possible to study evolutionary events by comparing whole genomes of closely related species and identifying the differences. efficient programs for detecting and aligning matching segments in pairs of mega-base scale sequences is important for comparing whole genomes and determining evolutionary relationships. several programs for large-scale genome comparison have been developed in the last six years, for example, mummer <cit> , ssaha <cit> , avid <cit> , blastz <cit> . all these programs follow an anchor-based approach in which all matching n-mers for a fixed n are first identified as potential anchors and the anchors are extended into longer alignments.

in this paper we develop a fast algorithm for comparison of pairs of long sequences using the information contained in cgr points. we first show how all similar segments of two sequences can be identified based on the distance between the cgr points of the two sequences. since determination of distance between all pairs of cgr points, is costly in time , n and m being the length of the two sequences), we speed up the program by using an anchored alignment approach similar to that used in other programs. we use cgr resolved by a 2n × 2n grid for fast location of the matching n-mers which form the anchors. the distance between cgr points corresponding to each pair of matching n-mers, is then used to see if the matching n-mers can be extended into longer local alignments. we allow for mismatches by chaining together close local alignments. the program finds multiple local alignments between two sequences, allowing the detection of homologous segments, internal sequence duplications and shuffling of segments.

RESULTS
figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> show dot matrix plots showing the local alignments between human immunodeficiency virus  and chimpanzee immunodeficiency virus , pyrococcus abyssi ge <dig>  and pyrococcus horikoshii ot <dig> , e. coli oh157:h <dig>  and e. coli k <dig> , rickettsia p. madrid e.  and rickettsia c. malish  <dig> , mycobacterium leprae tn  and mycobacterium tuberculosis h37rv  respectively. it can be seen that large segments have been inverted between pyrococcus abyssi and pyrococcus horikoshii as well as between mycobacterium leprae tn and mycobacterium tuberculosis h37rv. text files giving positions of insertions/deletions and mismatches inferred from the local alignments between the two strains of e. coli are given as supplementary material.

the time taken for finding all local alignments between pairs of sequences of different sizes is given in table  <dig>  it can be seen that the time of execution of the program depends not only on the length of the sequences, but also on the degree of similarity between them. for example, the time taken for comparing m.leprae and m.tuberculosis is much greater than the time taken for comparing m. bovis and m.tuberculosis even though the sizes of the genomes are similar. the time taken by this program for comparing the two e.coli genomes is  <dig> seconds while mummer a large-scale sequence alignment tool available takes only  <dig> seconds. the emphasis of this paper is on the theoretical development of the method rather than on software development and it is possible that with better programming inputs the implementation can be made more efficient and faster. the main advantage of this method comes from the fact that cgr simultaneously facilitates other types of sequence comparisons ranging from visual comparisons of patterns to oligonucleotide frequency spectrums and genome signatures.

CONCLUSIONS
a new algorithm that uses information from chaos game representation of genome sequences for finding all local alignments between the sequences has been developed. fast comparisons can be made between sequences of megabase size using a pentium iv machine. as far as the speed of alignment is concerned, the program, in its present state does not offer any major improvements over mummer, but it is possible that the method can be implemented more efficiently through better programming inputs. addition of the possibility of large scale sequence alignment to the existing repertoire of alignment-free sequence analysis possibilities from chaos game representation, positions cgr as a powerful quantitative sequence analysis tool.

