BACKGROUND
α-sarcin is a small fungal ribonuclease secreted by aspergillus giganteus. it functions as a ribonuclease by catalytically cleaving a single phosphodiester bond in a well-defined rna motif  within the rrna scaffold of the large ribosomal subunit. this makes the ribosome unrecognizable to elongation factors and in turn, blocks protein synthesis  <cit> . in addition to its ability to inactivate the ribosome, α-sarcin selectively interacts with acidic phospholipids, and causes membrane fusion, as well as aggregation of artificial liposomes  <cit> . α-sarcin's lipid binding properties allow for its uptake into the cell via acidic endosomes  <cit> . the mechanism of endosomal escape has not been characterized, but golgi trafficking may be involved  <cit> .

α-sarcin induces cell death through apoptosis but the mechanism is not completely understood  <cit> . it has been reported that the toxicity of α-sarcin is due to catalytic inactivation of the ribosome, and subsequent inhibition of protein synthesis  <cit> . studies in which purified recombinant α-sarcin is added to the exterior of cells have supported this conclusion and suggested that cleavage of the sarcin-ricin loop within the ribosome is a prerequisite for apoptosis in a manner that is jnk dependent  <cit> .

several mutagenesis studies have been conducted to identify the key residues critical for α-sarcin function. the majority of these studies have been in vitro determinations of α-sarcin enzymatic activity against ribosome containing fractions or dinucleotide substrates. in vivo analysis of α-sarcin activity has been limited to application of purified α-sarcin to the exterior of the cells  <cit> . from these studies, and analogy to α-sarcin relative rnase t <dig>  the catalytic mechanism of α-sarcin ribonuclease activity has been elucidated. cleavage within the rrna proceeds through a 2',3'-cyclic intermediate that is catalyzed by hydrogen transfer from histidine- <dig> to glutamate- <dig>  <cit> . this results in transphosphorylation in which the phosphate group is shared between the 2' and 3' positions on the ribose ring  <cit> . the hydrolysis of this cyclic derivative is catalyzed by these same two residues, however, in this case, glutamate- <dig> acts as a general acid, and histidine- <dig> acts as the general base  <cit> . arginine- <dig> has also been shown to be important for catalysis as mutations in this residue render α-sarcin unable to cleave ribosomal rrna, although it retains significant activity against dinucleotides  <cit> . arginine- <dig> of α-sarcin is thought to help position the substrate for catalysis  <cit> .

in this report, we assayed α-sarcin cytotoxicity and its ability to inhibit protein synthesis by direct cytoplasmic expression of the toxin in mammalian cells. we show that mutations in α-sarcin, which impair α-sarcin's ability to block translation of two independent reporters, retain the ability to kill cells. we conclude that protein synthesis inhibition is not necessary for α-sarcin to induce cell death. instead, our results indicate that α-sarcin can initiate cell death independent of rrna cleavage and jnk activation.

RESULTS
we established a mammalian cell expression system to directly assay the ability of α-sarcin to inhibit translation and induce cell death by expressing the ribotoxin directly in the cytoplasm of hela cells. our objective was to determine the relative cytotoxicity of α-sarcin mutants independent of effects due to toxin entry and trafficking. the α-sarcin cdna, and for comparison purposes, the ricin toxin a chain cdna, were cloned into the mammalian expression vector, pcdna <dig> , where gene expression is under control of the constitutive cytomegalovirus  promoter. ricin is a glycosidase which depurinates a highly conserved adenine within the sarcin-ricin loop, adjacent to the α-sarcin cleavage site  <cit> . hela cells have been reported to be resistant to α-sarcin activity  <cit> . this is presumably due to an inability of the toxin to enter hela cells. to determine the sensitivity of hela cells to direct ribotoxin expression, a dose response analysis was carried out by transfecting cells with increasing amounts of α-sarcin or ricin cdna. although both α-sarcin and ricin transfected cells demonstrated a dose-dependent decrease in viability at  <dig> hours, ricin was more effective at low doses  than α-sarcin . this was consistent with reported catalytic activities of α-sarcin and ricin, with ricin demonstrating approximately 100-fold greater catalytic activity than α-sarcin  <cit> . at concentrations greater than  <dig> ng, no further reduction in viability was obtained and approximately 20% of the cells remained viable. this was in keeping with our transfection efficiency in hela cells , which was determined by transfection of pcdna-gfp reporter plasmid and counting the percentage of fluorescent cells . to examine the time course of toxin induced cell death, hela cells were transfected with  <dig> ng of α-sarcin or ricin cdna, and cell viability was measured over a 48-hour period. exogenous expression of both α-sarcin and ricin in hela cells resulted in decreased viability within  <dig> hours . both α-sarcin and ricin induced cell death at similar rates, with ricin exhibiting slightly enhanced cytotoxicity. collectively, these results demonstrate that direct cytoplasmic expression of α-sarcin and ricin in mammalian cells is cytotoxic. we next examined whether α-sarcin catalytic activity was required for the cytotoxicity observed during direct cytoplasmic expression.

based on in vitro biochemical assays and cell culture experiments performed with purified α-sarcin, it has been reported that α-sarcin's toxicity is due to its catalytic ability to inactivate the ribosome and inhibit protein synthesis  <cit> . we sought to determine whether catalytic activity of α-sarcin is required for cytotoxicity when the toxin is directly expressed in the cytoplasm of cells. we initially characterized a catalytic mutant of α-sarcin, α-sarcin-r121q  <cit> . arginine  <dig> is located near the catalytic site and although it is not directly involved in catalysis, it is thought to help position the substrate in the correct orientation for cleavage  <cit> . the α-sarcin-r121q mutant is catalytically attenuated based on in vitro biochemical assays  <cit> . despite its reduced catalytic ability in vitro, expression of α-sarcin-r121q in hela cells resulted in a dose-dependent decrease in viability that was only slightly reduced from that observed for wild-type α-sarcin .

the cytotoxicity of α-sarcin-r121q suggests that either arginine- <dig> is not required for protein synthesis inhibition in cells, or that catalytic cleavage of the ribosomal rna is not necessary for α-sarcin-induced cytotoxicity. to address this issue, we measured the ability of α-sarcin and α-sarcin-r121q to inhibit the translation of a co-transfected gfp reporter. hela cells were transfected with toxin cdna, as well as a gfp reporter, and the extent of gfp expression was monitored. the transfections were carried out at high cell densities, as this was observed to delay α-sarcin cytotoxicity , and therefore, any decrease in gfp levels could be attributed to inhibition of translation, rather than a loss in total number of cells. in addition, cells were examined microscopically prior to analysis to confirm that the monolayers were of similar density, and assays were conducted  <dig> hours after transfection, before the onset of cell death . measurement of gfp fluorescence in cell lysates showed that gfp expression was inhibited relative to a vector control in the wildtype α-sarcin and ricin transfected cells . measurement of gfp fluorescence in α-sarcin-r121q transfected cells revealed that the mutant was attenuated with respect to its ability to inhibit gfp expression, which is consistent with data implicating r121q involvement in catalysis   <cit> . we also generated an n-terminal  <dig> × flag-tagged-α-sarcin  and c-terminal mychis-tagged-α-sarcin . while sarcin-mychis exhibited near wild-type inhibition of gfp translation and toxicity, the  <dig> × flag-sarcin was severely attenuated in both translation inhibition and toxicity , despite robust expression levels . the n-terminal  <dig> amino acids of α-sarcin form a β-hairpin that has been implicated in both the interaction with membranes and in guiding the toxin to the sarcin-ricin loop  <cit> . the attenuation of toxicity observed with the  <dig> × flag-sarcin supports the importance of this region in α-sarcin function.

the finding that α-sarcin-r121q retained toxicity is contrary to the widely held view that ribotoxins induce apoptosis by blocking protein synthesis  <cit> . a possible explanation for this result is that the r121q mutant is expressed to a greater extent. to rule out this possibility, western blot analysis was performed to determine the levels of toxin protein . the levels of α-sarcin detected using western blotting are invariably low and difficult to detect. although the levels of the r121q mutant  were slightly elevated compared to wildtype, α-sarcin-r121q was expressed at equivalent levels to sarcin-mychis, which was comparable to the wildtype α-sarcin in toxicity and translation inhibition. therefore, we conclude that the levels of translated toxin are unlikely to account for the observed toxicity of the α-sarcin-r121q mutant.

a second possible explanation for the toxicity associated with α-sarcin-r121q is that only a small decrease in protein synthesis is sufficient to induce cell death in hela cells. therefore to rule out any contribution of residual catalytic activity of the r121q mutant to the observed toxicity, we tested a second mutant, h137q. as discussed, histidine- <dig> is essential for catalytic activity of α-sarcin, acting as a general acid in the initial transphosphorylation step of the hydrolysis reaction  <cit> . the h137q has been shown to be catalytically inactive against ribosomes and dinucleotide substrates in vitro  <cit> . we tested the h137q mutant to determine if this catalytically defective mutant was cytotoxic. direct expression of α-sarcin-h137q in hela cells revealed that, similar to α-sarcin-r121q, this mutant is cytotoxic . we measured its ability to inhibit translation of the gfp reporter  and a second luciferase based reporter, in which luciferase expression is under control of ap- <dig> promoter. both gfp and luciferase expression are inhibited by wildtype α-sarcin, but not by either the r121q or h137q mutant forms of α-sarcin . to ensure the cytotoxicity we observed for the α-sarcin-r121q and h137q was not restricted to hela cells, we also expressed these mutants in cos <dig> cells. direct expression of α-sarcin and the catalytic mutants in cos <dig> cells resulted in cytotoxicity .

our results are in contrast with a previous study using the h137q mutant that concluded that α-sarcin toxicity was dependent upon its catalytic activity  <cit> . an obvious difference between this study and our own is that the previous study relied on adding purified α-sarcin to the media of rhabdomyosarcoma cells and measuring the effect on cell survival and protein synthesis. since the mechanism of α-sarcin entry and trafficking has not been fully elucidated, one cannot be certain that this mutation does not affect trafficking and, therefore, may not reach the cytoplasm to interact with the ribosome. by using direct cytoplasmic expression, we assessed toxicity independent of trafficking. a second difference between this study and our own is the cell line used. we have chosen two very different cell lines for our study – a human cervical cancer epithelial cell line  and an african green monkey fibroblast sv <dig> transformed cell line . therefore, our data is not cell type specific and the observed differences in cytotoxicity of the α-sarcin mutant between these studies is likely due to a failure of the r121q and h137q to properly traffic to the cytoplasm when added to the exterior of the cell.

the 28s rrna has been proposed to act as a sensor for ribotoxic stress; α-sarcin has been shown to induce jun n-terminal kinase  activation and phosphorylation through damage to the sarcin-ricin loop of the 28s rrna  <cit> . to test whether this pathway is important for the cytotoxic activity of the mutants, we assayed whether the α-sarcin-r121q and h137q mutants could induce jnk activation by measuring jnk phosphorylation. as expected, wild-type α-sarcin induced jnk phosphorylation . however, despite the observed cytotoxicity of the mutants, we did not detect an appreciable activation of this pathway with either catalytic mutant . this is consistent with the notion that 28s rrna damage is responsible for initiating this stress response  <cit>  and rules out the possible explanation that the mutants retain sufficient activity against the sarcin-ricin loop to induce apoptosis through a jnk mediated stress response. our results indicate that the cytotoxicity of the mutants is not due to a stress response caused by ribosome disruption.

recent studies have shown that α-sarcin binds to the ribosome through electrostatic interactions that lie outside of the catalytic site  <cit> . therefore it is likely the mutants still bind to the ribosome. to test this possibility, we examined the subcellular localization of α-sarcin and the mutants  in relation to ribosomal marker, rps <dig>  both the wild-type α-sarcin and the mutants localized to the nucleus and to a reticulate structure within the cytoplasm, which we determined colocalizes with ribosomal marker rps <dig> . a substantial portion of α-sarcin is found within the nucleus. at 17kda, α-sarcin is expected to diffuse freely through nuclear pore complexes. however, as far as we are aware, this is the first demonstration that α-sarcin accumulates in the nucleus, whether nuclear localization is important for α-sarcin function is an open question.

α-sarcin has been shown to kill cells by apoptotic induction  <cit> . to determine whether the cell death we observed by direct expression was due to apoptosis, we measured apoptosis in cells transfected with α-sarcin or each of the mutants. as expected, wild type α-sarcin and both of the mutants induced apoptosis  <dig> hours after transfection . we did not detect any difference in necrosis between pcdna <dig> controls and wild-type α-sarcin or either of the mutants .

we have shown that two independent mutations within the catalytic site of α-sarcin, which impair the catalytic activity of the toxin, do not abrogate α-sarcin cytotoxicity when expressed in cells. we conclude that α-sarcin catalytic activity is not required for α-sarcin cytotoxicity, but it is required to activate jnk in response to ribotoxic stress. this is consistent with reports on the cytotoxicity of n-glycosidase ribosome inactivating proteins, abrin and ricin  <cit> . the n-glycosydic depurination activity of these toxins occurs at a site near to the α-sarcin rna cleavage site. abrin has been shown to interact with and inhibit anti-oxidant protein- <dig>   <cit> . this interaction induces apoptosis by triggering an increase in reactive oxygen species, independent of ribosome inactivation. similarly, in a yeast expression screen, li et al. identified mutants of ricin, which although catalytically active, were not cytotoxic to yeast cells  <cit> . this implies that these mutations affect protein interactions other than ricin's catalytic interaction with the ribosome. whether α-sarcin, which is a ribonuclease, induces apoptosis through interactions with other proteins remains an open question. since arginine- <dig> and histidine- <dig> lie within the catalytic site and do not affect electrostatic interactions outside of the active site that are important for ribosomal binding, an alternative explanation for our results is that α-sarcin binding to the ribosome may be more important than the catalytic inactivation of the ribosome  <cit> . the observed co-localization of α-sarcin and mutants with ribosomal markers is consistent with this hypothesis.

it is intriguing that the  <dig> × flag epitope on the n-terminus of α-sarcin produced a catalytically inactive innocuous toxin. furthermore, we found that expression of an α-sarcin with a deleted n-terminus was non-toxic . these results implicate the n-terminal β-hairpin loop of α-sarcin in promoting cytotoxicity. consistent with this hypothesis, garcia-ortega et al. have shown that deletion of the entire β-hairpin produces a catalytically active toxin that is non-toxic  <cit> . this group showed that the n-terminal β-hairpin was important for conferring specificity towards the sarcin-ricin loop and suggested this region may be important for ribosomal recognition. others have identified a sequence  within the n-terminus of α-sarcin that is conserved within all members of the ribotoxin family. this resembles a sequence found in elongation factors <cit> , which is further suggestive that this region may be important in targeting α-sarcin to the ribosome. it is possible that the addition of the  <dig> × flag epitope interferes with the ability of the n-terminal β-hairpin to guide the toxin to the sarcin-ricin loop. this would support the idea that binding to the ribosome maybe more important for cytotoxicity than specific cleavage of the sarcin-ricin loop. alternatively, similar to abrin, α-sarcin may induce apoptosis through direct interaction with a protein  in the apoptotic pathway and that the n-terminus of the toxin maybe important for this interaction. our data cannot exclude either possibility. intriguing, the n-terminus alone is not sufficient for cytoxicity  which suggests that if this region is responsible for cytoxicity, it only functions within the context of the whole protein. further work is needed to determine how the n-terminus influences cytotoxicity, and whether this is due to interaction with the ribosome or other protein. the large-scale mutagenesis approach used by li et al. to isolate catalytically active, non-toxic ricin mutants based on their inability to kill yeast cells, would be ideally suited for identifying residues that are required for α-sarcin cytotoxicity but not for cleavage of the sarcin-ricin loop  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our results highlight the importance of direct expression analysis when characterizing protein toxin mutations. they indicate that the ribotoxin α-sarcin, similar to the plant ribosome inactivating proteins, ricin and abrin, can directly induce cell death, independent of its ability to inhibit protein synthesis. thus, our results suggest that α-sarcin can promote cell death through a previously unappreciated mechanism that is independent of rrna cleavage and jnk activation. this is the first demonstration of this independence within the ribonuclease family. our results suggest that contrary to the widely held view, protein synthesis inhibition by α-sarcin is insufficient to induce apoptosis and will interest those individuals developing inhibitors of ribotoxins, using ribotoxins for cancer therapy, as well as those interested in understanding ribosome function.

