BACKGROUND
the application of bacterial probiotics or nutritional supplements containing these microorganisms represents one of the fastest growing areas in both industrial/clinical microbiology. probiotics have been defined by the world health organisation live microorganisms which when administered in adequate amounts, confer health benefits on the host  <cit> . the lactic acid bacteria  comprise the most commonly used probiotics and have been shown to have therapeutic or prophylactic potential for a number of human and animal dietary conditions or diseases  <cit> . the natural diversity of lab in the human gut has been studied by cultivation dependent methods and conventional phenotypic identification of constituent species. more recently, powerful cultivation-independent methods such as microbial metagenomics have begun to shed light on the total microbial diversity of human gut  <cit> . although metagenomic studies allow detailed analysis of what species of bacteria are present, currently they provide only limited information on the level of strain diversity that may occur for any given lab species.

characterisation of the strain diversity of lab species has only really begun in the last decade. yeung et al <cit>  successfully used macrorestriction and pulsed field gel electrophoresis  to examine the genotypic diversity of probiotic lactobacilli and showed that several commercial probiotic formulations contained the same bacterial strain. vancanneyt et al.  <cit>  used a combination of amplified fragment length polymorphism  and pfge to specifically examine lactobacillus rhamnosus species probiotics and also demonstrated the presence of multiple indistinguishable strain types present in a variety of probiotic products. pcr-fingerprinting methods analysis have also been used to examine the strain diversity of lactobacillus probiotics. for example, schillinger et al.  <cit>  used random amplified polymorphic dna  analysis to differentiate lactobacillus strains cultivated from probiotic yogurts. pena et al <cit>  used repetitive element pcr  profiling to examine the genetic diversity of intestinal lactobacillus species colonising different transgenic mouse-lines; they demonstrated that mice with colitis due to il- <dig> deficiency were colonised with a different population of strains in comparison to those without colitis. multilocus sequence typing, a very powerful nucleotide sequence based strain differentiation methods has also been recently developed for lactobacillus plantarum  <cit>  and lactobacillus casei  <cit> . however, genetic typing methods that work at the strain level have seen limited use in their direct application to the human gut microbiota and have not yet been applied to specifically track the fate of a specific probiotic strain during consumption.

understanding the dynamics of gut colonisation by bacterial probiotics is an important parameter for the future clinical development of these therapeutic agents. we set out to determine if individual lactobacillus species strains could be tracked after human consumption of the encapsulated bacteria. rapd was selected as a suitable strain typing method to answer this question because:  as a pcr-based method it was amenable to high throughput, and,  we knew from past-experience that if the rapd method was systematically developed to target specific bacterial species, then its discriminatory power can be comparable to state-of-the-art dna sequence-based genotyping methods such as multilocus sequence typing  <cit> . here we describe the systematic development of a rapd fingerprinting method for a broad range of lab species and its optimization to allow direct application to single bacterial colonies. using this novel high throughput colony strain typing strategy we were then able for the first time to track the fate of specific lactobacillus strains after their consumption by human volunteers.

RESULTS
development of a rapd fingerprinting method for lactic acid bacteria
to systematically develop a rapd typing scheme for lab species, a set of  <dig> rapd primers which had proven successful for strain typing other bacterial species  <cit>  were screened for their ability to amplify multiple polymorphisms from l. acidophilus. fifteen primers  were found to reproducibly amplify  <dig> or more random dna fragments from the reference strain l. acidophilus lmg 9433t that ranged in size from  <dig> to  <dig> bp . the complexity of these profiles indicated that discriminatory typing of lab isolates with these primers was possible.

the primers with the most diverse polymorphisms,  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  were selected for genotyping isolates of further lab species beyond l. acidophilus. primary typing was performed with primer  <dig> because of its known discriminatory power  <cit> , and secondary confirmation of strain type was performed with primers  <dig> and  <dig> 

lab isolates examined
a collection of  <dig> lab isolates was assembled to assess the discriminatory power of the rapd fingerprinting method . the collection comprised reference isolates and type strains of known lab species obtained from recognised culture collections . in addition, commercially marketed probiotic products were purchased and their constituent lab isolates cultured and purified . previous studies have shown that the speciation and labelling of commercially marketed probiotics may often be inaccurate  <cit> . therefore prior to examining the ability of rapd to differentiate lab isolates, sequence and phylogenetic analysis of the 16s rrna gene was used to systematically identify the species of all lab isolates cultured from commercial samples . to test the accuracy of this speciation strategy, control sequences from l. brevis lmg 6906t and l. johnsonii lmg 9436twere obtained and found to cluster appropriately with the published sequences from these type strains . the majority of the cultivable bacteria contained within the commercial probiotic products were found to belong to the l. casei group  and l. acidophilus group  . other lab species identified included : l. gasseri , l. jensenii , enterococcus faecalis , and l. salivarius, l. plantarum, and pediococcus pentosaceus .

a strain widely used in commercial applications however specific original source was not known

b strain cultivated from a commercially marketed probiotic formulation

testing the discriminatory power of the rapd method on other lab species
the broad collection of systematically identified lab isolates  were used to test the efficacy of the rapd typing scheme. the reproducibility of the rapd method was excellent, with all  <dig> reference strains demonstrating identical fingerprint profiles after duplicate analysis. in addition l. acidophilus lmg 9433t was analysed by rapd at multiple points throughout the study as an internal control; the same fingerprint profile was obtained on each occasion demonstrating that the lab pcr genotyping scheme demonstrated the same high reproducibility as had been observed with previous rapd studies on other bacterial species  <cit> .

rapd fingerprinting was able to cluster genetically identical strains as well as differentiate distinct strains within closely related lab species. for example, multiple isolates of l. acidophilus were found to possess identical rapd fingerprints  to the type strain for the species, lmg 9433t . these included  <dig> additional reference isolates that had originally been recovered from diverse sources such as from rat and human faeces, as well as  <dig> isolates used in the commercial probiotic products . all l. acidophilus isolates were genotypically indistinguishable even when examined with additional rapd primers  <dig> and  <dig>  these data suggested there was little genetic heterogeneity among isolates of l. acidophilus examined in this study. in addition they show that isolates genotypically identical to the l. acidophilus type strain have been widely adopted for commercial use . of the remaining  <dig> lab reference isolates examined,  <dig> distinct rapd strain types were found that corresponded to each lab species .

rapd fingerprinting was also able to differentiate genetically unique strain types within very closely related species such as those within the l. casei group ; these included l. casei, l. paracasei and l. rhamnosus . from this closely related complex of species , a total of  <dig> distinct rapd types  were identified. two commercially marketed probiotics were found to contain the same strain of l. rhamnosus . another commercial probiotic formulation contained an l. casei strain, designated bf t <dig>  that was identical by rapd to the l. casei type strain lmg 6904t . overall, the rapd fingerprinting method was highly effective, working on all  <dig> lab isolates examined irrespective of their species and reproducibly defining  <dig> rapd types within this diverse collection .

application of rapd fingerprinting to single colonies
to facilitate high throughput typing that could be applied to screening lab isolates cultivated directly from human faeces, we evaluated if the pcr-fingerprinting method could be adapted for use on single bacteria colonies. single colonies were picked with a sterile plastic tip and rapid boiling/cooling in a chelex® resin extraction buffer used to obtain dna for pcr . the rapd fingerprints obtained from colonies processed in this way were identical to those produced from conventionally extracted high molecular weight dna . however, it was found that consistent profiles were only obtained if the rapd pcr was set up immediately after the boiling and chilling cycles of the colony extraction procedure. the amplified pcr fingerprints deteriorated after subsequent frozen storage of the chelex® resin extracted dna. to overcome this potential problem, we examined if prolonged frozen storage  of the resuspended colony in chelex® resin prior to full extraction by boiling was possible. this procedure did not affect the quality of the rapd profiles . the ability to fingerprint from frozen stored colony material provided a high throughput strategy that could be used to systematically screen the multiple colony types isolated from human faeces as part of a lactobacillus strain feeding study .

lactobacillus species feeding study design
a small scale proof-of-principle human feeding study was performed to evaluate if the colony-fingerprint strategy could be used to track specific lab strains from ingestion as capsule recovery from faeces. a capsule for oral administration was formulated to commercial standards which contained two lactobacillus species isolates: l. salivarius strain ncimb  <dig>  and l. acidophilus strain ncimb  <dig> . twelve volunteers participated in a feeding study where the capsule was taken daily for  <dig> days; faecal samples were provided on days before, during and after consumption as described in the methods. the volunteers were not advised to change their diets in any way other than to take the capsule once a day with some food on each of the trial days. at each faecal sampling point, lab were plated as described below, enumerated and multiple colonies genotyped by rapd.

cultivation of lab species from human faeces
although mrs agar is a well established cultivation medium for semi-selective culture of lab species  <cit> , we found that several non-lab species, in particular gram negative enteric bacteria were frequently encountered as contaminants after plating of human faeces . to assist with selection of the lactobacillus species in the feeding study, we investigated whether the addition of polymyxin b to mrs medium  would increase the selectivity of this medium by acting as a counter-selection against coliforms. addition of polymyxin b at a concentration of  <dig> units per ml of agar did not inhibit the viability of any of reference lab species isolates  or the two lactobacillus strains incorporated into the capsule. however, mrs-p was highly effective at reducing the number of contaminating gram negative enteric colonies seen after plating of human faeces.

to examine the efficacy of the semi-selective mrs-p developed for enrichment of the lab species within faeces,  <dig> of the most dominant cultivable isolates recovered from  <dig> of the volunteers at days - <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  were randomly selected for molecular identification. using 16s rrna gene sequence analysis these dominant isolates were identified as : lactobacillus species , streptococcus species , enterococcus species , weissella species  and staphylococcus species . the latter staphylococcus isolates were the only non-lab species isolated in high numbers on mrs-p agar after faecal plating. these data indicated that the mrs-p agar was effective for selection of lab species after faecal culture.

tracking lactobacillus strains after oral administration
rapd fingerprinting of the major colony morphotypes appearing after cultivation of each faecal sample was used to determine if the lactobacillus strains had survived gastric and intestinal passage . the mean faecal lab count was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> cfu per g faeces when all volunteer samples were analysed; consumption of the lactobacilli did not significantly alter the total faecal lab counts obtained from any of the volunteers . prior to the start of the study, l. salivarius strain ncimb  <dig>  was not detected in any of the volunteers, however, strains matching l. acidophilus ncimb  <dig> were cultivated from three of the volunteers at the pre-feeding stage . the appearance of this l. acidophilus  at this point in the study was not unreasonable since it appeared to be a strain commonly found in food/probiotic products which may have been consumed by the volunteers .

a d = day of faecal sample

b recurrent strains cultivated from faecal sample provided at two or more time points

c day + <dig> sample from this volunteer was provided on day 16

d volunteer withdrew from the study on day 2

e volunteer withdrew from the study on day 7

f volunteer withdrew from the study on day 12

g volunteer withdrew from the study on day 8

after consumption of the capsule, the l. salivarius ncimb  <dig> strain was detected on day  <dig> in three volunteers , on day  <dig> in two volunteers , with only volunteer s remaining faeces positive for this strain on days  <dig> and  <dig> . increased detection of the l. acidophilus ncimb  <dig> strain was also seen with  <dig> of the volunteers culture positive for this strain at one or more sample points during the feeding period , and  <dig> of these  remained positive on days  <dig> and  <dig> . l. salivarius ncimb  <dig> was never the dominant cultivable lab strain and was detected at  <dig> to  <dig> per g faeces . in contrast, l. acidophilus ncimb  <dig> was the most dominant colony morphotype in volunteers a , b , f  and n , where it represented 38% or greater of the total lab count. the mean lab count for these volunteers at these time points was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  ×  <dig> per g faeces indicating that l. acidophilus ncimb  <dig> must have been present at a level of at least  <dig> per g of faeces.

statistical evaluation of lactobacillus feeding in terms of gut colonisation was carried out assuming a null hypothesis that: "consumption will lead to the subsequent detection by cultivation of the constituent strains within the capsule in the faeces of each subject." chi squared analysis demonstrated that the distribution of l. salivarius ncimb  <dig> was significant, with none of the volunteers being positive prior to feeding, and  <dig> being culture positive  at least once during the feeding period of the trial . the distribution of l. acidophilus strain ncimb  <dig> was also significant , suggesting that consumption of the organism had led to a significant increase in gut carriage of this l. acidophilus strain. however, limited persistence of the strains was observed in the culture positive volunteers after feeding ceased. for l. acidophilus ncimb  <dig>   <dig> volunteers were culture positive at least once during the feeding period, this fell to  <dig> who were still positive on day  <dig> and  <dig> . with l. salivarius ncimb  <dig> only volunteer s retained the strain in faeces at day  <dig> and  <dig> after consumption had ceased .

specific lab strains persist in individual humans
although the persistence of the administered lactobacillus strains was not substantial after feeding had stopped, other faecal lab strains were recurrently cultivated at two or more time points from all  <dig> volunteers . the rapd fingerprinting strategy was able to detect the persistence of these strains within the faeces for greater than  <dig> days in several of the volunteers . reproducible fingerprints were obtained for lactobacillus species, streptococcus species, enterococcus species, and weissella species isolates that all persisted in this way . several strains were also the dominant cultivable isolates recovered from the faeces of certain volunteers, suggesting that they were colonising that individual's gut. for example, the enterococcus sanguinicola strain  recovered from volunteer g was first isolated at  <dig> days prior to commencing the feeding study and the same strain was also cultivated from their faeces at each subsequent sampling point until day  <dig> . at the - <dig> day sampling point this enterococcal strain was estimated to represent 1% of the cultivable diversity , however, within day  <dig> and day  <dig> samples it represented 99% of the observed growth ; at day  <dig> it still represented 88% of the cultivable diversity, however, on day  <dig> it was not detected.

all the volunteers were colonised with persistent lab strains  that represented greater than 1% of their viable faecal growth; at least one of these strains was identified to the species level for each volunteer except j . apart from sharing of the l. salivarius ncimb  <dig> and l. acidophilus ncimb  <dig> strains present within the administered feeding capsule, only one other strain was detected in two volunteers, the l. rhamnosus rapd type  <dig> strain . this l. rhamnosus strain was shared by individuals p and t . overall, these results demonstrate the ability of the fingerprinting strategy to detect and track the population biology of cultivable faecal strains representative of a broad range of lab species.

discussion
we successfully developed a rapid, colony-based strain typing strategy that was able to track two lactobacillus strains from feeding via a capsule through to faecal discharge in human volunteers. the rapd typing system was capable of genotyping a wide variety of lab species and its efficacy on single colonies provided a means to rapidly discriminate lab isolates cultivated from human faeces. evidence for survival and growth of the l. salivarius strain was most convincing as it was not detected in any of volunteers prior to the feeding study . in contrast, the l. acidophilus strain used in the capsule represented a very common genotype used in commercial applications . hence the appearance of l. acidophilus isolates which matched the feeding strain ncimb  <dig> may have been less attributable to consumption of the capsule. however, statistical analysis demonstrated that the distribution of l. acidophilus ncimb  <dig> after the feeding trial was significant in terms of the number of positive volunteers and in the majority of these positive individuals it was the dominant cultivable lab strain in faeces.

as far as we are aware, previous studies evaluating the dynamics of lab consumption by humans have not examined the cultivable faecal diversity at the strain level. several studies have used cultivation-independent methods such as real-time pcr to quantify the dna from probiotic strains present in faeces by extrapolating this amplification data to estimate of the numbers of bacteria. bartosch et al.  <cit>  used real-time pcr to estimate the total numbers of bifidobacterium species present in the faeces of elderly people taking a probiotic containing two bifidobacterium strains and an inulin-based prebiotic. they demonstrated that probiotic consumption increased the overall size of bifidobacterium population in their subjects as estimated by increase yields in the species-specific pcr and also used cultivation-based approaches to show that more lab species were present in the probiotic consuming subjects.

maruo et al.  <cit>  used rapd to identify a strain-specific marker for the probiotic strain lactobacillus lactis subsp. cremoris fc, and used real-time pcr to detect the strain's dna within the faeces of human subjects taking the probiotic. they were able to show that the strain's dna persisted during probiotic administration suggesting that between  <dig> and  <dig> bacterial cells were present per g of faeces. however, no cultivation and detection of the l. lactis subsp. cremoris strain fc was performed on the faecal samples  <cit>  to indicate that the strain remained viable and actively colonised the gut during probiotic administration. real-time pcr is a highly sensitive method, however, its dependence on detecting dna and the fact that minute traces of dna may take longer than cells to be completely cleared from the digestive tract, means that the method can be misleading in terms of providing functional information on the viability and persistence of an administered probiotic.

we have also shown that many commercial marketed probiotic products contain the same lab strain . our rapd typing was able to cluster genetically identical strains such as the multiple isolates matching the l. acidophilus type strain , l. casei type strain  and commonly used l. rhamnosus strains . studies by yeung et al.  <cit>  and vancanneyt et al.  <cit>  have also shown that multiple probiotic products often contain common lab strain types. the fingerprinting method was also highly discriminatory distinguishing closely related taxa within the l. casei group , yet at the strain level detecting  <dig> types among the  <dig> isolates examined from this group. the rapd pcr-fingerprinting method also proved very robust and reproducible, with reference strains and cultivated faecal strains producing exactly the same amplified polymorphisms at widely disparate sampling and analysis points . this reproducibility and the amenability of pcr-fingerprinting to high throughput analysis enabled it to be used to examine the molecular epidemiology of lactobacillus consumption by humans for the first time.

our analysis demonstrated that for the lactobacillus strains administered in the feeding study, long term persistence after consumption was not observed. interestingly, persistence for greater than  <dig> days was only observed in volunteer s, the oldest subject in the study , from which the l. salivarius ncimb  <dig> capsule strain was recovered up to day  <dig> of the study. increased probiotic colonisation in older people has been observed by others  <cit>  and it will be intriguing to examine this phenomenon further using the colony fingerprinting method. the persistence seen with the subject-specific lab strains cultivated from faeces is also interesting in this regard. commercialisation of lab strains for probiotic use is dependent on a number of factors, however, from our study and other work, it appears that many commercialised lab strains are genotypically identical to reference strains deposited in recognised culture collections . the fingerprinting strategy described herein could be used to select lab strains with better persistence in human populations by screening a large population of healthy people, and selecting the dominant lab strain types for evaluation as probiotics.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that specific lactobacillus strains consumed as part of a feeding study can be tracked through gastrointestinal passage via a colony-based strain typing strategy. the ability to identify specific lab strains in faeces after human consumption provides a means to answer many important questions concerning the clinical use of probiotics. our fingerprinting strategy could be used to identify the presence of the lab isolates of the same genotype as potential probiotics prior to their administration in clinical trials, therefore allowing outcome measures dependent on the probiotic to be distinguished from those dependent on individuals which may naturally carry the same lab strain. overall, the successful application of molecular epidemiological techniques to cultivable bacterial populations within the human gut provides a platform for future systematic studies on the development of probiotics, as well as a rapid means to assess the strain diversity in healthy versus diseased humans.

