BACKGROUND
opportunistic fungal pathogens have become a major source of life-threatening nosocomial infections. this situation is partly explained by modern medical progress, relying on large-spectrum antibiotics, immunosuppressive chemotherapy, and devices such as catheters, all of which have been shown to predispose to invasive candidiasis  <cit> .

among the emerging fungal pathogens, the incidence of candida glabrata has progressively increased, and it is currently the second or third most prevalent cause of candidiases. despite its name, this yeast is phylogenetically closer to the model yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae than to c. albicans <cit> , and is part of the nakaseomyces genus. this genus originally included three other species of yeasts isolated only from the environment, namely nakaseomyces  delphensis, candida castellii and nakaseomyces  bacillisporus <cit> . recently however, two pathogens have been added to the genus, candida nivariensis and candida bracarensis <cit> . because routine phenotypic tests, such as biochemical identification methods, are unable to identify these newly described species, leading most often to misidentification as zygosaccharomyces  their true clinical relevance may be underestimated. recently, collections of clinical isolates, phenotypically identified as c. glabrata, were screened with molecular methods, and c. bracarensis and c. nivariensis were found to represent less than  <dig> % and less than  <dig> % of the strains, respectively, with prevalence possibly varying across countries  <cit> . interestingly, although c. glabrata is considered a commensal of the human gut  <cit> , the ecological niches of c. bracarensis and c. nivariensis remain unknown. of note, c. nivariensis has been isolated from flowering plants in australia  <cit> , pointing to the possibility that this species may colonize humans from an environmental source.

as it is often the case in fungi, loss, or scarcity of sexual reproduction is associated to species isolated in human patients. nonetheless, the nakaseomyces comprise at least one known “environmental” species in which no sex has been observed, c. castellii <cit> . mat-like loci and the ho gene, the key player of mating-type switching in s. cerevisiae <cit> , were known to be conserved in c. glabrata and n. delphensis <cit> .

the genomic sequence of c. glabrata has been available since  <dig>  <cit> , and its comparison to s. cerevisiae has served to discuss possible genomic and metabolic features related to the pathogenic nature of the former  <cit> . however, it was as yet unclear whether some of these features were also shared by other nakaseomyces and how their presence actually related to the ability of the different species to become human pathogens. in the case of candida albicans, this has been explored by sequencing several of its close relatives  <cit> . to gain a similar insight into the specific features of c. glabrata and their relation to pathogenicity, we now report the complete sequencing of the five other known species in the nakaseomyces group.

our results show that all nakaseomyces nuclear genomes are small, transposon-free and contain significantly less genes than s. cerevisiae. this is in contrast to their mitochondrial genomes which, with the exception of c. glabrata, are large and invaded by palindromic putative mobile elements, the gc inserts  <cit> . loss of genes involved in several metabolic pathways as well as loss or amplification of some gene families, are shared by most, sometimes all, nakaseomyces species, although some remain species-specific. our molecular phylogenetic analysis supports the phylogeny of the nakaseomyces, as published by kurtzman,  <cit>  ie all these species can be grouped together as a new genus with a single common ancestor. we also confirm that the genus can be clearly subdivided into two main lineages, where the lineage containing c. castellii and n. bacillisporus has followed a very divergent evolutionary path. the second group, which we will refer to as the ‘glabrata group’, contains the three pathogenic species and n. delphensis, which is more closely related to the two recently identified pathogens. this depicts a complex scenario suggesting multiple independent events of emergence of pathogenesis within this lineage, and the presence of a genomic repertoire that may facilitate the emergence of pathogenicity towards humans. altogether our comparative analyses have enabled us to trace, at high levels of resolution, the genomic changes that occurred within this group and discuss how they relate to the pathogenic ability of the different species.

RESULTS
genome assemblies
sequencing of the type strains of the five nakaseomyces species; candida nivariensis cbs <dig>  candida bracarensis cbs <dig>  nakaseomyces  delphensis cbs <dig>  candida castellii cbs <dig>  and nakaseomyces  bacillisporus cbs <dig>  was performed at genoscope , using a combination of illumina and  <dig> technologies . genome data has been deposited at the embl.

final assemblies showed a close correspondence between scaffolds and chromosomes , and were annotated for coding and non-coding genes . flow cytometry results show that species are haploid, except n. bacillisporus which is diploid . all species have an haploid genome size of  <dig> to 12 mb. chromosome numbers, as estimated by pulsed-field gel electrophoresis , range from eight in c. castellii, the smallest yet recorded number of chromosomes in post-wgd yeasts  <cit> , to fifteen in n. bacillisporus; with the ‘glabrata group’ exhibiting the least variation . centromeres, similar in structure to s. cerevisiae’s, i.e. composed of three short “centromere defining elements”, cdei, ii and iii  <cit> ; were identified in all species but not in all scaffolds. telomeric repeats identical to those in c. glabrata and the putative telomerase rna-component were found in the ‘glabrata group’.

several ncrna genes are known to be surprisingly large in c. glabrata, such as the rpr <dig> gene of rnase p  <cit>  and the above-mentioned tlc <dig> gene  <cit> . this tendency to exceptionally large ncrnas seems to be general in the nakaseomyces, such as the  <dig> nt-long rpr <dig> gene in n. delphensis , and the  <dig> nt-long u <dig> snrna gene in c. castellii . other structural genomic features are discussed in the supplementary results . none of the species contain detectable active transposons in their nuclear genome.

phylogeny of nakaseomyces
in order to clarify the phylogenetic relationships of the newly-sequenced nakaseomyces and  <dig> other saccharomycotina, we used two alternative phylogenomics approaches, namely i) a maximum likelihood  analysis of a concatenated alignment of  <dig> protein families that have one-to-one orthologs in all the species considered, and ii) a super-tree approach based on the analysis of  <dig>  individual gene trees, which finds the species topology that is most parsimonious in terms of implied duplication events in all the individual gene trees  <cit> . both approaches yielded the same, highly resolved topology , which is largely congruent, for the shared species, with our current understanding of saccharomycotina phylogeny  <cit> .

this topology supports the the existence of the nakaseomyces genus, and defines two clear sub-groups separated by an ancient split. the first group comprises the highly divergent c. castellii and n. bacillisporus, whereas the second group  includes the three pathogenic species and n. delphensis. the average protein identity between orthologs of species in the different sub-groups ranges from  <dig> to 53% , which is similar to that of orthologs in the c. castellii/n. bacillisporus  and c.glabrata/s.cerevisiae  pairs, pointing to large levels of divergence. the ‘glabrata group’, is more compact and shows higher identity levels . notably, the two newly identified pathogens, c. nivariensis and c. bracarensis, are both closer to n. delphensis than to the most frequently isolated pathogen, c. glabrata . thus the emerging picture for the appearance of pathogenesis is complex, with plausible alternative scenarios involving either gain of the ability to infect humans at the base of the sub-clade followed by loss of the trait in n. delphensis or three independent events of acquisition of pathogenicity. these possibilities will be further discussed below.

the degree of synteny, i.e. gene order conservation between species, was found to correlate with phylogenetic proximity, with the highest conservation occurring between c. bracarensis, c. nivariensis and n. delphensis . conservation of synteny of the nakaseomyces in general, relative to s. cerevisiae is low. detailed analysis of syntenic regions will be presented elsewhere .

mating types
as is the case for many fungal species described as asexual, genes involved in sexual reproduction are known to be conserved in c. glabrata <cit> . in particular, although mating has never been reported in c. glabrata, the two additional mat cassettes, hmra and hmlalpha, and the ho gene are present in its genome, and haploid isolates of both mating types are found. in n. delphensis, also a mainly haploid species, these elements are also conserved  <cit>  and mating-type switch may occur in culture  <cit> . for the remaining four species, three are considered asexual and mainly haploid, but the last one, n. bacillisporus, is considered to be diploid and homothallic  <cit> . as mentioned above, ploidy was confirmed by flow cytometry. all species contain a well-conserved homolog of the ho gene , the most diverged encoded protein being the one from n. bacillisporus, which exhibits a c-terminal extension rich in proline and serine.

in all species, additional sequencing was needed in order to obtain the cassettes. in n. delphensis, n. bacillisporus and c. castellii, amplification of the mat-like cassette yielded both a and alpha fragments. this raises the intriguing possibility that c. castellii switches mating types in culture, whilst having no described sexual cycle, or that it is sexual and goes through a diploid phase. this will need further experimental analysis. figure  <dig> shows which cassettes are currently identified in these genomes. genes within cassettes, a <dig>  alpha <dig> and alpha <dig> are identified in all species, as is the ho site, which can be recognised at the yz junction. in cases where the three cassettes are identified, their configuration is apparently similar to c. glabrata’s: both hml- and mat-like cassettes are on the same scaffold, while the hmr-like cassette is on a different one, except for n. delphensis, where the three cassettes are on the same scaffold. thus, nakaseomyces species follow the rule of conservation of hml and mat on the same chromosome, noticed by gordon et al.  <cit> .

c. nivariensis has two hmr-like cassettes, i.e. cassettes that contain type a information, and that are present in addition to the mat locus, a situation already noted in other species  <cit> . experimental testing of these cassettes will reveal what role, if any, these extra loci have, in organisms where sexual reproduction has not been characterized yet.

variations in gene repertoires
the total numbers of protein-coding genes range from  <dig> to  <dig>  which is similar to what is found in c. glabrata <cit> , and lower than in s. cerevisiae. indeed, the number of true protein-coding genes in s. cerevisiae is estimated at around  <dig>  but this rises to around  <dig> when dubious and other non-experimentally characterized orfs are included, a figure more comparable to our predicted gene sets . to assess the coverage of the predicted gene repertoires we tested for the presence of a set of  <dig>  protein families previously found to be widespread in saccharomycotina <cit> . our proteomes contained  <dig> -100% of this core dataset, attesting for a high coverage in our procedures.

intron-containing protein-coding genes are far fewer in c. glabrata than in s. cerevisiae . this paucity of introns is shared by all nakaseomyces, which have intron counts lower than  <dig>  although experimental validation is needed, our data point to a remarkable loss of introns in the nakaseomyces.

to accurately trace the evolution of the genetic repertoires across the nakaseomyces, and confidently establish orthology and paralogy relationships, we performed an exhaustive phylogenomic analysis that included the reconstruction of ml phylogenies for every gene encoded in the nakaseomyces genomes . these were used to detect orthology and paralogy relationships  <cit> , and to map lineage-specific gene duplication  <cit>  and gene loss events onto the species tree. figures  <dig> and  <dig> and additional file  <dig> summarize the main findings regarding the presence or absence of genes relevant to central processes. lower gene numbers in the nakaseomyces when compared to s. cerevisiae are reflected in the number of gene loss events indicated on the tree from figure  <dig> 

in particular, we have paid special attention to the retained copies of so-called ohnologs . in s. cerevisiae, only  <dig> ohnologous pairs are left in the contemporary genome, as most such pairs have lost one member  <cit> . this is also the case in the nakaseomyces genomes, as in all post-wgd species. the exact complement of ohnologs retained in duplicates varies across species and is likely to reflect particular physiological differences.

a noteworthy example comes from central carbon metabolism: it has been suggested that the six ohnologous gene pairs encoding glycolytic enzymes, such as eno1/eno <dig>  and pyc1/pyc <dig>  conserved in s. cerevisiae and c. glabrata, play an important role in the crabtree effect, ie fermentation even in the presence of high glucose and oxygen  <cit> , a trait shared by all nakaseomyces <cit> . the genes involved are also in pairs in the ‘glabrata group’, but, in both c. castellii and n. bacillisporus, the situation is rather different, with single pyruvate kinase, enolase, and glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase genes . furthermore, c. castellii has two hexokinase genes , as compared to four  in the other species. other features of central carbon metabolism in the nakaseomyces are mentioned below and in additional file  <dig> 

comparison of the proteins encoded in c. glabrata and s. cerevisiae’s genomes had revealed several features specific to the former. in particular, since there are fewer genes in c. glabrata than in s. cerevisiae, there was a special interest in specific gene loss. indeed, there are at least four entire multigenic families which are absent in all nakaseomyces or represented by a sole member in c. castellii and/or n. bacillisporus: the pho, snz, sno and pau families. it is noteworthy that the paralogous pho family of acid phosphatases has been lost, while the rest of the pho pathway is conserved. functional analysis in c. glabrata has shown that the pho <dig> gene is present but not essential for regulation, and that the pho <dig> gene is poorly conserved at the sequence level, but is functional  <cit> . phosphate-starvation induced phosphatase activity in c. glabrata has been identified and is encoded by pmu <dig> homologs in tandem . the snz and sno gene families are poorly characterized in s. cerevisiae, but their expression is known to be induced in stationary phase. finally, the pau family consists of at least  <dig> subtelomeric genes in s. cerevisiae, possibly involved in anaerobiosis  <cit>  and similar to two other gene families, dan and tir, that encode cell-wall mannoproteins. there are no homologs to any of these genes in c. castellii and n. bacillisporus, while c. glabrata and c. nivariensis contain two copies of dan-like genes, and the remaining species seem to contain only one homologous copy.

also of particular interest was the loss of genes involved in de novo biosynthesis of nicotinic acid , which was hypothesized to result from the adaptation of c. glabrata to its human host  <cit> . comparison to the newly sequenced nakaseomyces has shown that the lack of bna genes is common to them all , regardless of their habitat, suggesting that the loss of this pathway is an ancient event. notably, loss of bna genes has also been observed in other, more distant species, such as kluyveromyces lactis and other species, and seems to be a volatile trait  <cit> . in fact, all gene losses observed in c. glabrata relative to s. cerevisiae are shared by the ‘glabrata group’, whereas in the two other species gene absence is variable. a remarkable example concerns the genes necessary for allantoin catabolism. in s. cerevisiae, the subtelomeric dal  cluster consists of six genes, and was formed in the ancestor to s. cerevisiae and naumovia castellii, but lost in c. glabrata <cit> . the dal cluster is absent from the ‘glabrata group’, but is present in both c. castellii and n. bacillisporus. intriguingly, in these genomes, the cluster contains another gene involved in allantoin catabolism, dal <dig>  which, in s. cerevisiae, is not linked to the cluster .

other notable examples of gene gain/loss involve the translation machinery: both the number of ohnologous ribosomal protein  gene pairs and the rp gene regulators, crf <dig> and sfp <dig>  vary between species, with no correlation between absence/presence of regulator genes and number of ohnologous rp gene pairs .

central carbon metabolism again provides examples of gene gain/loss events; all nakaseomyces genomes contain only two copies of adh genes, which, both by similarity and by conservation of synteny, correspond to orthologs of adh <dig> and adh <dig>  the s. cerevisiae genes that encode, respectively, the cytoplasmic and the mitochondrial activities converting acetaldehyde into ethanol. adh <dig>  which in s. cerevisiae is specialized in the conversion of ethanol to acetaldehyde, has no ortholog in the nakaseomyces. it is possible that bi-directional activities exist, or that alternative enzymes take over this conversion . for example, s. cerevisiae has additional alcohol dehydrogenase genes, in particular the family of aryl alcohol dehydrogenases encoded by seven subtelomeric aad genes and the non-subtelomeric ypl088w gene  <cit> . c. glabrata possesses an array of three such genes in tandem, while other nakaseomyces have several dispersed copies, except c. castellii which harbors a single such gene. experimental analysis is needed to tell which enzymes catalyze which reactions in nakaseomyces, and even in s. cerevisiae, in which enzymatic activities are still in the process of being characterized  <cit> . as for anaerobic growth, all nakaseomyces have the ability to grow in micro-aerobiosis, as tested by standard laboratory methods . two pairs of regulators are described as essential to anaerobiosis in s. cerevisiae; the ecm22/upc <dig> pair and the sut1/sut <dig> pair. these genes are conserved in all nakaseomyces except c. castellii. there are also pairs of genes that differ by their expression under aerobic and anaerobic growth, such as cox5a/cox5b and of cyc1/cyc <dig> in s. cerevisiae. in contrast, all nakaseomyces retain a single member of each of these ohnologous pairs, raising the question of their regulation.

genes involved in virulence
in c. glabrata, the epa genes, a family of glycosyl-phosphatydylinositol -anchored cell-wall protein  genes  <cit> , are the best characterized genes involved in adhesion to human epithelia  <cit> , an ability associated to virulence in diverse pathogens  <cit> . notably, our search for homologs of c. glabrata epa genes in the newly sequenced nakaseomyces , revealed higher numbers of such genes in the three pathogenic species. more specifically, in the most prevalent pathogen, c. glabrata, the type strain harbors  <dig> members of this family. seven new variants of epa genes are found in a different c. glabrata strain, bg <dig> . the other two pathogenic nakaseomyces, c. bracarensis and c. nivariensis have respectively,  <dig> and  <dig> members of the epa family. in contrast, the non-pathogenic n. delphensis harbors a single copy. these differences cannot be attributed to differences in the quality of assemblies, which were similar in all newly sequenced species. of the two remaining nakaseomyces species, only c. castellii contains three homologs of the epa genes, while n. bacillisporus presented only one distant homolog that clustered with pwp  and adhesin-like protein genes in c. glabrata. these proteins, more similar to the floculin homologs in s. cerevisiae, are only distantly related to epa proteins  <cit> . a closer inspection of the corresponding trees in the phylome and of a composite tree constructed with all members of the identified epa-like members , revealed that a significant fraction of the adhesin gene copies in c. glabrata emerged from lineage-specific duplications in this species, whereas many duplications in c. bracarensis and c. nivariensis are shared. this independent expansion of epa-like genes in c. glabrata and the emerging pathogens supports the idea of an independent emergence of pathogenesis and may explain the important differences in prevalence across these species. strikingly, the non-pathogenic member of the ‘glabrata group’, n. delphensis possesses a sole representative of this family, although the phylogenetic scenario implies that the common ancestor of this species and the two emergent pathogens would have had a higher number of copies. this scenario implies specific losses of epa-like genes in n. delphensis, and a possible secondary loss of adhesion capabilities in this species. interestingly, our search for adhesin-like proteins uncovered the presence of a group of four proteins in n. delphensis with poor similarity with the epa-like family . whether this group represents highly divergent members -or even pseudogenes- of the epa-like family in n. delphensis, remains to be further investigated. in any case, their high levels of sequence divergence, particularly at the n-terminal region known to harbor the ligand-binding domain in epa  <cit> , suggest they cannot be functionally equivalent.

other genes shown to be involved in virulence in c. albicans and/or c.glabrata, such as the phospholipase b gene, or the super oxide dismutase genes , exhibit variable presence/absence in the nakaseomyces, with no obvious correlation to pathogenicity of the species.

genes in tandem arrays
tandem arrays are a special genomic arrangement of certain gene families that imply specific amplification mechanisms and positive selection. they can either be shared by all members of a species, such as the globin genes in mammals  <cit> , or display polymorphism in terms of number of copies, such as the cup <dig> gene in s.cerevisiae, whose amplification is positively selected in copper-containing medium  <cit> . a few dozen tandems were identified in the nakaseomyces genomes . the species with the largest tandem arrays is c. glabrata, with two arrays of eight genes each , the mnt <dig> array  and the yps array  <cit> , and an array of five genes, coding for a protein of unknown function predicted to be involved in carbohydrate metabolism. none correspond to tandem arrays of more than two genes in other nakaseomyces. two other arrays of three genes are specific to c. glabrata, the aryl alcohol dehydrogenase gene array, and the pmu <dig> array. these findings indicate that most tandem arrays found in c. glabrata originated specifically in this lineage. this, together with the finding that some of these arrays are variable across strains, suggests that the amplification of these families may be driven by  selection. functions encoded by these families, are thus good candidates for finding possible physiological advantages underlying the success of c. glabrata as an opportunistic pathogen. in the case of the yps cluster, the genes have been shown to be involved in virulence  <cit> . pmu <dig> encodes the phosphate-starvation inducible phosphatase activity, which has been hypothesized to be a specific adaptation of c. glabrata to its mammalian host  <cit> .

analysis of evolutionary rates in the lineages leading to the ‘glabrata group’
as mentioned above, the ‘glabrata group’ contains several species with the ability to infect humans. we have previously discussed changes that occurred within this lineage in terms of acquisition and loss of genes. we next set out to investigate whether we could identify signatures of possible positive selection in the form of genes with accelerated rates in the branch preceding the diversification of the ‘glabrata group’. for this we focused on  <dig>  genes predicted as one-to-one orthologs shared by all nakaseomyces species and s. cerevisiae. using the species’ phylogeny, we used a likelihood ratio test  to compare two nested rate models . for  <dig> of the  <dig> genes , a model including a different rate in the branch leading to the ‘glabrata group’ was favored, and in  <dig> of them there was evidence for accelerated rates, suggestive of positive selection . in contrast, we did not find a significant rate acceleration in either the s. cerevisiae, n. bacillisporus or c. castelli lineages, nor within the ‘glabrata group’ itself, where the average dn/ds rate was  <dig>  indicating high levels of purifying selection. these findings suggest that prior to the diversification of the ‘glabrata group’, there was an increase in the non-synonymous substitution rate in at least  <dig> genes . among these we did not find families that have been related to pathogenesis in c. albicans. finally, we focused on the ‘glabrata group’ to identify genes accelerated in parallel in the three lineages leading to the three pathogenic species or exclusively in the c. glabrata lineage. we identified  <dig> proteins with evidence for different selective constrains in pathogenic species and n. delphensis, although this difference was mostly due to stronger purifying selection, rather than positive selection, in the pathogens. with respect to the c. glabrata specific branch, only four genes presented dn/ds > <dig>  overall, these results would suggest a burst of nonsynonymous substitution rates in a significant number of genes preceding the divergence of the ‘glabrata group’ and a subsequent stasis within the group itself. nevertheless, genes that are positively selected in these lineages constitute good candidates for testing potential roles in virulence.

discussion
even though experimental data will be needed to clarify the relationship between genome content and adaptation to the environment, we show that many gene variations observed occur in families of genes encoding cell wall proteins , as well as proteins involved in carbohydrate metabolism. these classes of genes have already been shown to be involved in adaptation of yeast species to particular biotechnological niches such as the mel and mal genes in saccharomyces species,  <cit> , the sul genes in lager yeasts  <cit>  or in adaptation to the human host such as the epa genes in c. glabrata <cit>  and the als genes in c. albicans <cit> . some of these genes fit the definition of contingency genes, i.e. genes that encode products that mediate the cell’s response to its environment and that evolve faster than allows the average mutation rate of other genes  <cit> . rapid evolution is supposed to be facilitated by internal repeats, such as within the epa genes, and by subtelomeric location, situations which enhance recombination frequency and generate new alleles and possibly new genes.

our data firmly support the existence of the nakaseomyces genus, but nonetheless, two of the species, c. castellii and n. bacillisporus, have diverged in many ways, first by the low conservation of their orthologous genes, when compared to the four other nakaseomyces, and also by their paucity of tandems, and by their frequent variation in gene numbers compared to the ‘glabrata group’ . furthermore, our analyses shows that the two emerging pathogens, c. nivariensis and c. bracarensis, are most closely related to the non-pathogenic n. delphensis, and all descend from an ancestor that has also given rise to c. glabrata. in accordance to their phylogenetic relationship, most genomic particularities observed in c. glabrata as compared to s. cerevisiae, are also shared by the two emerging pathogens and n. delphensis. some others, such as the absence of the nicotinic acid synthesis pathway are even common to all nakaseomyces, and thus represent ancient nakaseomyces traits, whose origin must have pre-dated the adaptation to the human host of some of the members of the group. hence, the scenario for the emergence of pathogenicity within the nakaseomyces, and the underlying genomic and metabolic changes must be reinterpreted in the light of these new genomic data. these findings also highlight the utility of increased taxonomic samplings when correlating genomic and phenotypic differences. considering that most genomic and metabolic features previously thought to be particular of c. glabrata are shared by the three most closely related nakaseomyces, of which two are not natural inhabitants of the human gut, the most plausible explanation is that they result from adaptations to environments other than the human gut. the alternative scenario in which human commensalism is an ancestral trait that was lost in c. nivariensis and n. delphensis seems unlikely given the large evolutionary distances involved and the relatively recent origin of our species. furthermore, since these four related species include one that has never been identified as a human pathogen, and two that have only been recently reported as opportunistic pathogens, the link to the emergence of pathogenesis for their specific genomic features should be indirect. nevertheless, the presence of three related species able to infect humans within this sub-group of nakaseomyces is in stark contrast to the almost complete absence of this ability in the rest of the genus as well as in the related saccharomyces and kluyveromyces groups. thus, it seems that some of the particularities shared by c. glabrata and the three related species may represent pre-adaptations  that may have facilitated, but not directly triggered, the emergence of pathogenecity towards humans. although further research is needed to identify which traits may have been particularly important for the emergence of pathogenesis within the nakaseomyces, several of the traits shared by c. glabrata and the three closest relatives are firm candidates. these include genes that likely underwent positive selection specifically in this lineage, of which some have homologs implicated in pathogenesis in c. albicans. in addition, the multiple parallel expansions of the epa genes, known to be important for the ability of c. glabrata to adhere to human cells, represent a clear example of a genomic change that correlates with the pathogenic trait. our data supports the fact that the emergence of pathogenesis relies on a combination of genomic alterations, rather than changes in a single gene family.

undoubtedly, c. glabrata is the most prevalent pathogen among the nakaseomyces. this increased ability to infect immunocompromised humans is probably related to some of the specific changes observed in the c. glabrata lineage, as compared to the other nakaseomyces. these include specific losses, expansions of some gene families, particularly as tandem arrays, and even the acquisition of horizontally transferred genes  <cit> . remarkably, some of these traits specific to c. glabrata have been related to virulence, such as the largest expansion of gene families involved in cell adhesion  and in phosphate starvation . that the epa genes have been expanded in c. glabrata independently of the emergent pathogens is consistent with the important differences of prevalence and suggest an independent emergence of increased adherence to the human epithelium, an important virulent trait.

considering all these data, one can speculate on the possible scenarios depicting the origin of pathogenesis within the nakaseomyces. to start with, our phylogeny does not support the monophyly of c. glabrata and the two emerging pathogens. two competing scenarios may explain this pattern: a single origin of pathogenesis towards humans followed by loss of the trait in n. delphensis or, alternatively, at least two independent events of emergence of pathogenesis. although the first scenario is more parsimonious in terms of the number of phenotypic shifts, the second hypothesis seems more likely in the light of the parallel expansions of the epa genes, and the fact that the pathogens other than c. glabrata have only been recently identified, suggesting these are recently emerged rather than derived pathogens. a plausible scenario for the emergence of pathogenesis within the nakaseomyces, compatible with our data, comprises the following steps: an ancestral environmental yeast with specific genomic features, gives rise to species adapted to being commensals of humans, of which some can evolve into opportunistic pathogens. a certain level of adaptation to the mammalian gut may have represented a selective advantage to yeast species that are naturally present in edible parts of plants , since this may have facilitated dispersion by the animals consuming the plants. increased levels of adaptation to the mammalian gut environment may have resulted in species that persist in the gut and gradually adapt to a particular host . once reached this point, particular features of some species may provide them with the ability to colonize an immuno-compromised host. such features could be related to the ability to adhere to the host, persist in tissues other than the gut and to overcome the  host immune system. intriguingly, c. nivariensis seems not to be a inhabitant of the human gut, and may colonize human patients from an environmental source. although further research is needed to clarify this, emergence of pathogenesis from environmental species would suggest that prior commensalism with humans is not a pre-requisite for developing infection capacity in candida spp. nevertheless, such species found in the environment may also be associated to other mammals. clearly, additional data on ecological distribution of these nakaseomyces species is needed to sort out these alternative hypotheses.

CONCLUSIONS
figure  <dig> shows a summary of the main findings described in this work. comparative genomics analyses support the hypothesis that pathogenicity arose several times in the nakaseomyces, and that this group represents a true genus, with common ancestral traits that may be favorable to adaptation to the human host.

