BACKGROUND
the beginning of embryogenesis is cleavage stage. during this stage, a zygote undergoes several rapid rounds of division, and produces a mass of cells within the zona pellucida. abnormally cleavage, such as multinucleation  <cit>  and asynchrony division  <cit> , will lead to poor developmental competence. in most in vitro fertilization  cases, the evaluation of implantation potential is carried out at cleavage stage embryos, or oocytes, which are based on morphological and/or genetic methods  <cit> . however, the precision of these methods is far from ideal: only one third of clinical ivf cases successfully result in a pregnancy  <cit> . thus, understanding the molecular mechanism underlying cleavage stage development is of paramount importance to the improvement of preimplantation genetic diagnosis .

recently, the efforts to characterize cleavage stage embryos have revealed the global gene expression profiles during preimplantation development of mouse embryo . a major goal in the study of cleavage stage embryos is to illustrate intricate molecular regulatory networks and to identify key regulators during cleavage stage embryonic development. however, although the expression patterns of messenger rnas and micrornas in cleavage stage embryos were discussed in previous studies, the long non-coding rnas , which were recently proved to be critical gene regulators of development, are not yet clearly elucidated.

in the past decade, many lncrnas in variety species were identified via massive parallel sequencing of transcripts  . one limitation of regular rna-seq is the requirement of large amounts of material and a minimum of 500 pg total rna input is suggested  <cit> . fortunately, several researchers have developed single-cell rna-seq methods to elucidate gene expression profile in a single cell, such as mouse oocytes and cells from mouse preimplantation embryos  <cit> , mouse bone marrow-derived dendritic cells   <cit> , human white blood cells  <cit> . these efforts may help to study new and low abundance lncrnas expressed in a very limited subset of cell types and reveal the expression variability between individual cells.

although the functions of most lncrnas are still unclear, several lncrnas were found to be involved in cleavage stage embryos development. for example, the well-known x-link lncrna xist mediates the x-inactivation since 4-cell stage  <cit> , and kcnq1ot <dig>  a paternally expressed non-coding rna expressed since 2-cell stage, regulates the establishment of imprinting in kcnq <dig> domain during preimplantation development  <cit> . these studies suggest that lncrnas may play an important role in preimplantation development.

here we report the genome-wide characterization of cleavage stage embryonic lncrnas, and define a stringent set of  <dig>  novel lncrna genes from single-cell rna-seq data of mouse cleavage stage embryos. we validated our data set by known genomic features of lncrnas, including transcript length, exon number, evolutionary conservation and spatiotemporal expression specificity. weighted gene co-expression network analysis revealed that lncrnas express in a strong developmental stage-specific manner, and many of them are highly associated with development regulatory genes. our genome-wide annotation of cleavage stage embryonic lncrnas may improve our understanding of molecular mechanism that underpin mouse embryogenesis and provide a large number of candidate targets for pgd.

RESULTS
reconstruction of mouse cleavage blastomere transcriptome
to identify lncrnas involved in mouse cleavage stage embryo development, we first assembled cleavage stage embryonic transcriptome to reexamine the rna-seq data gse <dig>  <cit>  which include  <dig> single cell rna-seq data from four mouse cleavage stages .figure  <dig> 
overview of cleavage stage lncrnas identification pipeline.




briefly, all reads were aligned to mouse genome  by using tophat, a program specifically designed to align rna-seq reads and discover de novo splice junctions  <cit> . the mappable reads were then assembled into transcripts with two different assemblers, cufflinks  <cit>  and scripture  <cit> . we identified  <dig> , <dig> non-redundant transcripts from  <dig>  loci in four embryonic stages.

to eliminate erroneously assembled transcripts, we applied a stringent criteria  <cit>  to identify probable transcripts which should be detected by two assemblers in same sample or identified in at least two individual samples by same assembler and defined a set of  <dig>  cleavage stage transcripts. next, we removed unreliable lowly expressed transcripts by using a learned read coverage threshold similar to previous study  <cit> . unlike conventional rna-seq, the transcripts reconstructed from single-cell rna-seq are more fragmentary  <cit> , so we applied an integrity threshold of  <dig>  to define well-constructed transcripts, which means an annotated transcript will be accepted if 75% of its exon was covered by reads . since our transcriptomes are reconstructed from a non strand-specific rna-seq dataset, we determined the direction of transcripts based on the splice junction sequences. all single-exon and short transcripts  were excluded from our dataset. in the end, a set of  <dig>  multi-exonic transcripts from  <dig>  loci were identified as high-confidence transcripts . notably, the vast majority of high-confidence transcripts were detected by both assemblers, suggest that our high-confidence transcriptomes are reliable.

identification of  <dig> novel lncrnas in mouse cleavage blastomere
to define novel lncrnas from our high-confidence transcriptome, we developed a filtering pipeline to remove known mrnas, potential mrnas and known ncrnas . firstly, we removed all transcripts overlaping exons of known genes recorded in ncbi refseq, ucsc and ensembl databases, resulting in a data set containing  <dig> high-confidence transcripts. then, we compared the genomic coordinates of our predicted lncrnas with lncrna database noncode , and found  <dig> lncrnas were collected in noncode . thus, the remaining  <dig> rnas are novel rna transcripts.

because novel protein-coding transcripts mingle with novel non-coding transcripts in the prediction process, we applied coding potential calculator   <cit>  to evaluated protein-coding potential of novel transcripts and remove putative protein-coding transcripts. cpc assess coding potential by considering potential orfs,the quality and integrity of predicted orfs, and the homology with known proteins. cpc also parse the output of blastx search against known protein sequences by extract features such as number of hits, quality of hits, and concentration of hits in a single orf. cpc algorithm incorporates these features and returns a cpc score to evaluate coding potential of transcripts. we define an lncrna with an empirical cpc score threshold , and  <dig> putative noncoding transcripts were retained.

cpc uses only uniref <dig> as reference database of protein similarity analysis, and it defines a coding transcript with a relatively stringent parameter . these might result in loss of some mrnas with relatively weak similarity to known proteins and therefore cause false positive results in lncrna discovery. based on the hypothesis that translation products of mrnas are likely to have higher similarity to known proteins or protein families than non-coding transcripts, we translated each transcript and estimated their similarity to known proteins or protein families in order to identify mrnas which were not captured by cpc. by using blastp  <cit>  and hmmer- <dig>  <cit> , transcripts with an e-value < 10- <dig> that estimated by any of the two algorithms were considered as protein-coding transcripts. finally, a set of  <dig> transcripts from  <dig> loci passed all filters and were regarded as novel mouse cleavage stage lncrnas . a quick view of read counts mapping to annotation features such as mrnas, known lncrnas and new predicted lncrnas in this study suggested new lncrnas highly expressed in zygote genome activation in 2-cell stage .

genomic features of mouse cleavage stage lncrnas
previous studies have shown that lncrnas are shorter, less conserved than protein coding transcripts  <cit> . thus we estimated the length, structure, evolutionary conservation of our predicted novel lncrnas to determine whether mouse cleavage stage lncrnas are characterized by these features.

we found that the predicted lncrnas in cleavage stage embryos are fewer in exon number and shorter in length  than refseq protein coding transcripts  . interestingly, lncrnas in mouse cleavage stage embryos are shorter in length than lncrnas in human  and zebrafish , but more in exon number than lncrnas in human   <cit>  and zebrafish   <cit> .figure  <dig> 
genomic features of new predicted lncrnas.  length distribution of  <dig> coding transcripts and  <dig> new predicted lncrnas.  exon number distribution of  <dig> coding transcripts and  <dig> new predicted lncrnas.   mean phastcons score  and mean phylop score  for  <dig> coding transcripts,  <dig> known lncrnas and  <dig> new predicted lncrnas .



although lncrnas in different species share some conservative genomic features, sequence conservation of lncrnas is lower than protein-coding genes in different species  <cit> . therefore it is difficult to estimate sequence conservation by multiple sequence alignment. thus, we used two different methods, phylop  <cit>  and phastcon  <cit> , to estimate the evolutionary conservation of predicted lncrnas across  <dig> vertebrate species . we found that our predicted novel cleavage stage lncrnas are less conserved than protein coding transcripts, but have similar conservation to pre-annotated lncrnas. thus, these features of our predicted lncrnas verified that they are bona fide mouse cleavage stage embryonic lncrnas which share similar genomic features and evolutionary features with other lncrnas.

lncrna genes and their neighbouring coding genes are globally independent transcripted in mouse cleavage stage embryos
many lncrnas are located closely to genes associated with developmental regulatory functions  <cit> . a subject about lncrnas is whether lncrnas transcripted coordinately with neighbouring genes. therefore we analyzed gene paires formed by lncrnas and their neighboring genes and identified  <dig> lncrna:coding gene pairs. in these coding genes near new predicted lncrnas, a significant enrichment  of morphogenesis and transcription regulation was observed . then, we analyzed gene pairs formed by pre-annotated lncrnas in cleavage stage mouse embryos and their neighbor cording genes and found  <dig> refseq lncrna:coding gene pairs. we found that developmental regulatory functions also enriched for their neighbor coding genes . these results are similar with previous studies in other vertebrates .

recent studies demonstrated that some lncrnas can regulate gene transcription in cis . we analyzed lncrnas expressed in cleavage stage mouse embryos, and observed a more correlate expression pattern of lncrnas and their neighbouring coding genes  compare to random coding gene pairs . on the other hand, coding gene and their coding neighbors  also exhibit a relative higher correlated express pattern compare to random coding gene pairs . however, lncrnas:coding gene pairs exhibit a modestly higher correlative expression pattern than coding gene pair , even there is a significantly different between them . this observation suggested that the correlation between lncrnas and their neighbor coding genes are higher than random gene pairs but similar to coding genes pairs.

previous studies have shown that many lncrnas are originated within a 4-kb region surrounding the transcription start sites  of protein-coding genes and tend to be coordinated with neighbouring protein coding genes . we analyzed the distance between tsss of lncrnas expressed in mouse cleavage stage embryos  and their neighbouring protein-coding genes. we found that  <dig> %  of lncrnas in cleavage stage embryos were originated within 10 kb from one or more tsss of protein-coding genes and formed  <dig> lncrna:coding gene pairs. we observed no significant different between lncrna:coding gene pairs  and neighbouring coding pairs   but both lncrnas:coding gene pairs and neighbouring coding pairs are more correlated than random coding gene pairs  . further analysis illustrated that the 5' ends of lncrnas are enriched in a 4 kb region surrounding the tsss of their neighbouring coding genes , which are in agree with previous studies  <cit> .

divergent transcription at promoters of active protein coding genes was considered as an important source of lncrnas . corresponding to these observations, we observed a higher fraction of bi-directional promoters in lncrna:coding gene pairs than neighbouring coding gene pairs . tsss distance analysis of lncrna:coding gene pairs revealed that both sense and antisense lncrnas mainly originate within tss regions of coding genes . this distribution is reminiscent of the tss associated- rnas   <cit>  which peak between -100 nt to -300 nt of antisense tss. analysis of all head-to-head genes  suggested a common feature of head-to-head genes that the distance of two tss is range from  <dig> to -400 nt , which corrected a previous study  <cit> . nevertheless, analysis of neighbor gene expression patterns showed limited differences between lncrnas:coding gene pairs and neighbouring coding gene pairs in both directions .figure  <dig> 
bi-directional promoter analysis.  proportion of different direction in each category of gene pairs.  distribution of distance from one tss to another, in unidirection of lncrna:coding gene pairs , bidirection lncrna:coding gene pair , unidirection coding gene pairs , bidirection neighbor coding gene pairs .   distribution of correlation of tss adjacent neighbor  in lncrnas:coding gene pairs  or neighbouring coding gene pairs .



taken together, these analyses revealed that lncrnas in cleavage stage embryos mainly originated within tsss region of neighbouring protein coding genes and have coordinated transcription with their neighbors in a similar level of protein coding gene pairs.

expression specificity of mouse lncrnas
previous studies showed that lncrnas are expressed in a cell-type specific manner and their expression level were significantly lower than that of protein coding transcripts  <cit> . we calculated the spearman’s rank correlation coefficients between samples based on lncrna and protein coding rna expression data, respectively, and found that the correlation coefficients derived from lncrna profile data are significantly lower than those derived from mrna profile data  which indicated that lncrnas are more variable than protein-coding transcripts in early embryonic development. to quantitatively estimate temporal specificity of each transcript during cleavage stage, we applied a jensen-shannon distance-based algorithm  <cit>  to calculate temporal expression specificity score of each transcript in  <dig> single cells from cleavage stage embryos and  <dig> mouse tissues from encode  . as expected, our newly identified lncrnas showed an increased specific expression pattern as compared to protein-coding genes, which is correspond to previous reports  . notably, the specificity of known lncrnas is modestly higher than protein coding transcripts but lower than lncrnas identified in this paper. since most of known lncrnas were identified from somatic cell lines  <cit> , it is not surprising that known lncrnas are expressed widely in a variety of somatic organs. in contrast with that, our newly identified lncrnas are expressed principally in cleavage stage.figure  <dig> 
temporal specific expression of lncrnas.  violinplot indicating distribution of spearman’s rank correlations between each embryonic sample pairs derived from lncrnas and mrnas, respectively.  distribution of jsd-based specificity of transcripts in various categories.  distribution of maximal expression level of lncrnas and mrnas across  <dig> mouse embryonic rna-seq data and  <dig> mouse somatic tissue rna-seq data.



we next examine the expression level of lncrnas and found expression levels of lncrnas are lower than those of protein coding transcripts , which agree with the expression patterns of lncrnas in human and zebrafish  <cit> .

together, these observations suggested lncrnas in cleavage stage embryos are expressed in a more temporal-specific manner than protein coding transcripts and lncrnas identified in somatic tissues. meanwhile, new identified lncrnas are expressed in a relatively low level.

functions of lncrnas in mouse cleavage stage embryos
to investigate the potential roles of lncrnas in mouse cleavage stages, we performed weighted gene co-expression network analysis  to associated lncrnas with mrnas and predicted their functions based on "guilty-by-association" analysis. by clustering correlated genes together,  <dig> co-expression gene modules were identified . notably,  <dig> of  <dig> modules were highly correlated  with specific developmental stages or entire process .figure  <dig> 
function prediction of cleavage stage lncrnas.  stage specific co-expression gene modules and their correlation to development stage. numbers of each square represent correlation of module and development stage, and p-value of each correlation value. color of each square is correspond to correlation: positive correlation ; negative correlation ; no correlation . the column "time" in the right represents the correlation of each module and entire development process of cleavage stage. modules with high correlation to time mean overall upregulated during cleavage stage.  heatmap in the upper panel is the expression pattern of all genes in this module across all  <dig> samples. the barplot in the middle panel shows the corresponding module eigengene expression vaule versus each sample. the piechart in the lower panel is the ratio of mrnas and lncrnas in module. number beside the pie chart is the exact number of mrnas and lncrnas in this module.  function enriched in stage associated modules. length of bars indicate the significance .



the functional annotations enriched in each modules indicated that they are clearly functionally related to specific developmental stages . in each development stage, especially in 2-cell stage and 4-cell stage, we observed a large number of lncrnas , suggesting lncrna might involved in biological processes which regulate the development of cleavage embryos. genes in blue module, which is highly relate to 2-cell stage and contains a large fraction of lncrnas, were enriched in pyruvate metabolism , while genes in turquoise module, which is related to development process and contains a relative small fraction of lncrnas, are enriched in oxidative phosphorylation . these results suggest that the lncrnas in these two modules regulate the switch of predominant nutrient source, which correspond to the previous finding that the predominant nutrient source of cleavage stage embryos is pyruvate in the beginning and switch to glucose around compaction  <cit> .

notably, black module and pink module are both related to oocyte but differently expressed in wild type and dicer-/- oocytes. the black module, which contains  <dig> transcripts , is hightly expressed in dicer-/- oocytes, while the pink module, which contains  <dig> transcripts , is highly expressed in wt oocytes and two-cell stage embryos. dicer is essential for oocyte maturation since the deficient of dicer could lead to misregulation of spindle structure in oocyte  <cit> . interestingly, we observed centrosome  but not spindle related terms in pink module . in contrast with this observation, spindle organization  was enriched in black module, suggesting the meiotic spindle defects of dicer-/- oocyte may caused by misregulation of post-transcription of spindle related genes. in consideration of the key role of dicer in the metabolism of lncrnas, we believe that lncrnas may regulate oocyte maturation and meiosis

hub genes in modules could reflect the core functions of the modules, so we performed a hub-gene network analysis of each stage-specific modules and found many hub lncrnas . the functions of these lncrnas can be predicted based on their co-expression with hub genes that have known biological functions. for example, in black module, the lncrnas that co-expressed with cep <dig>  which is a centrosomal protein, may play roles in regulation of meiosis. in pink module, the lncrnas that co-expressed with the rhpn <dig>  which is involved in the organization of the actin cytoskeleton, may play roles in the regulation of spindle organization. likewise, the lncrnas in hub gene networks of brown, blue, turquoise, and purple modules may relate to cell cycle, glucose metabolic process, rna process and protein synthesis. all these networks contain lncrnas, indicating the key roles of lncrnas in cleavage stage embryonic development.

discussion
the roles of lncrnas in early embryonic development are intriguing issues with respect to development biology. however, it is difficult to profile mrna and lncrna transcriptome in early embryos because of the technical obstacles, such as the analysis of lncrnas expressed at lower levels and in small amount of cell. here we, for the first time, illustrated the lncrna profiles of mouse cleavage stage embryos based on single-cell rna-seq data. we have identified  <dig> novel transcripts from  <dig> loci with poor coding potential, which largely expanded the repertoire of lncrnas. moreover, we constructed a weighted gene co-expression network and predicted the functions of lncrnas based on their association with known protein coding genes.

our newly identified lncrnas in mouse cleavage-stage embryos shared many characteristics with those in other mammalian species. they are shorter, lower in exon number, lower in expression level and less conserved than protein coding transcripts. analysis of the co-expression of lncrnas and their coding neighbors revealed that, globally, the lncrnas are coordinated to their neighbouring genes in a similar level as the neighbouring coding gene pairs.

investigation of expression pattern of lncrnas in cleavage stage embryos elucidated that lncrnas tend to be expressed in a developmental stage-specific manner. notably, many lncrnas are expressed in a very narrow developmental time window and some lncrnas are restrictedly expressed in an individual cell. these observations suggested that the slight transcriptional changes which may be masked in previously bulk cell analysis can be revealed by single cell transcriptome analysis. thus, single-cell rna-seq is a very promising method with high resolution for probe of rare cell types, discovery of low abundant molecules, capture of flash events and detection of weak associations masked in bulk experiments  <cit> .

the highly specific expression patterns of lncrnas in cleavage stage embryos suggested diverse functions of lncrnas in early embryonic development. wgcna based prediction of lncrna functions associated lncrnas to different modules with function-known genes, and classified them into different functional groups. several modules that significantly associated with development stages were investigated and characterized by their functions. for example, lncrnas in brown module which is highly related to oocyte may function in oocyte meiosis and maturation. in addition, cleavage stage lncrnas, in modules of brown, blue, purple and turquoise, may regulate cell-cycle based on their module functions. this hypothesis is supported by a recent study which revealed a set of lncrnas transcribed within cell-cycle promoter of human  <cit> .

the rapid change of lncrnas during cleavage stage embryonic development also suggests that the stability of lncrnas is highly regulated. in the procedure of oocyte maturation and oocyte-to-zygote transition, the highly selective degradation of maternal mrnas is required  <cit> . an intrinsic question is whether the stability of lncrnas is regulated by identical or comparable mechanism that regulates stability of mrnas in cleavage stage development. study of decapping of lncrnas in yeast  <cit>  have shown that decapping, as a crucial mechanism in regulating stability of mrnas and some lncrnas, is critical for rapid and robust induction of genes which associated with galactose utilization. thus, the regulatory mechanism of lncrnas stability may play an essential role in gene expression network in cleavage stage development.

CONCLUSIONS
we provided the first lncrna profiles of mouse cleavage stage embryos based on single-cell rna-seq data, and identified  <dig> novel lncrna transcripts from  <dig> loci expressed in mouse cleavage stage embryos. these lncrnas tend to be expressed in a developmental stage-specific manner, many are expressed in a very narrow developmental time window and some are restrictedly expressed in an individual cell. co-expression network analysis suggested many lncrnas in cleavage stage embryos are associated with cell cycle regulation, transcription, translation and oxidative phosphorylation to regulate the process of cleavage stage embryonic development. our results provides the first catalog of lncrnas expressed in mouse cleavage stage embryos and gives a revealing insight into the molecular mechanism responsible for early embryonic development.

