BACKGROUND
two species of microsporidia have been reported so far as pathogenic to cultivated penaeus monodon and p. vannamei in thailand. these are agmasoma penaei  <cit>  and enterocytozoon hepatopenaei   <cit> . in contrast to e. hepatopenaei  that does not cause any obvious gross signs of infection, a. penaei infections are characterized by a milky white appearance in the usually translucent musculature of the shrimp abdominal segments, sometimes referred to as “cotton shrimp disease” in english  <cit>  or “white back disease” in thai  <cit> . microsporidian infections have been recorded in eight species of penaeid shrimp worldwide. , but only two of them are currently known to infect cultivated shrimp in thailand and its neighboring countries.


a. penaei cannot be transmitted horizontally among shrimp in rearing ponds by either spores or cannibalism  <cit> . since some fish species in thailand gave pcr positive test results for a. penaei in thailand  <cit>  a successful control strategy was devised that consisted of excluding fish  from shrimp hatcheries and farms. because of this practice, the prevalence of cotton shrimp disease  in cultivated shrimp in thailand is very low.


e. hepatopenaei  was first described and characterized in  <dig> from hepatopancreatic tissue of cultivated black tiger shrimp p. monodon in thailand. however, it had first been reported as a previously uncharacterized microsporidian in juvenile shrimp in  <dig>  <cit>  during studies attempting to determine the cause of retarded growth in cultivated p. monodon. at that time, results for detection of e. hepatopenaei  by the presence of spores using light microscopy and confirmation by in situ hybridization did not correlate statistically with the occurrence of retarded growth e. hepatopenaei  morphologically resembles previously reported, unidentified microsporidians from hepatopancreatic tissue of p. monodon in malaysia  <cit>  and p. japonicus in australia  <cit> , suggesting that e. hepatopenaei  may be endemic in australasia and have the capability of infecting multiple species of shrimp. thus, after introduction and wide-spread cultivation of exotic whiteleg shrimp  in asia, outbreaks of hpm caused by e. hepatopenaei  in cultivation ponds were also reported  <cit> . this was despite the fact that post-larvae used to stock some of the ponds were originated from specific pathogen free  broodstock free from e. hepatopenaei . in pond reared juvenile shrimp, e. hepatopenaei  infects only tubule epithelial cells of the central region of the hepatopancreas and does not extend into the embryonic cell region   <cit> . it can sometimes also be seen in cells of the midgut epithelium near its junction with the hepatopancreas.

with respect to disease control in shrimp cultivation ponds, the most important difference between e. hepatopenaei  and a. penaei is the fact that e. hepatopenaei  can be horizontally transmitted among shrimp in rearing ponds by cannibalism  <cit>  while a. penaei cannot  <cit> . this makes control in rearing ponds more difficult, and it raised the question as to whether transmission among shrimp in rearing ponds might occur also via e. hepatopenaei  spores released into the water in shrimp feces. we reasoned that if transmission via spores in water did occur, then cohabitation of e. hepatopenaei -infected shrimp with uninfected shrimp would be successful and could be used as a challenge model for testing preventative measures against hpm in the laboratory. here we describe a successful challenge model for transmission of e. hepatopenaei  in the laboratory by cohabitation of infected shrimp with uninfected shrimp.

methods
collection of infected shrimp and naïve shrimp
naïve juvenile p. vannamei were acquired together with rearing water from a shrimp nucleus breeding center, while juvenile p. vannamei infected with e. hepatopenaei  were collected together with rearing water from cultivation ponds in and around bangkok, thailand. all were transported to the laboratory in plastic containers with proper aeration. they were acclimated at centex shrimp in 100 l tanks containing artificial seawater . from each shrimp lot,  <dig> samples were arbitrarily selected to test by nested pcr  <cit>  for the presence of e. hepatopenaei  in hepatopancreatic tissue   <cit>  to confirm infection in the case of infected shrimp and to confirm absence in the case of naïve shrimp. since the infected shrimp and naïve shrimp were raised at different salinities , salinity for all shrimp was adjusted during acclimatization in artificial seawater to 20 ppt by increasing or decreasing the salinity at 2 ppt/h.

cohabitation assays
all cohabitation tests were carried out at 20 ppt. two aquaria containing 150 l artificial seawater each were set up with  <dig> infected  juvenile shrimp and  <dig> naïve post larvae  <dig>   per aquarium. the naïve and infected shrimp were separated by having one or the other placed in closed plastic baskets to prevent contact between the two groups . the shrimp were fed with commercial feed pellets twice a day until the end of the experiment. three naïve shrimp from each tank were sampled at 7 days and 14 days post cohabitation. each shrimp was dissected to reveal the hepatopancreas, a small portion of which was put in lysis buffer for dna extraction. the entire remainder of the whole shrimp was fixed with davidson’s fixative and processed for histopathological analysis by light microscopy following standard methods  <cit> . two negative control groups were setup similar to the above mentioned groups, with  <dig> naïve shrimp inside the basket cages and  <dig> naïve shrimp outside.fig.  <dig> schematic drawing  of the setup for the cohabitation challenge experiment. in the diagram, naïve shrimp are outside the basket cage and infected shrimp inside. however, the process was also reversed with the same test outcome




dna extraction and pcr detection of e. hepatopenaei 
total dna was extracted according to the traditional phenol-chloroform method  <cit> . hepatopancreatic tissue was homogenized prior to dna extraction in lysis buffer . e. hepatopenaei  was detected using a previously reported nested pcr protocol targeting its ssu rrna gene  <cit>  yielding amplicons of  <dig> and 176 bp .table  <dig> primer sequences used for pcr amplification and e. hepatopenaei  dig probe preparation

ssu-pcr
 enf779
 enf176



preparation of a dig-labelled dna probe for e. hepatopenaei 
a dna probe for in situ detection of e. hepatopenaei in shrimp tissue sections was prepared by pcr using primers enf <dig> and enr <dig> targeting the ssu rrna gene  in a pcr reaction using a dig-labelling mix  that contained digoxigenin-11-dutp  to substitute for a portion of the dttp in the dntp mix. the pcr reaction mix contained 1x pcr buffer,  <dig>  mm mgcl <dig>   <dig>  μm primers, 1x pcr dig labelling mix and  <dig>  unit taq polymerase . the pcr protocol consisted of initial denaturation at 95 °c for 5 min followed by 35 cycles of denaturation at 95 °c for 30s, annealing at 58 °c for 30s and extension at 72 °c for 45 s. after a final extension at 72 °c for 7 min, the reaction was cooled down to 16 °c. the dig-labelled probe was then run on a  <dig> % agarose gel and the probe band was cut for gel extraction using a nucleospin gel and pcr clean-up kit  according to the manufacturer’s instructions. the concentration of the probe was measured using a qubit fluorometer .

in situ nucleic acid hybridization using the dig-labelled probe
paraffin embedded tissue sections were de-paraffinized in xylene and rehydrated before being treated with 5 μg/ml proteinase k  in 1x tne buffer for 10 min at 37 °c. the sections were then incubated with 150 μl pre-hybridization buffer  at 37 °c for 30 min after which the sections were covered with the dig-labelled probe  in hybridization buffer . a cover glass was added followed by incubation at 42 °c for at least 16 h. this was followed by high stringency washes and equilibration in buffer i , followed by incubation in buffer ii  for 30 min at rt. after the incubation, a solution containing alkaline phosphatase conjugated anti-digoxigenin  was added for 1 h. the unbound antibody was washed off twice using 1x buffer i before the sections were equilibrated in buffer iii . signal was developed by addition of nbt-bcip substrate  and colour development was followed by microscopy before stopping, counterstaining with bismarck brown y  and dehydrating for preparation of permanent slides.

RESULTS
preliminary pcr screening
all samples of  <dig> shrimp from all batches of naïve shrimp tested gave negative results by nested pcr analysis for e. hepatopenaei . at the same time, all of the samples of purported e. hepatopenaei -infected shrimp gave positive results by the same test, showing either a single nested pcr amplicon of 176 bp  or two amplicons , one of 779 bp for the first-step pcr and one of 176 bp for the second, nested pcr step.

cohabitation bioassay
during the cohabitation experiments, no mortality was expected and none occurred, since hpm is not usually associated with mortality. for the  <dig> control shrimp sampled  none gave positive nested pcr assay results for e. hepatopenaei . in addition, none of the  <dig> specimens from day  <dig> gave positive in situ hybridization results for e. hepatopenaei . by contrast, all  <dig> shrimp samples taken from the e. hepatopenaei  cohabitation aquaria at day  <dig> were positive for e. hepatopenaei  by the nested pcr assay,  <dig> at the first pcr step  and  <dig> at the nested step only  .fig.  <dig> agarose gel showing pcr amplicons for the ssu rrna gene of e. hepatopenaei  in naïve shrimp at 14 days after cohabitation with e. hepatopenaei -infected shrimp. note that  <dig> of the samples gave amplicons for the first-step of the nested pcr assay, indicating severe infections. the gel image has been inverted to make first step pcr band in lane  <dig> and  <dig> more prominent. n: negative control, p: positive control, m: marker, lanes 1–6: shrimp samples




histopathology by h & e staining and in situ hybridization assays
h&e stained sections of hp tissue from the pcr positive cohabitated shrimp specimens showed varying levels of infectivity. some samples showed extensive histological signs corresponding to e. hepatopenaei  developmental stages such as plasmodia and spores , albeit under oil immersion, whereas some samples gave no histological signs of infection, contradicting the pcr results in section  <dig> . however, the dna probe specific for the ssu rrna gene of e. hepatopenaei  gave positive hybridization results revealing that many of the hp tubule epithelial cells were infected . this confirmed the e. hepatopenaei  infections indicated by the pcr results, even though the samples showed no clear developmental stages such as plasmodia and spores by h&e staining in the single tissue sections examined for each specimen. although tedious and time consuming, the in situ hybridization method provided a more reliable and accurate assessment of the severity of infection than did h&e staining.fig.  <dig> progressively magnified photomicrographs of adjacent hp tissue sections stained with h&e  or showing in situ hybridization results using a dig-labeled probe for e. hepatopenaei  . a low magnification  showing that e. hepatopenaei  cannot be resolved by h&e staining. b adjacent tissue section showing that focal areas of e. hepatopenaei  infection can be easily detected by a dig-labeled probe. c no probe negative control showing some regions of non-specific signal  also present in  . d higher magnification  of the area outlined in  showing that e. hepatopenaei  still cannot be easily resolved. eadjacent section showing that e. hepatopenaei  spores cannot be easily resolved by the dig probe. f higher magnification  of the area outlined in  showing spores and intracellular plasmodia of e. hepatopenaei  that are just visible. squares outline regions that are magnified in  and  to make the spores and plasmodia easier to see. g and i adjacent sections showing a magnified region of  making it easier to see e. hepatopenaei  spores labeled by the dig probe




discussion
the successful cohabitation model described herein overcomes the disadvantage of the previous destructive, oral challenge model using e. hepatopenaei -infected hepatopancreatic tissue  <cit> . it allows for the testing of shrimp broodstock and other potential carriers for infection with e. hepatopenaei  in a non-destructive manner. it also allows for the testing of water or feed treatments for possible efficacy in protecting against e. hepatopenaei  infection via this natural infection route. protection might result from treatments to kill spores or to interfere with their process of polar tube extrusion that must occur for the spore contents to enter host cells  <cit> . the cohabitation model will also be useful for testing potential carriers of e. hepatopenaei  in both directions, i.e., from shrimp to potential carriers and vice versa. at the same time, the previous method of oral challenge using infected hp tissue  <cit>  will still be useful for testing such things as e. hepatopenaei  inactivation by heating, chilling, freezing, etc.

the main reason we developed this cohabitation method was that spores we had purified by density gradient centrifugation from hepatopancreatic tissue of infected juvenile shrimp following previously published methods  <cit>  failed to induce infections when used by bath exposure, when added to shrimp feed or when administered by reverse gavage . the reason for these failures is still unknown. it is possible that the steps in purification by density gradient separation or that refrigeration of the purified spores at 4 °c inactivated them prior to use in those tests. to address these issues, we attempted to test for viability of the purified, refrigerated spores using previously published methods for vital staining  <cit>  but these failed for reasons including stain uptake by the spore walls, or auto-fluorescence of the spore walls . we also tried to induce polar tube extrusion by previously published methods  <cit> , but these tests also failed, possibly indicating that the refrigerated spores were indeed non-viable.

another possibility is that the spores produced at different host life stages may differ in ability to re-infect the same host. this phenomenon has been previously reported for other microsporidians  <cit>  where spores produced at a later host developmental stage may differ physiologically from those produced at an earlier host stage and that such spores may require some kind of activation step such as drying before they become infectious. it is also possible that spores produced at a later host developmental stage may be destined for an alternative host species. these two possibilities seem unlikely for e. hepatopenaei  since our cohabitation tests employed infected juvenile shrimp similar in age to those used for spore purification. on the other hand, it is also possible that the juvenile shrimp may produce two different types of spores, one for horizontal transmission and another for transfer to an alternative host. clearly, much more work is needed on this emerging pathogen to elucidate its host range and life stages.

in addition, during the development of the cohabitation model, our team noticed that assessment of ehp infection purely by the presence of spores by light microscopy can be misleading. work using an in situ hybridization probe specific for e. hepatopenaei  with cultivated p. vannamei sometimes reveal severe infections  with few recognizable intracellular stages of plasmodial development and spore production, as assessed by histological analysis of tissue sections  <cit> . hence, as demonstrated in this study, in situ hybridization assays with the same tissue section were performed in parallel with the standard h&e analysis to better estimate the extent of infection. nonetheless, the histopathological assay is a tedious and time-consuming process. we, therefore, recommend instead that pcr based on dna extracts from homogenates of hepatopancreatic tissue of individual or pooled shrimp samples be used for initial e. hepatopenaei  diagnosis  <cit> . moreover, based on current results indicating that the degree of growth retardation from e. hepatopenaei  is positively related to pathogen load, it is probably best to test for e. hepatopenaei  using quantitative pcr methods .

CONCLUSIONS
the bioassay for inducing laboratory infection is a primary requirement for studying any newly emerging pathogen and our co-habitation model is straightforward and simple. it can be applied to develop protective treatments for water or feed and to test e. hepatopenaei  transmission between shrimp and suspected carriers. in the meantime, the problems associated with the use of purified spores may be solved allowing for additional bioassays related to issues such as infectious spore dose.

abbreviations
ehp
enterocytozoon hepatopenaei


nbt-bciphp, hepatopancreas

the authors would like to thank prof. t.w. flegel for assistance in analyzing the experimental data and in preparing this manuscript.

funding
this work was supported by funding from the national research council of thailand .

availability of data and materials
the authors confirm that all data underlying the findings are fully available without restriction. all data are included within the manuscript.

author contributions
ks and st conceived and designed the experiments. ps, and pj performed the experiments. ks, oi, and st analyzed the data and wrote the paper. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

competing interests
there are no actual or intended patents or products in development or products marketed to declare as being associated with the contents of this manuscript. the information is published to be used freely. thus, provision of funding entailed no constraints on adherence to all bmc veterinary research policies on sharing data and materials.

consent for publication
not applicable.

ethics approval
since the ethical principles and guidelines for the use of animals of the national research council of thailand  apply to vertebrates only and there is no official standard for invertebrates, its principles were adapted to shrimp. the guidelines of the australian, new south wales state government for the humane harvesting of fish and crustaceans were also followed  with respect to details regarding the transport of the shrimp and their laboratory maintenance. with respect to processing the shrimp for histological analysis or for killing at the end of an experiment, the saltwater/ice slurry method was used as recommended in the australian guidelines.
