BACKGROUND
speciation of bacteria, i.e., their divergence from the ancestor and evolution into new species, is facilitated by incorporation of laterally acquired genetic material into the genome, as demonstrated by comparative studies of model bacteria, such as salmonella and other enteric bacteria  <cit> . bacteria of the salmonella genus have been frequently used as ideal research models of bacterial genomic divergence and evolution owing to several advantages that fit such studies, including the close genetic relatedness and, conversely, distinct pathogenic properties of these bacteria. in addition, the extraordinarily large number of known genetic and pathogenic types of salmonella makes the comparative studies informative and feasible.

salmonella diverged from escherichia coli more than  <dig> million years ago  <cit> ; to date, more than  <dig> serologically defined types, called serotypes or serovars, have been documented  <cit> . genomic comparisons reveal that different salmonella serotypes have highly similar overall genome structures, which are also similar to that of e. coli <cit> , validating the long speculated high level genomic conservation during long evolutionary times. when more detailed comparisons are made systematically over the whole genome, specific differences can be found among even very closely related bacterial lineages  <cit> . genomic differences can be classified essentially into two main categories: dna sequence variations and distinct sets of insertions between the bacteria. it is well documented that monophyletic salmonella serotypes  may have “hallmark” insertions, such as the 134 kb spi <dig> in most s. typhi isolates   <cit> . within a monophyletic salmonella serotype, individual sub-lineages may also have their own unique insertions or combinations of them, as exemplified by the dt <dig> phage type of s. typhimurium for their possession of three insertions st <dig>  st104b and st64b, a combination not seen in other s. typhimurium sub-lineages  <cit> . all these facts suggest that, although bacteria have many chances to contact exogenous dna in the environment and may even possibly have it moved into the cell via mechanisms such as bacteriophage-mediated transduction and plasmid-mediated transformation, the recipient may or may not have it incorporated into the genome regardless of whether or not the recipient might gain better fitness to the environment by having it. for example, although in vitro recombination efficiency depends linearly on the levels of the sequence similarity of the dna strands, whether this linearity also exists in the exogenous dna incorporation process inside a bacterial cell is unknown.

in this study, we assessed the efficiency of exogenous dna acquisition by phage-mediated transduction and plasmid-mediated transformation in selected bacterial strains to establish whether dna transfer efficiency might be correlated with the levels of sequence identity. we found that the efficiency was remarkably different among even very closely related bacteria. we conclude that dna acquisition efficiency is greatly variable among bacteria that have as high as over 99% identical genetic background, which implies that bacterial speciation involves highly complex processes affected not only by whether beneficial exogenous dna may exist in the environment but also the “readiness” of the bacteria to accept it.

RESULTS
transduction frequency and its correlation with sequence similarity: general tendency and strain-specific efficiency
we transferred five tn10-inserted genes, including flgl, trea, ompc, hisa and purg, from s. typhimurium lt <dig> to the recipient strains . to assess whether the five genes might be representative of the whole genome regarding the divergence among the salmonella strains used in this study, we concatenated the sequences of the five genes and constructed a phylogenetic tree  for comparison with the tree that was based on the core genes of the whole genome . for the strains for which no whole genome sequences were available for tree construction, we used the published sequences of strains of the same serovar, such as s. agona strain sl <dig> instead of sarb <dig> . the two trees demonstrated essentially the same genetic relatedness among the bacteria, justifying the use of these salmonella strains, although the five genes had different levels of divergence among the salmonella strains .

s. typhimurium 
*see more detailed information on these bacterial strains at http://www.ucalgary.ca/~kesander.
s. typhimurium 
lt <dig> and the recipient strains

flgl
trea
hisa
ompc
purg
recombination frequencies as reflected by the relative numbers of transductants on lb plates varied among thefive genes in a given recipient; however, the differences between strains were much greater . as would be expected, s. typhimurium 14028s exhibited the highest frequency of recombination with the dna from s. typhimurium lt <dig> among all recipient strainsand we did not get any transductants from s. bongori sarc <dig>  althoughthis latter strain did express the o <dig> antigen after transformation by ppr <dig> . notably, however, although 14028s has nearly identical genomic sequence to lt <dig>  its recombination frequency was as low as merely one tenth that of lt <dig>  a similar situation was seen with s. enteritidis lk <dig>  whose sequence divergence is only  <dig>  from s. typhimurium lt <dig> but its recombination frequency with lt <dig> was even lower than s. arizonae sarc <dig> with lt <dig>  although s. arizonaeis a serovar from subgroup iiia, which is much more divergent than s. enteritidis from s. typhimurium . another notable observation was that we did not obtain any transductants from s. typhi ty <dig> even though we tried numerous times, which however was consistent with our previous findings that we had to disrupt the mutl gene of s. typhi ty <dig> in order to obtain transductants in the transduction experiments with the donor dna from s. typhimurium lt <dig> when we were constructing a physical map for s. typhi ty <dig>  <cit> .

flgl
trea
ompc
hisa
purg
note: the relative transduction frequency listed in the table refers to relative transduction rate compared to lt <dig> 

as a whole in the experiments described above, although we saw a general tendency of higher transduction efficiency with closer genetic relationships between the donor and recipient bacterial strains, a linear model was not supported by our data . especially, the results out of s. typhimurium lt <dig> and 14028s seem to demonstrate that the transduction efficiency is rather strain-specific. we thus considered evaluating bacterial strain specificity by involving multiple strains of a salmonella lineage and between very closely related lineages, i.e., s. gallinarum and s. pullorum.
salmonella 
strains.

transduction frequency between s. gallinarum and s. pullorum: variable efficiency among individual strains
s. gallinarum and s. pullorum have a common antigenic formula,  <dig> ,12:-:-, the former causing typhoid and the latter causing pullorum disease in fowl. they were originally treated as separate species  <cit>  but have since the mid 1980s been classified into the same serovar of the same subspecies . however, their distinct biological properties, i.e., causing entirely different diseases, unambiguously distinguish them as different organisms. recently our work reveals that the two pathogens have accumulated distinct sets of mutations, including different pseudogenes  <cit> , which further demonstrated their genetic divergence. we moved the tn10-inserted ompd gene first from s. typhimurium lt <dig> to four wild type strains each of s. pullorum  and s. gallinarum  and then from one of the eight strains to the other seven strains; this process was repeated for each of the eight strains. we observed a tendency that transduction frequency was higher in a donor-recipient pair of strains within s. pullorum or within s. gallinarum than between s. pullorum and s. gallinarum strains, although not all of these differences were statistically significant . to validate this observation and rule out the possibility that a particular genomic dna segment  or some bacterial strains might have biases, we used tn10-inserted leu, bio, oxra and cysa as donor dna, with ompd also included as donor dna for a comparison, in the second set of transduction experiments with larger numbers of s. pullorum and s. gallinarum strains. again, the transduction frequency was lower between s. pullorum and s. gallinarum than within s. gallinarum or s. pullorum, but, similar to the above experiments, not all of the differences were statistically significant .

transformation efficiency among individual salmonella strains
as transduction frequency reflects a combined result of dna taking up capability and recombination efficiency, we wondered whether the non-linearity of transduction frequency with the level of relatedness of the bacteria might have mainly resulted from differential capability of the bacteria to take up dna from the environment into the cell. to look into this, we transformed representative strains with the plasmid pqe <dig>  which does not have homologous sequences with the genomes of the bacterial strains used in the study, and compared the transformation efficiency among them. intriguingly, the transformation rates differed more than one thousand times among the tested bacteria, e.g., as low as ca.  <dig>  × 10- <dig> in s. enteritidis lk <dig> andas high as ca. <dig>  × 10-3ins. arizonae sarc <dig> .

discussion
two classes of genomic changes are associated with the phylogenetic divergence and evolution of bacteria – acquisition of laterally transferred dna and nucleotide substitution, with the former being the primary driver of bacterial speciation, i.e., the process and consequence of bacterial development into a nascent biological species.

the biological species is defined on the basis of sexual reproduction potential of the organisms  <cit> , i.e., each species is separated from others through reproductive barriers. this definition of species works well for many plants and animals but not so much for bacteria owing to the mostly non-sexual reproduction modes of bacteria. as bacteria acquire much of the genetic novelty through homologous recombination of laterally transferred dna, it seems reasonable to presume that recombination efficiency among bacteria should be falling gradually with increasing sequence divergence. several lines of evidence exist to support this presumption in escherichia, bacillus and streptococcus <cit> . if so, bacterial speciation would be a gradual process, leading to continuous divergence of the bacterial genomes without genetic boundaries to delineate bacteria into discrete clusters, i.e., bacterial species would have to be arbitrary. however, our recent work has demonstrated the existence of clear-cut genetic boundaries among bacteria as closely related as the salmonella lineages  <cit> , indicating that a fundamental question still remains regarding molecular mechanisms involved in bacterial speciation, especially the dna acquisition capability of the bacteria.

based on our hypothesis of genetic boundaries and the experimental evidence  <cit> , we propose that biological species should be non-continuous and non-overlapping units of organisms with sufficient similarities among members of the same species and radically distinguishing features from organisms of other species. bacteria, though as essentially non-sexual organisms, should also be genetically isolated from one another as species. to date, thousands of bacterial strains have been sequenced, with a full picture of the genomic divergence among them awaiting systematic analyses. we believe that genomic divergence among bacteria is not continuous and clear-cut boundaries ought to exist to demarcate bacteria into discrete species. in our adopt-adapt model of bacterial speciation  <cit> , we dissect the process into two overall stages: adopt, in which bacteria “adopt” exogenous dna from the environment to gain beneficial genetic traits, and adapt, in which bacteria make adjustments to “adapt” to the genetic and biological changes brought about by the novel genetic material, including genomic rearrangements  and genetic separation from the ancestral strain as reflected by the formation of the genetic boundaries  <cit> . according to this model, exogenous dna acquisition is the first step; the present study demonstrates that the stochastic lateral dna acquisition events may not be destined to take place even though the “right” recipient might meet the “right” donor at the “right” time . rather, this event might be under strict control, although the molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. in this study, we assessed correlations between genomic sequence divergence and transduction or transformation frequency among closely related bacteria, anticipating either  a linear model with falling transduction or transformation frequency in correlation with increasing genomic divergence; or  a non-linear model; we observed the latter.

to interpret these observations, we may divide the exogenous dna acquisition process into two steps. in the first step, exogenous dna enters the cell and escapes degradation by restriction enzymes or other defense systems. the next step includes hetero duplex molecule formation, replication and segregation to daughter cells. this second step is controlled negatively by mismatch repair  proteins, such as muts and mutl, and positively by the induction of sos system. as mmr and sos genes are highly conserved in bacteria, they are supposed to function equally in all tested salmonella strains. consequently, the second step here should mainly be determined by the sequence divergence between the donor and recipient. it is therefore reasonable to presume that the non-linear correlation between recombination efficiency and genomic divergence should be due to differences in the first step, i.e., entry of exogenous dna into the bacterial cell. as transduction and transformation use different mechanisms to bring dna into the cell across the cell wall and membrane, the plasmid transformation may not effectively simulate the first step of p22-mediated homologous recombination. nevertheless, when we divided the transduction frequency by the transformation frequency in a given strain, the “normalized” results fitted the linear model slightly better . taken together, our results demonstrate that the linear model may hold true only when recombination efficiency is determined exclusively by sequence divergence, although there seems no such a case in the real world. as this study focused on only dna transfer events, systematic elucidation of the bacterial speciation mechanisms requires investigation of also other strain differences such as level of gene expression for competency/dna recombination, which is under study in our laboratory. since transformation and transduction are the two main mechanisms for dna uptake by bacteria and even very closely related bacteria may exhibit distinct performance in recombination as demonstrated in this study, it is possible that subpopulations or even individual cells of a bacterial species might have begun to form genetic barriers against exogenous dna to stabilize the bio-system within the cell or a subpopulation or to continue the speciation process to become a nascent species.

CONCLUSIONS
dna acquisition efficiency is variable among closely related bacteria, suggesting that bacterial speciation involves highly complex processes affected not only by whether beneficial exogenous dna may exist in the environment but also the “readiness” of the bacteria to accept it.

