BACKGROUND
in the last decade, attention focused on functionality and structure of proteins. accelerated proteomics studies demand high-throughput protein production methods to ensure availability of proteins of interest. presently, overexpression in e. coli cells is the most preferred protein production method. though this system has been well optimized and is suitable for the simultaneous generation of a panel of proteins, its application is often limited by the insolubility of synthesized eukaryotic proteins  <cit> . although different e. coli strains and various protein and peptide fusion partners have been developed to increase the solubility of heterologous proteins, these methods are not universal and have to be optimized individually for efficient protein production  <cit> .

recently, in vitro protein translation has emerged as an alternative to cell-based protein synthesis methods. the robustness of the translation apparatus is known since the fifties, and latest technical improvements made to cell-free translation resulted in protein production methods that approach the efficiency of cell-based systems  <cit> . various sources of translation machinery can be used for cell-free in vitro translation systems, but -due to its low cost and capacity for synthesizing properly folded, high molecular weight eukaryotic proteins- wheat germ derived protein extract presently seems the most promising choice  <cit> .

unlike prokaryotic mrna, eukaryotic mrna has to be extensively modified to be an effective translation template. the 5'-cap is essential to translation initiation and has to be introduced to in vitro transcribed mrnas using rna polymerase, which incorporates the three modified nucleotides . the efficiency of incorporation is low, and the excess of free modified nucleotides remaining in the mix dramatically decreases the productivity of translation. the 3'-end poly tail of eukaryotic mrnas also presents a technical difficulty during in vitro translation template preparation, as long polya/t sequences of plasmids are unstable in host cells. to solve these problems, wheat germ in vitro translation vectors have been constructed with a special sequence replacing the cap. in the optimized vectors, the cap structure is substituted by either the tobacco mosaic virus translational enhancer Ω sequence with an additional gaa triplet at the 5'-end   <cit> , or an artificial  <dig> nucleotides containing a leader sequence  <cit> . the same laboratory also examined the requirements for a poly tail, and found that translation did not depend on the sequence but only on the length of 3'-utr. an additional benefit of these plasmids is that the produced mrnas were effective in vitro translation templates in a wider range of concentration than in vitro capped mrnas.

although the optimized vectors improved the productivity of in vitro translation, in order to build high-throughput protein synthesis systems, every step of the procedure must be accelerated, including the cloning of target genes and the purification of translated proteins. ligation independent cloning  was developed to facilitate complex cloning and subcloning strategies  <cit> , and have been applied by many laboratories since then. lic overcomes important limitations of traditional cloning technologies, since any pcr product can be cloned into lic compatible vectors without using restriction endonucleases and ligation. the lic method takes advantage of the 3' exonuclease activity of t <dig> dna polymerase to create complementary 12- to 15- nucleotide overhangs in the vector and pcr product. upon transformation into e. coli cells, the host repair enzymes ligate at the vector-insert junction; thus, lic produces high cloning efficiency with minimal non-recombinant background  <cit> .

a serious bottleneck of high-throughput protein production is the fast and high level purification of target proteins. generally, the purification step is facilitated by addition of affinity tags to the n- or c- terminus of synthesized proteins. although the affinity tags aid the purification, it might in many cases alter the in vivo function and structure of proteins; hence, it must be removed by site specific proteases. the tobacco etch virus  protease is an ideal choice because it cleaves with high specificity at a seven-amino-acid recognition sequence  <cit> . furthermore, it is active under a wide range of conditions, such as low temperature and high ionic concentration, and is only mildly sensitive to many protease inhibitors which are used to prevent protein degradation by host proteases.

we have improved two commercial vectors for wheat germ in vitro protein translation to generate lic plasmids incorporating a tev cleavable affinity tag. the modified vectors encode a leader sequence consisting of either a gst or a his affinity purification tag, followed by a tev protease recognition site. experiments with the modified vectors showed that they functioned effectively in all aspects, including cloning, translation, purification and cleavage. furthermore, we demonstrated that a protein kinase purified from a wheat germ in vitro translation reaction possessed higher in vitro kinase activity than the same kinase produced by overexpression in e. coli. these features make the modified vectors suitable for high-throughput production of properly folded eukaryotic proteins.

RESULTS
construction and characterization of lic vectors
mrna templates of commercial in vitro translation systems are produced by either t <dig> or sp <dig> bacteriophage rna polymerases, therefore we modified the peu3n-ii and peu <dig> vectors which harbor t <dig> and sp <dig> promoters, respectively. the lic vectors with cleavable affinity tags were created by inserting an oligonucleotide cassette or pcr-generated fragment into the multicloning site of host vectors. sequencing of the constructed peu3-nii-hlic, peu3-nii-glic, peu-e01-hlic, peu-e01-glic vectors showed that the dna fragments had been correctly introduced. inserts in hlic vectors encode an amino acid sequence consisting of an n-terminal methionine followed by a six-histidine affinity tag and the enlyfqs tev recognition site. the pcr fragment introduced into glic constructs possesses the same components except the six histidines are replaced by glutathione-s-transferase protein . the extensively used gateway system shows limitations for protein production since the fusion partners and amino acids encoded by the recombination site cannot be removed without inserting protease specific motif coding nucleotides downstream of the recombination site, and non-native amino acids can interfere with the structure and functionality of purified proteins  <cit> . to obviate this drawback, an sspi restriction endonuclease site involving lic was inserted in our vector constructs. this rational design places the tev protease site in proximity of the native protein and allows removal of the affinity tag, leaving only three extra amino acid residues in n-terminal  <cit> .

the created vectors were tested by generating constructs encoding a plant mitogen activated protein kinase, atmpk <dig>  the vectors were cleaved in the middle of the lic site by sspi digestion, and the linearized plamids were incubated with t <dig> dna polymerase in presence of dgtp. due to the 3'-5' exonuclease activity of t <dig> dna polymerase, this protocol generated 15-base long single-stranded overhangs. to insert the target gene, the atmpk <dig> specific primers were designed with a 5'-end extension complementary to the lic site, and the pcr products were treated with t <dig> dna polymerase in presence of dctp. the generated complementary overhangs allowed introduction of the target gene into the vectors treated with t <dig> dna polymerase using a simple annealing step, without use of any other enzyme. the reaction mixture was directly transformed into competent cells, and colony pcr analysis showed than more than 90% of tested colonies carried the target gene, proving the lic procedure to be very effective.

in vitro translation of a mitogen activated protein kinase
in order to test the protein synthesizing capacity of constructed vectors, two commercial wheat germ in vitro protein translation kits were used. these companies use different approaches to extend the lifetime and thus the productivity of in vitro translation reactions. the continuous supply of feeding solution is provided by diffusion through either a dialysis membrane  <cit>  or simply the phase of different density solution  <cit> , and they require t <dig> and sp <dig> rna polymerase, respectively. the dna templates were purified from atmpk <dig> comprising constructs with a commercial plasmid dna isolation kit. the translation reactions were carried out according to protocols suggested by manufacturers. polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis analysis of total protein samples demonstrated that all four vector encoded proteins with their expected size . the in vitro translated target proteins were detectable with coomassie blue staining, and the yields of different constructs and translation mixtures were comparable.

purification and tev cleavage of translated proteins
to further verify the functionality of the created vectors, the synthesized proteins were affinity purified and cut by tev protease. the gst- and his-tagged in vitro translation products were separated by batch incubation with glutathione sepharose and magnehis particles, respectively. according to page analysis, highly purified proteins were obtained within one hour of incubation for both affinity purification protocols . the tev protease cleavage site was tested under different conditions. in the first case, the purified proteins were eluted with appropriate buffers and digested with his-tagged tev protease. in the second case, the kinases were cut directly by tev on the beads, without elution . the results demonstrated that the tev protease worked effectively on both constructs under a wide range of conditions, since they were cleaved completely in different buffers, either coupled to beads or in solution.

kinase activity of the purified protein kinase
previously, it has been demonstrated that  <dig> out of  <dig> wheat germ in vitro translated plant protein kinases displayed autophosphorylation activity  <cit> . in order to compare the in vitro kinase activities of proteins produced in e.coli and in a cell-free system, the his tagged atmpk <dig> cassette was transferred from peu3-nii-hlic into pet11a expression vector. the kinase was isolated by metal chelate affinity chromatography either from e. coli or from the in vitro translation reaction mixture. equal amounts of his-atmpk <dig> were used to determine the in vitro kinase activities of overexpressed and translated proteins using myelin basic protein  as a substrate. according to autoradiography results, phospholabeling of mbp was hardly detectable when bacterially overexpressed his-atmpk <dig> was tested, while the in vitro translated protein kinase displayed a clearly visible activity .

the high kinase activity of translated atmpk <dig> indicates proper folding of the kinase domain, although posttranslational modification of the translated protein are also likely to be responsible for elevated kinase activity; indeed, proper phosphorylation of map kinases is essential to gain their full kinase activity and kinases present in wheat germ extract could perform these phosphorylations.

CONCLUSIONS
we have constructed a set of four vectors to facilitate the cloning and purification steps of wheat germ extract protein in vitro translation systems. the presented vectors eliminate the traditional cloning steps and aid the purification of translated proteins by incorporation of a lic site and a tev cleavable affinity tag, respectively. purification of a plant mitogen activated protein kinase demonstrated that the vectors functioned as intended. furthermore, proper folding of the purified protein was indicated by high in vitro kinase activity. we have successfully used our vectors for purification of proteins with different sizes from various organisms, too . in summary, these vectors allow fast and parallel cloning and protein purification, and hence represent useful molecular tools for in vitro translation of eukaryotic proteins.

