BACKGROUND
bidirectional promoters are defined as the regulatory regions that are shared between two genes, when those two genes are transcribed away from one another  <cit> . the genes are said to be in a head-to-head arrangement, with their transcription start sites  positioned nearby one another. by definition, the intergenic distance between these genes  can be no greater than  <dig> bp  <cit> . this distance is measured from the tss of the gene on the left of the promoter to the tss of the gene on the right of the promoter. head-to-head genes are spaced at this distance more frequently than expected in the human genome  <cit> , suggesting a regulatory theme in gene expression. we recently showed that the human genome contains more bidirectional promoters than previously recognized  <cit> . here we map the orthologous regions of bidirectional promoters in seven additional species.

using the "chains and nets" data from the ucsc human genome browser and the liftover tool  <cit> , we are able to use the identity of genes on each side of a bidirectional promoter to find the corresponding functional location in other species. the use of these orthologous genes, which were present in the last common ancestor to the species being compared, is important because bidirectional promoters themselves often do not show a strong signal for conserved sequences. this fact makes the assignment of ancestral relationships difficult in these regulatory regions. because genes flank both sides of bidirectional promoters, they provide markers of the ancestral history. the presence of the same head-to-head genes over long evolutionary time spans facilitates the assignment of orthology at their intervening promoter regions. our approach complements and extends the work of li et al.  <dig>  <cit>  who examined bidirectional promoters in multiple species, because we are able to explore the ancestral history of bidirectional promoters in eight species simultaneously using whole genome orthology information. our method uses orthologous genes as anchors that can be traced across vertebrate genomes. we use this information to track the appearance of bidirectional promoters in vertebrate evolution, predict when gene annotations are missing in higher vertebrates and determine which gene functions regulated by these promoters are the oldest.

RESULTS
orthologous gene pairs identify ancestral patterns of gene regulation
human protein-coding genes regulated by bidirectional promoters were placed into  <dig> pairs and mapped to other species using conserved synteny information applied through the approach outlined in figure  <dig>  three types of outcomes were detected in the species being compared to human, including  the orthologous bidirectional gene pair was present in the second species  only one member of the gene pair was present in the second species and  no evidence existed for a bidirectional promoter in the second species. comparisons were between human, chimp, rhesus, dog, mouse, chicken, fugu, and zebrafish.

other sets of bidirectional promoters showed a lineage-specific history. for instance, a large group of mammal-specific genes was not present in chickens or fish. a smaller group was only present in primates. in contrast, genes that were present in all species except chimp were likely to be missing from chimp due to assembly problems. nearly twenty pairs of genes were found only in the human genome.

intergenic distance at bidirectional promoters
the distance between tsss at bidirectional promoters was mapped for human and other vertebrate species. each species is shown in two graphs. one graph depicts the raw distance measurements between the tss in human and the second species . the distance measurements are graphed with human on the x-axis and the second species on the y-axis. the scatter plots indicate the size of the datasets and the correlation of the bidirectional promoter lengths at orthologous gene pairs of eight species. the red line shows the position of a linear relationship , where the distances between the tsss are the same for the two species.

the second graph shows the cumulative percentage of bidirectional promoters mapped in human and a second species, where the human dataset is limited to a  <dig> bp distance. the most complete annotations were found in the human-mouse comparison. this result is illustrated by the similar curves for the cumulative percentage of orthologous bidirectional promoters in mouse that fall within  <dig> bp. up to 80% of all human bidirectional promoters were identified in mouse at this similar distance. in comparison, 75% of the human promoters were present in chimp within  <dig> bp. the high levels of orthology found in mouse and chimp suggest that the  <dig> bp distance will capture similar gene sets in other species. thus we predict that the gene annotations of chimp, rhesus and dog will improve to represent a minimum of 80% of the bidirectional promoters the human genome.

evolutionary comparison of head-to-head and tail-to-tail gene pairs
the percentage of human bidirectional promoters detected at distances up to  <dig> bp was compared to the cumulative percentage detected in other species . evidence of selective pressure was determined from the retention of human tail-to-tail genes, spaced within the  <dig> bp limit, in other species. pairs of genes representing bidirectional promoters are shown in green and tail-to-tail genes in purple. the same color scheme was used for the second species, except that different symbols were used. although the total percentage of genes mapped in the second species was less than 100% for chimp, rhesus, and dog, the head-to-head and tail-to-tail gene sets had equivalent amounts at the  <dig> bp distance. in these datasets the tail-to-tail genes plateau at a longer intergenic distance than the head-to-head genes. thus a larger distance between the orthologous genes has been tolerated without deleterious effects.

for chicken datasets the head-to-head gene sets were found more frequently than the tail-to-tail sets at  <dig> bp, indicating that tail-to-tail arrangements of genes had been allowed to change in both distance and arrangement more often than head-to-head genes. these results indicate that selective pressure acts more strongly over evolutionary time to keep head-to-head genes together at the  <dig> bp distance compared to tail-to-tail genes.

the data from the fish genomes indicated that very long distances were necessary to capture a majority of the human gene pairs. given the compact nature of the fish genomes, it is unlikely that many of these long distance associations are biologically relevant. however, the preservation of tightly associated genes indicated the presence of important regulatory or functional roles that cannot be disturbed.

gene ontology associated with bidirectional promoter regulation
functions associated with orthologous genes regulated by bidirectional promoters were examined for those conserved in all seven species, or in the four mammals. sixty pairs of genes were conserved across all seven species. these genes were examined for functional classifications. four groups emerged: intracellular membrane bound organelle, macromolecule metabolism, chaperone, and mitochondrion. the p-values on these groups ranged from 10e- <dig> to 10e- <dig>  and remained statistically significant following benjamini correction for false discovery rate .

genes that were conserved across the four mammals had a much larger range of functional activities. of  <dig> pairs of genes, catalytic activity emerged as the most significant enrichment in any functional class . thus bidirectional promoters are regulating many enzymes in mammalian genomes. in total,  <dig> functional classes were significantly enriched in this dataset compared to a random collection of genes. these data indicate that the regulatory domain of bidirectional promoters has expanded to encompass a much larger set of gene functions in mammals.

training esperr to discriminate bidirectional promoters
our previous work indicated that sequence-based characteristics were different in bidirectional promoters and non-bidirectional promoters  <cit> . however the size of the datasets was quite disparate . therefore for training esperr  <cit>  we sampled equal size subsets of  <dig> elements from each class . for each training interval we then extracted genomic alignments of six species  from the  <dig> species alignments available in the ucsc genome browser. regions of the training data overlapping coding exons  were masked out. we first performed an unsupervised encoding selection  to create an encoding in  <dig> symbols. leave-one-out cross validation on the training data using this encoding yielded a success rate of 76%. on the bidirectional test set, the model trained using this mapping correctly classified  <dig> elements  and incorrectly classified  <dig> . on the non-bidirectional test set it successfully classified  <dig>  elements , and incorrectly classified  <dig>  . next, we performed the full esperr procedure, using the first stage reduction to produce an encoding of size  <dig>  which was then refined with the heuristic search yielding an encoding of size  <dig>  the resulting encoding gave a modest improvement in cross-validation, with a success rate of 82%. however, on the bidirectional test set, the model using this encoding classified  <dig> elements  and incorrectly classified  <dig> . on the non-bidirectional test set it successfully classified  <dig>  elements , and incorrectly classified  <dig>  . thus, using the esperr heuristic search gives no improvement for classifying this dataset. it is noteworthy that these classification rates, though modest, indicate that there are sequence and evolutionary patterns that can be captured to characterize bidirectional promoters. particularly interesting is the substantially greater generalization rate for the bidirectional test set, suggesting that there are more characteristic signals for these elements that can be captured. this is consistent with the result of the esperr heuristic search – optimizing the encoding using the training data gives a slight improvement in recognizing the bidirectional test elements, but at the cost of poorer performance on the non-bidirectional test set.

CONCLUSIONS
our study of bidirectional promoters across orthologous regions of eight species provides a foundation for optimized annotations of these regulatory regions in higher vertebrates, including chimp, rhesus and dog. furthermore the functional analyses of genes regulated by these promoters show that a small subset of specialized functions in chickens and fish was expanded in mammals to include a wide breadth of activities. a common regulatory mechanism is likely to exist that coordinately regulates genes in these functional pathways. we continue to investigate the features associated with bidirectional promoters using a classification procedure containing supervised and unsupervised techniques. the results are promising in that they indicate that bidirectional promoters have features consistent with learnable patterns.

