BACKGROUND
flooding creates hypoxic conditions around the roots affecting a number of physiological processes in plants including gas exchange, carbohydrate metabolism and water relations  <cit> . some woody plants that are adapted to flooding conditions develop hypertrophic lenticels and/or root aerenchyma to increase aeration  <cit> . in other species, including tamarack  k. koch), flooding triggers the development of adventitious roots, which help the trees tolerate seasonal changes in water levels  <cit> . however, the mechanisms through which adventitious roots contribute to flooding tolerance of the tree and those that enable the roots to survive hypoxic conditions remain unclear. adventitious roots in tamarack are often present below the water level for extended periods of time  <cit>  and, therefore, they must be adapted to low oxygen conditions.

stomatal closure and wilting are among the initial symptoms of oxygen deficiency in the root zone  <cit>  due to the reduced ability of the root system to conduct water  <cit> . the maintenance of fine balance between the water loss and water uptake requires adjustments in tissue hydraulic conductivity. most of the dynamic regulation of root hydraulic conductivity has been attributed to the transmembrane water flow regulated by the aquaporins. the reduction of root hydraulic conductivity in hypoxic plants has been linked to the inhibition of aquaporin-mediated water transport through root metabolic changes  <cit>  and low cytoplasmic ph  <cit> , and could be partly alleviated by the treatment of plants with ethylene  <cit> . in flooded tamarack seedlings, the emergence of adventitious roots coincided with an increase in hydraulic conductance of the root system  <cit> . adventitious roots in tamarack were also reported to have higher hydraulic conductivity  under flooding conditions compared with non-adventitious roots of the same tree  <cit>  suggesting that adventitious roots may posses functional modifications which make them less sensitive to flooding.

since aquaporins are sensitive to hypoxia  <cit> , the adaptations of adventitious roots to flooding likely include modifications that are aimed at making the roots less dependent on the transmembrane water transport. an increase in apoplastic water pathway could reduce the dependence of root water transport on aquaporins, but it could also compromise the benefits of selective permeability of the transmembrane pathway. in the present study, we examined the hypothesis that the adventitious roots produced in tamarack in response to flooding are able to maintain high hydraulic conductivity by developing structural and functional modifications that increase the apoplastic bypass. in turn, these features enable flooded plants to maintain stomatal conductance and photosynthesis to sustain carbohydrate supply to the roots. we subjected seedlings to six months of flooding, which resulted in the replacement of the existing root system with newly-produced adventitious roots. we then compared the gas exchange and water relations of flooded plants with the plants growing in a well-drained soil and examined the differences in root structure and relative contributions of apoplastic and cell-to-cell pathways in flooded and non-flooded plants.

RESULTS
dry weights, gas exchange, water potentials and leaf chlorophyll concentrations
flooded seedlings showed a transient inhibition in shoot growth and photosynthetic rates which was accompanied by an increase in leaf necrosis during the first month of the flooding treatment , but the seedlings recovered in the following months. after six months of flooding, there were no statistically significant differences in root, shoot and total dry weights between flooded and non-flooded plants .

different letters within the same row indicate significant differences between flooded and non-flooded plants . values are means ± se .

needle chlorophyll concentrations were significantly lower in flooded compared with non-flooded seedlings after six months of treatment . however, there were no significant differences in net photosynthesis, transpiration rates and shoot water potentials between the two groups of plants .

root hydraulic properties
there were no significant differences in the hydraulic conductivity  of the whole root systems between non-flooded and flooded seedlings when measured after six months of flooding . however, at all measured temperatures ranging from 10 °c to 30 °c, the hydraulic conductivity  of individual roots  was several-fold higher in non-flooded seedlings compared with adventitious roots of flooded plants .

activation energy  for lind was higher in adventitious roots of flooded plants  compared with control non-flooded roots  . similarly, the pts <dig> concentration of xylem exudates  was almost two-fold higher in flooded adventitious roots  compared with the roots of non-flooded seedlings .

root morphology and structure
most of the existing roots disintegrated in plants during the first several months of flooding except for the older woody parts of the roots which comprised about one-third of the whole root system in flooded plants. the adventitious roots were distributed close to the soil surface. control roots consisted of numerous relatively short, mostly woody and branched roots with relatively short white tips  . the root system in flooded plants consisted of fewer but longer  adventitious roots , largely unsuberized and with no secondary tissues present for as far as 10–15 cm above the root apex.

there were several major structural differences in the zone of the primary tissues between non-flooded roots and adventitious roots. the non-flooded roots contained a well-developed endodermis with suberized cell walls  and well-developed xylem  that could be observed close to the root tips. adventitious roots of flooded plants had poorly-developed endodermis  and few, small-diameter, tracheids throughout the examined length  of the root .

there was relatively little starch present in the root cells of non-flooded plants . in contrast, the cortex of flooded adventitious roots was filled with starch grains .

inmunolocalization of root aquaporins
pip <dig> and pip <dig> antibodies showed similar immunostaining patterns in roots and, therefore, only the pip <dig> antiserum is shown. the western blot analysis showed an immunoreactive band in maize and tamarack root proteins separated by sds page . in both species, the band of a molecular weight corresponding to an aquaporin monomer of approximately  <dig> kd was visible and another, faint, band of approximately 60 kda corresponding to the aquaporin dimer. the most intense immunofluorescence in the adventitious roots of flooded plants that were incubated with pip <dig> and pip <dig> antibodies was present in the outer cortical cells and it was less intense in other parts of the root compared with the non-flooded roots . in non-flooded roots, pip <dig> and pip <dig> aquaporins were abundant in the root cortex and concentrated especially in its central part away from the epidermis and endodermis . the stele in adventitious roots and in non-flooded roots incubated with pip <dig> and pip <dig> also showed relatively intense immunofluorescence.

discussion
after a transient inhibition of shoot growth, photosynthesis and the increase in needle necrosis, the recovery and resumption of shoot growth in flooded tamarack coincided with the initiation of adventitious roots. since the existing younger roots disintegrated over time, there were only old woody roots and new adventitious roots that were present in seedlings at the end of the flooding treatment. even though needle chlorophyll concentrations were reduced by the flooding treatment, transpiration rates, net photosynthesis, and shoot water potentials were similar in flooded and non-flooded plants. these results suggest that, despite some hypoxia-induced toxicity symptoms, adventitious roots maintained adequate water supply to flooded seedlings. flooding commonly triggers reductions in leaf chlorophyll concentrations in plants  <cit> . the lack of an effect of reduced needle chlorophyll concentrations on net photosynthesis in flooded tamarack suggests that stomatal factors are likely to override photosynthetis responses to flooding under the study conditions.

the initial responses of plants to flooding include an inhibition of gas exchange  <cit> . however, transpiration and photosynthesis have been often reported to recover in flooding-tolerant plants  <cit>  suggesting that the tolerant plants can restore their water balance over time. the recovery of root hydraulic conductance in flooded tamarack seedlings coincided with the emergence of adventitious roots suggesting that adventitious roots were more flooding-tolerant compared with non-adventitious roots  <cit> . this recovery is usually related with the production of ethylene within the roots that will induce an increase on root water transport  <cit>  and hence an increase on the phosphorylation of aquaporins. hypoxia, which is the main consequence of flooding, inhibits root water uptake through its effect on the aquaporin-mediated water transport due to low cytosolic ph and inhibition of respiration  <cit> . therefore, adaptations of the root system to flooding may be expected to include the structural and functional modifications which decrease the dependence of the root system on the aquaporin-mediated water transport.

in the present study, a large part of the root system in flooded tamarack seedlings consisted of long, non-woody, adventitious roots with a large unsuberized absorption surface. as part of the adaptations to flooding, the adventitious roots contained greatly reduced vascular bundles when examined as far as 3 cm from the root apex. also, their endodermal layer was poorly developed and often not apparent when examined at the same distance from the root apex as the roots of non-flooded plants. the fact that the cortex of adventitious roots contained abundant starch grains suggests that they were the sink for carbohydrates. starch is a primary energy storage compound and its allocation pattern and translocation may be critical for growth and hypoxia tolerance  <cit> . it has been suggested that plant survival in wetland habitats may depend on root carbohydrate reserves  <cit>  and starch abundance is considered to be among the principal characteristics of flooding-tolerant tree species  <cit> . high accumulation of starch in the rooting regions has been also associated with adventitious root formation  <cit> . it is plausible that large amounts of starch are needed to supply adventitious roots with sufficient energy required to support their growth and basic metabolic functions under hypoxic conditions. however, a possible effect of starch accumulation on matric potential of the root cortex and its consequences for root water relations also deserve further attention.

both ktot and ltot of the whole root systems were similar in flooded and non-flooded plants . when measured in individual roots, kind and lind were several-fold lower in flooded adventitious roots compared with non-flooded control roots . therefore, there were likely water entry points through the parts of the old, partly disintegrated root system. regardless of the differences in the hydraulic conductance of flooded and non-flooded plants, growth, gas exchange, and shoot water potentials suggest that water transport was not the limiting factor to the flooded plants with established adventitious roots. this was likely facilitated by the greater water absorption area of adventitious roots and structural modifications increasing the apoplastic bypass.

the results of pts <dig> and immunostaining with the pip <dig> and pip <dig> antibodies support the notion of the reduced role of cell-to-cell water transport in adventitious flooded roots. the concentration of pts <dig> in the xylem sap expressed from the individual flooded adventitious roots was almost two-fold higher compared with control non-flooded roots. pts <dig> is a water-soluble fluorescent, non-toxic dye that does not cross cell membranes or adhere to cell walls  <cit> . although the exact concentrations of apoplastic flow calculated from the fluorescent tracer dye concentrations are not precise estimates of the actual apoplastic flow rates, they have been used to estimate relative changes in water flow pathways  <cit> . increases in pts <dig> concentrations in the xylem sap have been also correlated with the inhibition of aquaporin-mediated transport in plants exposed to drought  <cit> , mercury  <cit> , and metabolic inhibitors  <cit> .

higher activation energy for water flow in flooded adventitious roots  compared with non-flooded control roots  suggests that water transport in flooded adventitious roots is more sensitive to temperature compared with the non-flooded roots. for the transmembrane transport, ea increases with increasing restriction of water movement through aquaporins  <cit>  and the overexpression of pip <dig> and pip <dig> aquaporins in arabidopsis abolishes temperature sensitivity of root cell hydraulic conductivity over the range of  <dig> to 25 °c . however, at the whole root level, hydraulic responses to temperature are confounded by the effects of apoplastic pathway  <cit> .

the immunolocalization of pip aquaporins showed that in addition to the overall reduced intensity, immunofluorescence was concentrated in the outer parts of the cortex and epidermis of adventitious flooded roots. this suggests their relatively greater role in the root surface water uptake as demonstrated for pip2; <dig> in maize  <cit> . a more uniform distribution and higher intensity of immunostaining throughout the root cortex of non-adventitious non-flooded roots combined with the presence of larger vascular bundles and well-developed endodermis suggests a greater functional importance of radial water transport in this root zone.

the ability to produce adventitious roots offers an opportunity to tamarack to develop the features that allow trees to survive flooding conditions. it remains to be determined whether the modifications in water transport properties constitute a general flooding tolerance mechanism or are unique to this tree species.

CONCLUSIONS
the study has demonstrated that after six months of flooding, tamarack seedlings had similar shoot water potentials, transpiration rates and net photosynthesis to non-flooded plants. flooded seedlings produced adventitious roots which accumulated numerous starch grains in the cortex and developed structural modifications which likely contributed to their reduced dependence on the aquaporin-mediated water transport under hypoxic conditions. the reduced dependence of roots on the hypoxia-sensitive aquaporin-mediated water transport is likely among the main mechanisms allowing tamarack seedlings to maintain water balance and gas exchange under flooding conditions.

