BACKGROUND
the rotifera  is a group of aquatic micrometazoans, mostly less than a millimeter in size. it includes more than  <dig>  described species that usually occur in freshwater and marine environments throughout the world, but some species are found in wet terrestrial habitats, such as moist soil, or mosses and lichens living on fallen trees and rocks  <cit> . this group is usually distinguished from other metazoans by presence of the corona  located in the cephalic region, which is used for locomotion and food gathering. due to their great abundance and high reproductive potential, rotifers have been considered to play a significant role in the food webs of certain freshwater environments through their involvement in energy cycling and nutrient transfer  <cit> . most authorities accept that the rotifera consists of three classes, each having a unique reproductive strategy  <cit> : bdelloidea , monogononta , and seisonidea . of these, the class bdelloidea is very unique in that its species  are exclusively female. this is the largest metazoan asexual group where no sexual reproduction has ever been reported and represents an ancient origin of asexuality with great evolutionary success in the diversification of the species  <cit> . the class monogononta, representing the largest group of rotifers, comprises more than  <dig>  species. they are mostly found in freshwater, brackish and marine waters and are characterized by a unique life cycle, cyclical parthenogenesis, that alternates between two reproductive modes, i.e. amictic and mictic phases of reproduction according to the absence/presence of males, respectively  <cit> . the class seisonidea consists of three epizoic species  on marine crustaceans  and all of these are known to reproduce by amphimixis  <cit> .

there is little doubt about the close relationship between rotifera and acanthocephala, the clade known as syndermata because they share the feature of the syncytial epidermis  <cit> . this affinity has received broad support from many earlier studies utilizing different sources of phylogenetic information: morphology  <cit> , ssu rdna sequences  <cit> , combined analysis of molecular and morphological characters  <cit> , and combined analysis of ssu and lsu ribosomal dna sequences  <cit> . in contrast to syndermatan monophyly, internal phylogeny within the clade  has been the subject of relatively vigorous contention  <cit> . most controversies are related to eurotatorian monophyly versus paraphyly, although there are differences regarding the phylogenetic position of seisonidea within the clade. the monophyly/non-monophyly of eurotatorians  relative to acanthocephala has received much attention because this issue plays a key role in understanding the evolution and ecological diversity found among major groups of syndermata. lorenzen  <cit>  first recognized the lemnisci  and proboscis  as synapomorphic characters for unifying the bdelloidea and acanthocephala , and this relationship has also been recovered in many subsequent molecular analyses . based on morphological and molecular perspectives, garey et al.  <cit>  recognized acanthocephala as a subtaxon of rotifera and united these two groups under the superclass 'lemniscea' . however, eurotatorian monophyly  and sister-group relationship of seisonidea and acanthocephala have also been suggested from some earlier studies based on morphological evidence  or from molecular analysis . furthermore, employing different methods for phylogenetic analysis resulted in inconsistent tree topologies when ssu data were analyzed  <cit> . although the most recently published work from est-based phylogenomic analysis supported eurotatoria paraphyly  <cit> , but the phylogenetic issue regarding the eurotatoria monophyly/paraphyly still awaits other types of data for corroboration.

with a very few exceptions, metazoan mitochondrial genomes are circular dna molecules  that encode  <dig> genes:  <dig> protein-coding genes , two ribosomal rna genes, and  <dig> transfer rna genes  <cit> . due to its universality and remarkably stable feature in genome content across various metazoan phyla, comparisons of the mitochondrial genome information  have often proven useful for reconstructing the deep node phylogeny and for assessing the phylogenetic relationships among closely related species  <cit> . in recent years, there has been an unprecedented increase in mitochondrial genomic surveys in relation to phylogenetic comparisons of a variety of animal groups. mitochondrial genome information has now become available for more than a thousand animal species . however, the distribution of completely characterized mitochondrial genome sequences has been strongly biased across the metazoan taxa: the subphylum vertebrata and the phylum arthropoda account for more than 80% of the metazoan mitochondrial genome data determined so far, whereas there are still a considerable number of metazoan phyla for which there is limited mitochondrial genome information, and some phyla have never been investigated  <cit> . complete mitochondrial genome sequencing from poorly investigated groups is needed to supplement a gap in our current understanding of mitochondrial dna evolution in the metazoa.

mitochondrial genome information from the syndermata was reported, for the first time, from the acanthocephalan species leptorhynchoides thecatus  <cit>  and recently thereafter from the monogonont rotifer brachionus plicatilis  <cit> . despite belonging to the same clade , the mitochondrial genomes reported for these two organisms did not share many characteristics in their organization such as chromosome structure, gene order, codon usage and the secondary structure of trna molecules. for example, the mitochondrial genome of b. plicatilis, a representative of the monogononta, is encoded in two separate mitochondrial chromosomes, each having different gene content and copy number. in contrast, as in most metazonas, all genes of l. thecatus mtdna are encoded in a single type of circular mitochondrial dna molecule. the lack of common features in the mitochondrial genomes between these species necessitates additional characterization of mitochondrial genomes from the other major groups of the syndermata. information from bdelloidea is expected to supplement our understanding of syndermatan mitochondrial genome evolution and provide utility as a molecular marker in resolving internal phylogeny among the major groups of the syndermata. to this end, we characterized the first complete mitochondrial genome sequence of the bdelloid species rotaria rotatoria, and compared its mitochondrial genome information with other syndermatan species in order to investigate phylogenetic issues regarding the monophyly or paraphyly of eurotatoria.

RESULTS
general features of the r. rotatoria mitochondrial genome
the mitochondrial genome of r. rotatoria is  <dig>  bp in length  and contains  <dig> protein-coding genes , two rrna genes, and as is occasionally found in some other metazoans, all but one  of the typical  <dig> trnas genes. all genes are encoded in the same direction in a single circular mitochondrial dna , unlike that of the monogonont rotifer b. plicatilis, in which mitochondrial genes are encoded in two separated circular chromosomes  <cit> . the genome organization including the gene order, length of overlapping regions between the genes and length of intergenic spacer regions is shown in table  <dig>  the nucleotide composition of the entire r. rotatoria mtdna sequence is  <dig> % a,  <dig> % t,  <dig> % g, and  <dig> % c . the overall a+t content  approximates more or less that of the acanthocephalan l. thecatus , but is significantly higher than those found in the monogonont rotifer b. plicatilis . the average of a+t composition of protein-coding genes  is very similar to that of the entire sequence, but there is noticeable compositional difference across the codon positions: the average a+t content of the third position  is noticeably higher than those of the first  and second codon  positions, indicating that there is a strong bias toward t  and a  in third codon position.

gene/
§ termination codons were excluded

protein-coding genes
twelve protein-coding genes were identified using ncbi orf finder and by comparing their sequence with those of homologous genes reported from the acanthocephalan l. thecatus  <cit>  and monogonont b. plicatilis  <cit> . even after an exhaustive search using blast, we failed to discover any atp8-like protein sequence. the lack of atp <dig> in the mtdna genome is not very rare, and quite common in most nematode and platyhelminth species reported so far .

in many metazoan mtdnas, the codon usage is strongly biased, especially in the third position of synonymous codons within amino acid families  <cit> . in the protein-coding genes of r. rotatoria mtdna, the higher a+t content is related to amino acid composition with higher abundance of a+t-rich codons. amino acids encoded by t-rich and a-rich codons  account for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the total amino acid composition, respectively, totaling  <dig> % of the entire protein sequences . another factor that causes nucleotide bias is differential preference of thymine  or adenine  in the third position of codons. the average relative nucleotide frequency in the third position is  <dig> % ,  <dig> % ,  <dig> % , and  <dig> % , respectively. indeed, both in twofold- and fourfold-degenerate codon families, the t-ending codons are greatly favored in most synonymous codons, whereas c-ending codons are evidently avoided. the relative frequency of ttt  coding phenylalanine is much higher than that of its degenerate codon ttc . another notable example of biased codon usage is that the codon att  is much more frequently used than atc  in the isoleucine family. the propensity of a preference for t, with an apparent bias against c may reflect mutational bias at the third codon position as postulated in other metazoans  <cit> . of  <dig> protein-coding genes, six  use atg as the initiation codon, whereas others initiate with att , or ata , respectively . the majority of genes end with complete termination codon taa  or tag , but cox <dig> and nad <dig> terminate with the incomplete stop codon t, which is presumed to become a complete termination codon through post-transcriptional polyadenylation  <cit> .

the letter in parenthesis indicates one-letter abbreviation of the amino acids.

* stop  codon.

transfer rna and ribosomal rna genes
implementation of trnascan algorithm failed to find any trna-like secondary structure, but we manually identified them by eye. of  <dig> trna genes normally found in most other metazoan mtdnas,  <dig> trna-like nucleotide segments  except for trnc can be folded into a cloverleaf secondary structure with some mismatches or incomplete configuration of the dhu and/or tΨc arms . in spite of the exhaustive trna search, we were not able to identify any candidates for trnc with high confidence. out of  <dig> trnas found, only  <dig>  display a typical cloverleaf-like structure equipped with dhu and tΨc arms. many other trnas appear to lack a tΨc arm  or a dhu arm , or both . the rarity of having a typical cloverleaf-like secondary structure was also found in the acanthocephalan species leptorhynchoides thecatus  <cit>  where almost none of the inferred trnas displayed a typical stem-and-loop configuration in the dhu and tΨc arms. this differs from most other metazoan mtdnas, including the monogonont rotifer brachionus plicatilis  <cit> . indeed, the putative secondary structure of  <dig> trnas found in b. plicatilis contains a typical cloverleaf structure comprising a amino-acyl arm , a dhu arm , an anticodon arm  and a tΨc arm .

based on sequence comparison with l. thecatus and b. plicatilis, two ribosomal rna genes were identified: the rrnl  is located between trny and trnl <dig> as found in l. thecatus, but its size is remarkably smaller than any other metazoan large ribosomal subunit molecule  including those of other syndermatans reported thus far . the rrns  is located between trnm and cox <dig> 

non-coding regions
a total of  <dig> intergenic non-coding sequences, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> bp in size , were detected. of these, five intergenic non-coding regions  are prominent by their significant lengths , ranging from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp . despite an exhaustive search using the ncbi orf finder, we were not able to find orf-like candidates of significant length from these spacer regions. the relatively larger genome size of the r. rotatoria mtdna is attributed to the abundance of conspicuously long, unassigned spacer regions, compared to that of acanthocephalan l. thecatus . the region located between trnr and trns <dig>  contains  <dig> tandemly repeated units of a 18-nt sequences , each having potential to be folded into a stem-loop structure . such repeats, known as variable numbers of tandem repeats , have been reported from a variety of animal mtdnas and they have been utilized as molecular markers for detecting subdivision of the population in ecological studies .

mitochondrial molecular phylogeny
phylogenetic position of platyzoa within lophotrochozoa
the platyzoa refers to an assemblage of some acoelomate and pseudocoelomate animal taxa including platyhelminthes, rotifera, acanthocephala, gastrotricha, and gnathostomulida  <cit> . phylogenetic affinity of these groups with other lophotrochozoans has not yet been confirmed. results of recent molecular analyses depicted platyzoa as a sister to trochozoa , or as a derived subclade of lophotrochozoa  as outgroups. resulting trees from both ml and bi methods showed that the protostomes and deuterostomes were divided into two separate clades with very high support . within the protostome clade, monophyly of ecdysozoa and monophyly of lophotrochozoa were also found, but the dichotomy between these two groups was collapsed when the nematode sequences  were included in the analysis. in all cases, nematode sequences were nested within the lophotrochozoan clade rather than grouped with ecdysozoan members , and their position varied considerably according to different phylogenetic methods. their unusual position appears to be artificial and due to the long-branch attraction  problem as documented in many previous papers  <cit> . therefore, in order to reduce this factor in the tree reconstruction, we excluded nematode sequences from subsequent analyses. after the exclusion of nematodes, the concatenated amino acid sequence dataset consisting of  <dig>  homologous positions was used for the subsequent analyses. note that monophyly of lophotrochozoa and monophyly of ecdysozoa were recovered after removal of nematode sequences from the analyses, and support values for clades were noticeably improved in all analyses . the monophyletic grouping of ecdysozoan members received 100% bp  in ml, and  <dig>  bpp . the lophotrochozoan clade was also well supported with  <dig>  bpp in bi, but received a very weak bootstrap support value of 56% in ml analysis . although the lophotrochozoan clade is not strongly supported, the current amino acid sequence data support the ecdysozoa/lophotrochozoa split. it is particularly noteworthy that both phylogenetic methods  recovered platyhelminthes, rotifera, and acanthocephala  as monophyletic lineages in the lophotrochozoan clade and nodal support for platyzoa was very strong . this result is in agreement with an earlier analysis based on a combined dataset of lsu and ssu sequences that recognized the platyzoa as a derived monophyletic assemblage within the lophotrochozoa  <cit> . as yet, the availability of complete mitochondrial genome information is limited to platyhelminthes, acanthocephala, and rotifera, and further evidence from gnathostomulida and gastrotricha is required to confirm the monophyly of platyzoa and its derived position within the lophotrochozon clade .

phylogenetic implications for syndermata: eurotatoria paraphyly
phylogenetic relationships among syndermata, in particular with regard to eurotatoria monophyly/paraphyly are still vigorously debated. the answer to this question is prerequisite for correct understanding of the evolution of different types of life styles found among major groups of syndermata  <cit> . in this study, we revisited this issue based on phylogenetic analysis of amino acid sequence for eleven protein-coding genes  of the complete mitochondrial genome. the resulting trees both from bayesian and maximum likelihood analyses recovered syndermatan members  as a monophyletic group, which is in turn grouped with platyhelminthes . the phylogenetic affinity of the syndermata with platyhelminthes in this study is concordant with some earlier publications asserting their sister-relationship  <cit> . it is particularly significant to note that both bi and ml methods placed bdelloidea and acanthocephala as sister taxa and this relationship was very strongly supported by  <dig>  bpp in bi analysis, but received relatively weaker support  in ml analysis. moreover, none of the phylogenetic methods recovered the two eurotatorian species, rotaria rotatoria  and brachionus plicatilis  as monophyletic, but instead always depicted them as a paraphyletic assemblage. bdelloidea represented by r. rotatoria appears to share most recent common ancestry with acanthocephala rather than with the monogonont b. plicatilis. the sister-group position of the monogononta to the bdelloidea+acanthocephala, received strong support from bi  and moderate support from ml , respectively. this result indicates a firm support for the 'eurotatorian paraphyly' hypothesis. in all cases of the analysis, monophyly of bdelloidea + acanthocephala relative to monogononta is always very robust. in order to assess whether our data rejects the alternative hypothesis , we performed statistical comparison of the likelihood scores for the best ml tree without constraint versus the best tree with the topological constraint of eurotatoria monophyly using thetreefinder program. the result of topology test failed to detect a significant difference between these two competing hypotheses under various criteria . although eurotatoria monophyly was not significantly worse interpretation of these data by tree topology comparison test, the optimal phylogenetic trees from different methods unanimously depicted b. plicatilis  sister to two other syndermatans , regardless of different options applied in the data analysis . in addition, this relation  is further corroborated by sharing greater similarity in gene arrangement between r. rotatoria and l. thecatus .

a close relationship between bdelloidea and acanthocephala is also evident when gene arrangement patterns of r. rotatoria mtdna are compared with other metazoan animal groups. gene arrangement of r. rotatoria mtdna is very different from those found in other metazoans, but shows the highest similarity to the acanthocephalan l. thecatus. the gene order comparison between r. rotatoria and l. thecatus identified the gene order of trnn-nad2-cox1-trng, trny-rrnl-trnl1-nad <dig>  and nad4l-nad4-trnh-nad <dig> shared between the representatives of the bdelloidea and acanthocephala, respectively . the gene order of nad4l-nad4-trnh-nad <dig> can also be found across many various metazoan mtdnas, such as bryozoa  <cit> , brachiura , gastropoda , vertebrata , and priapulida  <cit> . however, this conserved gene order is not shared by the b. plicatilis mtdna and we suggest it is due to the idiosyncratic features of b. plicatilis mtdna in which  <dig> genes are encoded separately into bipartite mitochondrial genomes  <cit> . in contrast, note that the gene order similarity found between r. rotatoria and l. thecatus  is very unique among the metazoans and this shared gene rearrangement lends another line of strong support for their common ancestry. the phylogenetic conclusion of eurotatoria paraphyly suggested from the present study is also consistent with the most recent est based phylogenomic analysis  <cit> .

in general, the evolutionary potential for adaptive radiation and its subsequent diversification of extant biota are often associated with preferential adoption of different life styles during evolutionary history. in most cases, a robust phylogeny is a prerequisite to correctly understand the evolution of life styles among the groups. the syndermata  is one of the best model systems for studying the evolutionary origin and persistence of different life styles because it shows a variety of lineage-specific reproduction modes. of these, bdelloidea is particularly among the most unique in that it contains exclusively several hundred species and all individuals are females, the largest metazoan group with no sexual reproduction that has ever been documented  <cit> . this group is also considered to represent an ancient origin of asexuality with a great evolutionary success in their diversification of asexual species  <cit> . there are some additional cytological  <cit>  and molecular evidence  <cit>  suggesting that the evolution and maintenance of asexuality in bdelloidea is of relatively ancient origin, dating back to more than tens of millions of years ago. inferring the history of the obligatory asexual class bdelloidea within the syndermatan phylogenetic framework is a central topic in evolutionary biology of asexuality because these organisms have long been regarded as perfect candidates to test the advantage of sexual reproduction  <cit> . the phylogenetic conclusion obtained from this comparative mitochondrial genome study provides essential clues in extrapolating the directionality of long-term asexual evolution of bdelloidean lineage. the sister group position of monogononta to the bdelloidea/acanthocephala clade suggests that the obligatory asexuality of bdelloideans may have been derived secondarily from some other preexisting condition in earlier lineage of rotifers. however, because no mitochondrial genome information is available from seisonidea, we are not able to postulate what is the most likely ancestral condition that gave rise to bdelloidean asexuality. there are only a few complete mitochondrial dna sequences available from the syndermata: b. plicatilis , r. rotatoria  and l. thecatus . more information, especially from seisonidea needs to be obtained to confirm the phylogenetic position of seisonidea within syndermata. this further phylolgenetic information would be a very substantial ingredient for precisely estimating the origin of asexuality in bdelloidea and at the same time, contribute to a better understanding of mitochondrial genome evolution within the syndermatan phylogenetic framework.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we revisited phylogenetic relationships of eurotatoria  based on comparative analysis of the complete mitochondrial genome information for major groups of the syndermata. for this purpose, we determined the first complete mitochondrial genome sequence  of a bdelloid rotifer, rotaria rotatoria. comparisons of inferred amino acid sequence and gene arrangement pattern with those of other syndermatan mtdnas  supports the hypothesis that the bdelloidea shares a most recent common ancestor with acanthocephala, and not with monogononta. from this finding, we suggest that the obligatory asexuality of bdelloideans may have secondarily derived from some preexisting condition in earlier lineages of rotifers. definitively, testing this question of phylogenetic relationships and evolution of different types of life style among the major members of syndermata awaits further investigation of mitochondrial genome sequencing from seisonidea.

