BACKGROUND
parasitic organisms, whether bacteria, viruses, fungi, nematodes or phytophagous insects, sometimes make use of a sequence of different hosts during their life cycle. such host alternation is so common among parasites that many courses in parasitology are devoted largely to descriptions of parasitic life cycle and the sequences of host changes. the evolution of such complex life cycle is puzzling in many ways. in particular, parasites displaying host alternation may show extreme specificity and adaptations for two very distantly related hosts with few features in common  <cit> . several questions have been raised about the evolution of host alternation. is host alternation evolutionarily labile or is it a rare evolutionary change in various phyla? is it adaptive and, if so, what advantages does it confer on parasites with this trait? what effect does it have on parasite diversification? do complex life cycles favour the colonization of new ecological niches and enhance cladogenesis?

such questions can be addressed in aphids . aphids and their closest relatives, the phylloxeridae and adelgidae, are the only phytophagous insects, with cynipid wasps  <cit> , known sometimes to use two sets of host plants during their life cycle. these species are described as "heteroecious" or as displaying "host alternation"  <cit> . host alternation is found in about 10% of the  <dig> described aphid species, the other 90% of aphids using the same group of host plants throughout their entire life cycle . in most heteroecious aphididae species, the cycle follows a similar pattern: the eggs hatch and colonies develop parthenogenetically on their primary/winter hosts ; the aphids then migrate to secondary/summer hosts  on which they reproduce parthenogenetically; subsequent generations then return to the primary hosts for sexual reproduction and overwintering. in most cases the alternate sets of hosts are not taxonomically related and have no obvious ecological similarities  <cit> . however, life cycles involving host alternation are thought to reflect the order in which plant taxa were acquired as host plants by aphid lineages. monoecy on trees is assumed to be the ancestral state in the family  <cit> , with host alternation being acquired at the time of initial grass diversification , followed in some cases by the loss of the primary host tree species and monoecy on grasses  <cit> . the evolution of the aphid life cycle, the selective pressures driving it and its consequences for aphid diversification have been a matter for lively debate over many years.

heteroecy is observed in different aphid subfamilies and the means of returning to primary hosts depend on the subfamily concerned, strongly suggesting that several acquisitions of this trait have occurred in the aphididae  <cit> . the most recent phylogenetic study suggests a minimum of two independent acquisitions of host alternation  <cit> . multiple acquisitions of host alternation have also been suggested in the aphid subfamily with the largest number of species, the aphidinae, as many genera in this subfamily contain both heteroecious and monoecious species  <cit> . it is difficult to infer the exact number of gains and losses of heteroecy in aphids based on current reconstructions: the phylogenies of aphididae, or even aphidinae  <cit> , are still largely unresolved, probably because aphids have undergone rapid radiation  <cit> . the evolutionary forces driving the evolution of this trait are also poorly understood. there are two points of view concerning the evolution of host alternation in aphids  <cit> . the first view suggests that having two hosts is adaptive  <cit> , as it allows the optimal exploitation of the available plants. numerous adaptive advantages have been proposed   <cit> , but all arguments boil down to the general idea that aphids use two sets of hosts when this is optimal for their growth and parthenogenetic reproduction. another point of view is that this trait results from developmental constraints affecting several aphid morphotypes  <cit> . according to this hypothesis, the use of two hosts is not necessarily advantageous and primary hosts are retained because of strong phylogenetic constraints on the morph that hatches from overwintering eggs in spring, the fundatrix. this morph is highly adapted to the primary hosts, and less able to switch hosts than other morphs. the oviposition preferences of the sexual morphs for the woody host are also likely to be subject to evolutionary constraints. this would imply that the loss of the primary host and the shift of the entire cycle to a new secondary herbaceous host requires an escape from both these constraints, entailing several major, simultaneous mutations  <cit> . this hypothesis, known as "the fundatrix specialisation hypothesis", generates a straightforward prediction: if aphids manage to lose their primary host during evolution, thus escaping from the dead-end resulting from fundatrix specialisation, then a return to heteroecy should not occur  <cit> . hence, monoecy on herbaceous hosts, which occurs in several aphidinae genera, should always be a derived state. finally, the evolution of host alternation is also often described as having played an important role in favouring the colonisation of new plant species and speciation in aphids. indeed, the acquisition of heteroecy may be followed by a shift of all or part of the population to permanent existence on some of the new secondary hosts and, therefore, by speciation  <cit> . the species-rich genera of the aphidinae that are monoecious on herbaceous plants are thought to have arisen through the loss of their primary host, followed by extensive radiation on their newly acquired herbaceous host  <cit> .

in this study, we addressed some of the questions concerning the evolution of life cycles in aphids, by focusing on the evolution of this trait in one genus of the aphidinae subfamily: the genus brachycaudus van der goot,  <dig>  this genus has  <dig> species  <cit> ,  <dig> of which always or sometimes spend some of their life cycle on prunus species  <cit> . there are about  <dig> heteroecious species associated with secondary host plants belonging to the asteraceae, boraginaceae, caryophyllaceae, lamiaceae, polygonaceae and scrophulariaceae  <cit> . other species are monoecious, living either on rosales or on herbaceous hosts, some of which belong to the same families as the secondary host plants of heteroecious species  <cit>  . hence, this genus displays all the types of life cycle: monoecy on a woody host, host alternation between a woody host and herbaceous hosts, and monoecy on herbaceous hosts. some species in the genus thus appear to have lost their primary rosaceous hosts to become monoecious on more recently acquired secondary herbaceous hosts   <cit> . we investigated this hypothetical scenario through phylogenetic reconstruction of the genus and addressed several questions: 1) what is the ancestral life cycle state in this genus? 2) how many gains and losses of host alternation have occurred in this genus and, once lost, has heteroecy ever been regained? 3) what are the consequences of evolutionary changes in aphid life cycle for the association of these insects with their host plants?

we expand on our previous phylogenetic studies of the genus  <cit> , by adding several extra species and specimens to our sampling. we have also added a nuclear dna fragment, to improve phylogenetic resolution. our previous studies showed that some of the species of the genus brachycaudus had been ambiguously defined. some specimens identified as belonging to the same species failed to cluster as a clade and formed polytomies with specimens belonging to very closely related species but defined as having a different life cycle and/or host range. our objective here was to infer the evolutionary history of life cycle and host association. we therefore ensured that inferences concerning the number of evolutionary transitions in these characters were as conservative as possible, by applying a dna-based species delimitation method to our dataset. this made it possible to define species independently of the ecological traits we wanted to study.

RESULTS
phylogenetic reconstructions
we obtained a well resolved phylogenetic tree , in which most of the nodes were supported by high ml bootstrap and pp values. the phylogenetic relationships obtained here were very similar to those reported previously  <cit> , and the addition of a nuclear marker confirmed the previously reported phylogenetic relationships between the species sampled. two additional species from central asia, brachycaudus pilosus  and brachycaudus cerasicola , not included in previous reconstructions, clustered together with relatively long branches as a sister group to the species of the subgenus acaudus. however, support for this branch was poor, suggesting possible long branch attraction  <cit> .

species delimitation
our sampling initially comprised  <dig> recognised brachycaudus species identified on the basis of classical taxonomy and three unidentified specimens. for the brachycaudus ultrametric tree obtained with multidivtime, the gmyc model was preferred over the null model of uniform branching patterns . this species delimitation method retrieved  <dig> phylogenetic species of brachycaudus . most species recognized by classical taxonomy were retrieved by our method. however, this method also clustered several species together. b. lateralis  and b. cardui  specimens were grouped together as a single entity. this suggests that b. lateralis and b. cardui do not form the two species generally defined -- one mostly anholocyclic  on asteraceae and the other alternating between prunus and plants from several different families  -- but instead form a single species displaying host alternation between prunus and several plant families. b. lateralis is indeed sometimes treated as a subspecies of b. cardui. all species of the subgenus appelia other than b. cerinthis also clustered together, even if several specimens from central asia were included. brachycaudus  spp. associated with caryophyllaceae, except b. divaricatae  and b. klugkisti , also formed a single genetic cluster. specimens identified as b. lami  and b. ballotae  were also identified as belonging to a single species. these clustering patterns confirmed our previous findings, based on less extensive specimen and species sampling and fewer dna markers  <cit> . the clusters obtained all corresponded to groups of species in which species identification can be difficult and specimens may be assigned to species on the basis of host affiliation or morphological characters subject to intraspecific variation. however, this method detected two clusters within b. helichrysi  and two clusters among the thuleaphis specimens collected in kazakhstan that we failed to identify. two of the thuleaphis specimens collected on atraphaxis sp. formed a phylogenetic cluster, and one specimen collected on a rheum sp. but morphologically different from b. rumexicolens  appeared as a separate, differentiated taxon. these two phylogenetic species may correspond to the two new thuleaphis species reported by kadyrbekov  <cit> .

character evolution
ancestral state reconstruction by mp, ml and stochastic mapping are summarised in fig.  <dig> and  <dig> and tables 1-2- <dig> 

1for each analysis, likelihoods given in the table are average likelihoods for the  <dig> trees .

2two scenarios were investigated each time: a) facultative heteroecious species considered as heteroecious; b) facultative heteroecious species considered as monoecious on trees.

3node numbers refer to those in fig.  <dig> 

node numbers refer to those in fig.  <dig>  different prior distributions for the rates of evolution of each character were tested: we show results corresponding to α =  <dig> and β =  <dig>  for both characters, as different combination of priors gave very similar results. a: facultative heteroecious species considered heteroecious. b: facultative heteroecious species considered as monoecious on trees.

different prior distributions for the rates of evolution were tested: we show results corresponding to the same priors than table  <dig>  a: facultative heteroecious species considered as heteroecious; b: facultative heteroecious species considered as monoecious on trees.

the use of different prior distributions for character rates of evolution for stochastic mapping had no effect on the results obtained. mp and stochastic mapping both suggested that, based on our species sampling, the most likely ancestral state in the genus brachycaudus was monoecy on herbaceous plants, regardless of whether facultatively heteroecious species were considered to be heteroecious or monoecious on trees. for ml reconstructions, a full model  was preferred over a single rate model or simplified models where some transition rates were set to zero . using this  <dig> parameter model yielded uncertainty at the root of the tree with no particular state identified as best state .

character states reconstructions suggested that there have been numerous transitions in life cycle . mp reconstruction, which suggested that there have been eight or nine life cycle transitions during the evolution of the genus, inferred that there had been four or five acquisitions of heteroecy from monoecy on herbaceous plants, depending on the status assigned to facultatively heteroecious species. it identified at least five acquisitions of woody hosts . however, the model setting transition rates from state zero  towards states  <dig>  and  <dig>  to zero, was significantly worse than a model without any constraint or a model setting the reverse transitions to zero . further, when character states at several nodes of interest  were constrained to state  <dig> , the likelihood of the reconstruction was significantly worse  than when the same nodes were fixed to state  <dig>  . these models and ancestral state assignments comparisons all suggest that, given our dataset, transitions from monoecy on herbs towards heteroecy are likely in this aphid genus. stochastic mapping suggested similar ancestral character states  and a similar total number of life cycle transitions to mp analysis . like mp, simmap optimisations suggested that heteroecy has evolved from monoecy on herbaceous plants on four or five occasions.

dietary shifts were also numerous . ml investigation of character state transition suggested that a single rate model was not significantly worse than a two rate model . we therefore used a single mk <dig> model for ml character reconstruction as implemented in mesquite  <cit> . the ancestral state in the genus was probably a specialist diet . mp and ml optimisations suggested several acquisitions of a generalist feeding diet on the secondary host-plant range: one in the subgenus brachycaudus and, potentially, several in the subgenus acaudus, although mp optimisations classified most nodes as equivocal in the subgenus acaudus, indicating that acquisitions and losses were equally parsimonious. simmap results suggested that transitions from a specialist feeding diet to a more generalist feeding diet were more numerous than those in the opposite direction .

all monoecious species  are specialists, but the posterior predictive test for association between life cycle type and breadth of host range yielded non-significant results . the lack of statistical association was probably due to the occurrence of several heteroecious species that remained specialised on their secondary host plants.

evolution of host-plant association
the mapping of host association on the phylogenetic tree revealed that several monoecious species lived on plants from the same family as the secondary hosts of closely related heteroecious species . this was the case in the subgenus thuleaphis, in which b. amygdalinus , which alternates between prunus amygdalinus  and polygonum spp. , is closely related to b. rumexicolens, which is monoecious on plants of the family polygonaceae . similarly, in the subgenus brachycaudus, many of the secondary hosts of heteroecious species and the host plants of monoecious species were found to belong to either the boraginaceae or asteraceae. in acaudus species associated with caryophyllaceae, the only heteroecious species  alternates between a prunus species and various species of silene, which also act as hosts for monoecious species of this subgenus.

discussion
evolution of host alternation in brachycaudus
our study generated a well resolved phylogeny of the aphid genus brachycaudus. character mapping revealed the occurrence of multiple transitions in life cycle in this genus during the course of its evolution. our findings provide strong evidence for the potential evolutionary lability of complex life history traits, such as host alternation. against all expectations, mp and stochastic mapping both suggested that monoecy on herbaceous host could be the ancestral state in the genus and that up to four -acquisitions of the heteroecious life cycle have occurred. ml optimizations yielded more ambiguities on ancestral character states, and did not allow a precise estimation of the number and types of transitions, but they all favoured a scenario where losses of monoecy on herbs and transitions towards heteroecy have occurred. character mapping methods are based on prior distributions and models of evolution, the reliability of which remains unclear  <cit> . but the fact that all optimisation criteria agree on reconstructions involving several reversions towards heteroecy suggests that we can have a high level of confidence in this scenario. artefacts such as the omission of some species or the existence of asymmetrical diversification rates between monoecious and heteroecious species could bias our results  <cit> . however, available data on described species that were missing from our reconstructions  indicate that most of them are probably monoecious on herbs; hence their addition should not change our conclusions. several studies suggest that when a character change has en effect on speciation, inferring transition rates for this character can lead to erroneous conclusions  <cit> . in our case, monoecy on herbs has been hypothesized to accelerate diversification rates in aphids  <cit> . this could lead to a high abundance of species that are monoecious on herbs and bias estimation of life cycle transition rates. but this should bias the results towards an overestimation of the number of transitions towards monoecy on herbs. hence, taking into account biases such as missing species or high diversification of monoecious species on herbs should only confirm that heteroecy can be acquired de novo. concerning the root of the tree, it is less certain that the actual ancestral state in the genus is monoecy on herbs. brachycaudus belongs to the tribe macrosiphini, and its closest relatives are often associated with hosts from the rosaceae   <cit> . many aphidinae clearly have a close affinity with rosaceous hosts, and this affinity may be ancestral  in some of the tribes of this subfamily  <cit> . it is therefore likely that some species that have gone extinct over the history of the genus brachycaudus might have been monoecious on a woody host . we are thus not suggesting that species of the genus brachycaudus have captured, in an independent manner on several occasions, prunus; our study simply demonstrates that potential ancestral rosaceous hosts can easily be recaptured once lost, as the sole host or as primary host for the heteroecious life cycle.

our results thus clearly contradict the "fundatrix specialisation" hypothesis, which predicts that, once lost, the primary host cannot be recaptured. moran, in her paper supporting the "fundatrix specialisation" hypothesis  <cit> , rightly pointed out that heteroecious species include some species for which there are differences between populations in the use of secondary herbaceous hosts, with some individuals remaining on primary woody hosts and others alternating between two hosts. by contrast, there have been no reports of variation in the use of the primary host. the absence of "facultative use of the primary host" constitutes a strong argument in favour of the fundatrix specialisation hypothesis, suggesting that host alternation loss involves a loss of the primary host, but not of the secondary host. however, this observation may be biased. as soon as sexual morphs of an aphid species are found on herbaceous hosts, it is generally assumed that the aphid species concerned is monoecious on this host plant and genetically differentiated from any morphologically similar aphids reproducing on a woody host. the subgenus appelia in the genus brachycaudus has been the subject of many taxonomic discussions and revisions  <cit> . it includes aphids identified as b. tragopogonis that are supposedly monoecious on tragopogon spp., aphids identified as b. schwartzi that are supposedly monoecious on prunus spp., and aphids identified as b. prunicola that are reported as sometimes alternating between various prunus species and tragopogon spp. or monecious on various prunus species . even with the use of several variable dna markers , it was not possible to differentiate specimens into these species: this complex of taxa  may therefore constitute a case of a heteroecious species making facultative use of the primary host for the sexual phase. this may be the "evolutionary step" reported to be missing in moran's study.

considering that aphids are the only phytophagous insects exhibiting host alternation, the lability of this trait can be surprising. furthermore, transitions towards heteroecy necessitate changes in the ability to produce certain morphs  as well as changes in host preference for prunus in several morphs . this a priori involves complex changes that are not likely to occur repeatedly during the course of evolution. however aphid clones have the ability to produce alternative morphs which is also very unusual among phytophagous insects. further, the developmental processes underlying morph determination seem quite labile as for instance, the production of winged and unwinged males is highly variable across the phylogeny  <cit>  and some species in the brachycaudus genus and many other aphids genera produce both types of males  <cit> . transcriptomic analyses actually suggest that alternative morphologies can be determined by alternative gene expression  <cit> . this ability to produce alternative morphs with the same genetic material might actually facilitate evolutionary changes in life cycles  <cit> . concerning the use of rosaceous hosts in brachycaudus, its lability is actually not particularly surprising. retention of the ability to use former host plants may be quite common in phytophagous insects  <cit> . transitions towards heteroecy simply represent another example of reacquisition of ancestral character states  <cit> . finally, phylogenetic studies of life cycle evolution in parasites have suggested that complex life cycles are evolutionary labile  <cit> , and evolutionary research in the domain of parasitology has largely focused on the selective advantage of using several hosts rather than on the constraints limiting this trait  <cit> . hence the lability of life cycle in aphids is not that surprising when put into perspectives with literature on life cycle evolution in other groups.

the alternative hypothesis to the "fundatrix specialisation hypothesis" is that heteroecy is advantageous. however, this raises a question already posed in a previous study  <cit> : why would closely related species living in similar environments have different life cycles? furthermore, the presence of fewer host-alternating species in the genus than of monoecious species, and the small number of heteroecious aphids in general  are not consistent with the hypothesis that host alternation is selectively advantageous, unless this advantage applies to only a very small number of environments. we suggest that the observed patterns of life cycle evolution in the genus brachycaudus, and possibly similar patterns in other genera of the aphidinae, probably result from a combination of both selection and constraints on host plant choices. studies of closely related species with different life cycles should improve our understanding of the balance between these forces. these biological models could be used to study morphological changes in the fundatrix following the evolutionary loss of the primary host. indeed, such an approach would actually be the best way to test the fundatrix specialisation hypothesis  <cit> . the genetic determinants of aphid morphs involved in life cycle variation  have also been little studied, and may actually involve very few genes  <cit>  or genes that are easily switched on and off  <cit> , making the reacquisition of a woody host less unlikely than previously thought. this could be investigated with experimental data in the genus brachycaudus, but the genomic information now available for aphids could also be used  <cit> . such studies are necessary to give definitive proofs of the lability of life cycle in the genus brachycaudus.

consequences of host alternation for host-plant association and the diversification of aphids
host-plant associations are highly diversified in the genus brachycaudus. our phylogenetic tree revealed two patterns of host-plant evolution: 1) several monoecious species were found to be associated with herbaceous host plants from the same family as the secondary hosts of closely related heteroecious species; 2) many monoecious species were found to be associated with host plants unrelated to the heteroecious life cycle. for example, brachycaudus malvae, which is associated with malva spp., is closely related to heteroecious and monoecious species associated with plants of the asteraceae.

the first of these patterns, when found in other genera of aphidinae, has been interpreted as an illustration of speciation via loss of the heteroecious life cycle and the shifting of all primary host generations onto some of the secondary hosts of the original life cycle  <cit> . this scenario has been suggested for some species in the genus cryptomyzus  <cit> . for example, c. alboapicalis is monoecious on mints , whereas closely related species, such as c. galeopsidis, alternate between a woody host  and mint  <cit> . c. alboapicalis is thought to have differentiated from its sister species by losing the primary woody host. our study in the genus brachycaudus suggests an additional diversification scenario, in which re-acquisitions of heteroecy have probably played a major role in speciation events. a shift in life cycle, so long as it involves the loss or acquisition of the primary  host in a group of individuals of an aphid species, necessarily results in the shifting of sexual reproduction to a separate host plant and strong reproductive isolation from the population of origin. hence, the multiple acquisitions of heteroecy revealed by our study have probably promoted the diversification of some brachycaudus species. aphidinae, the aphid subfamily with the largest number of species, includes many genera displaying host alternation. some genera, like the genus brachycaudus, include both monoecious and heteroecious species . it would be interesting to carry out phylogenetic investigations in these genera to determine whether the acquisition or re-acquisition of heteroecy has also occurred and could account for some of the diversification events.

the second pattern, the use of host plants unrelated to the heteroecious life cycle, is more difficult to explain. how did aphids capture these new hosts? we found no significant correlation between transitions in diet and changes in life cycle, but the secondary host-plant repertoire of heteroecious species is often larger than the host-plant repertoire of monoecious species. this larger host plant repertoire on secondary host plants is a common pattern in aphids  <cit> , and may favour the capture of new hosts  <cit> . the genus brachycaudus may illustrate speciation via the acquisition of new, sometimes distantly related hosts during the "summer" phase of the heteroecious life cycle.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our results suggest that host alternation is surprisingly labile in the aphid genus brachycaudus. the primary woody hosts can be lost and easily recaptured. these results clearly go against "the fundatrix specialisation" hypothesis, suggesting that aphids in the genus brachycaudus and, possibly, other genera of the macrosiphini tribe, seem to have escaped from the hypothetical dead end put forward by moran  <cit> . improvements in our understanding of the selective forces behind the evolution of host alternation in aphids will require elucidation of the genetic determinants of the fundatrix and the sexual morphs and of the oviposition preferences of sexual morphs and thorough ecological studies of closely related species with different life cycles or natural populations of species described as facultatively heteroecious. there are several good candidate species in the genus brachycaudus for comparative analyses of this type.

