BACKGROUND
structural systems pharmacology  <cit>  is the study of drug action through characterization of proteome-wide drug-target interactions and their systemic consequences. a previously developed local structure homology-based approach to predicting ligand binding pockets   <cit>  has been applied efficaciously in multiple contexts to study pharmacological phenomena  <cit> . the recent development of a structural biology resource with which to study physiological stresses upon the proteome of escherichia coli k <dig> mg <dig> metabolism  <cit>  has enabled a diversity of potential applications. thus, we applied the smap methodology and the e. coli metabolic genome-scale model integrated with protein structures , to analyze and predict antibacterial effects of chemical compounds. e. coli k <dig>  although not pathogenic under normal circumstances, is a well-characterized laboratory model for enteropathogenic bacteria that infect humans. thus methods, and perhaps even some specific predictions of antibacterial properties made in this study, are extensible to pathogenic e. coli and other bacterial pathogens. in addition to the integrative framework presented in this study for structural systems pharmacology, this effort also included significant expansion of the previously developed gem-pro to account for physiological assemblies of protein complex structures with activities accounted for in the e. coli k <dig> metabolic network ijo <dig>  <cit> . results from this study show promising proof of principle for such an analysis framework and raise specific molecular and systemic hypothesis about antibacterials that are amenable to experimental testing.

RESULTS
expansion of gem-pro to include protein complexes
many proteins do not act as monomers in the cell but as part of multimeric protein complexes that may include proteins encoded by one or several distinct genes. the previously constructed escherichia coli genome-scale model integrated with protein structures   <cit>  considered proteins solely as single-peptide chains. as a result, we sought to expand the scope of gem-pro to account for the structure of protein complexes. the structures of protein complexes are complementary to the existing single-peptide chain structures already included in the e. coli gem-pro. the objective was to best represent the physiological assemblies of metabolic enzyme complexes, that is, the best structural representation of the active form of enzyme complexes in vivo. a conceptual representation of this expansion with respect to the example reaction of glucosamine-1-phosphate n-acetyltransferase  is displayed in figure 1a; in this case, the physiologically active form of the glmu enzyme is a homotrimer.

there are  <dig> functional enzymatic complexes  <cit>  known to form among the proteins accounted for in ijo <dig>  <cit> . the overall coverage of complexes in this gem-pro is  <dig> out of the  <dig> known complexes ; of these  <dig> complexes,  <dig> are completely represented with accurate subunit stoichiometry by a single structure in the expanded gem-pro, and another  <dig> complexes are partially represented by structures, which may not include all distinct polypeptide subunits of the complex or may have incomplete subunit stoichiometry. this effort yielded  <dig> individual protein structure files,  <dig> of which were redundant with structures contained in the previously developed gem-pro  <cit> . as is clear from figure 1b, a slight majority of known complexes are not represented at all in the complex expansion to the gem-pro. a combination of the ecocyc database  <cit> , pdb structure curation  <cit> , computational assessment of symmetry operations on the asymmetric unit of protein crystals  <cit> , and literature review were used to identify a consensus for the most physiologically accurate assemblies currently possible . these assemblies were distributed among different classes of oligomeric states: monomers, homomultimers, and heteromultimers . the monomers directly overlap with contents previously reconstructed  <cit> .

structure-based prediction of protein targets of antibacterials
the expanded e. coli gem-pro was employed prospectively to explore possible currently unknown antibacterial properties. two pipelines were established to screen for different types of antibacterial associations . protein targets for antibacterials with unknown mechanisms of action, compounds known to have antibacterial effects but without known molecular targets, were predicted , and anti-metabolite compounds were also predicted as novel antibacterials to target orphan protein targets without known inhibitors . protein-ligand targeting was predicted using the previously developed smap method  <cit> . some negative and positive control antibacterial compounds were also screened, for which there is existing data on antibacterial properties and established mechanisms of action within metabolism.

a subset of the results of these screens are summarized in table  <dig>  including novel predicted compound targets and those that displayed antibacterial properties through simulation of inhibition in the metabolic model ; the full set of smap predictions is presented in additional file 2: table s <dig> 

in the negative control screen for glucose  smap predicted that glucose significantly binds to  <dig> individual metabolic e. coli proteins and  <dig> protein complexes, one of which is a known target . using less stringent significance criteria for the smap p-value revealed a second known target . some of these targets are expected because glucose is a known substrate of these proteins. although smap does not predict significant binding of glucose to glycogen phosphorylase , for which it is a known inhibitor, this protein does rank 4th of  <dig> structures for one screen . because we assume that glucose binding targets are the most extensively characterized of all compounds included in this study, these negative control screens were also used to examine the false positive rate of smap predictions of ligand binding. using stated significance criteria ,  <dig> false positive and  <dig> true negative predictions resulted, corresponding to a false positive rate of  <dig> .

of the positive antibacterial controls, the top smap hit for the sulfonamide 4-amino-n-benzenesulfonamide  is the known primary target, dihydropteroate synthase . two other positive controls, fosfomycin  and trimethoprim , were predicted by smap to bind significantly to a number of proteins , none of which were known targets, leaving these predictions as unresolved but nevertheless putative targets defining unknown mechanisms leading to an antibacterial effect, described further below. the positive control  <dig> ′-methanediylbis  was not predicted by smap to significantly bind any proteins; although the known primary target  was ranked 122nd out of  <dig> protein structures. the experimentally-characterized binding mode of h3p co-crystalized with bovine glutamate dehydrogenase  is as a ring consisting of six h3p molecules  <cit> , each molecule interacting both with the gdh homohexamer and with two other neighboring h3p molecules. this complex binding mode may explain the lower than expected significance of smap hits for known h3p targets, as the template for the binding site used for the smap screen did not capture the six-molecule ring binding mode.

the antibacterial 4-benzoic acid , with unknown action mechanism, was not predicted to significantly bind to any metabolic proteins. intriguingly, the two other antibacterials with unknown mechanisms of action screened in this study, bis  and cholesteryl oleate , were both predicted as significant binders by smap to multiple metabolic proteins , suggesting possible mechanisms for their antibacterial activity.

of the three screens aiming to identify anti-metabolite inhibitors of known essential genes in e. coli, smap predicted  <dig> candidate inhibitors for the tryptophan synthase β subunit . predicted trpb inhibitors include 2-{amino}ethyl dihydrogen phosphate , -l-ryptophane , -n-{3-hydroxy-2-methyl-5-pyridin-4-ylidene}methanaminium , indoline , and pyridoxyl-serine-5-monophosphate . criteria supporting the potential inhibitors of trpb are listed in table  <dig>  smap screens for inhibitors of erythronate-4-phosphate dehydrogenase  and orotate phosphoribosyltransferase  failed to predict any significant candidate inhibitors.

several other known metabolic targets of the control compounds were not predicted by smap. in our preliminary control screens, it was hypothesized that there may exist distinct binding pocket motifs for an individual compound such that using a single protein template to search for other targets may not identify all true targets of a compound. expanding the number of search templates for a single compound, as was done for bgc, fcn, and top, indeed identified more significant known targets, supporting this hypothesis.

to assess the relative accuracy of smap in predicting true positive protein-ligand interactions, we performed statistical analysis of the entire set of smap results, including insignificant calls. mann whitney u-tests were run on the ranked lists of smap predictions with respect to each template protein structure, yielding inconsistently statistically significant p-values for some compounds . this result too supports that different binding motifs may exist for an individual compound, as is most apparent for bgc and top, which show the widest range of p-values. to highlight the overall efficacy of smap in predicting true positives, the results from all screens for a particular compound were combined by considering only the top rank number for each protein structure, whether a known target or not. it is apparent from figure  <dig> that the examples bgc, fcn, top, and h3p all noticeably support smap’s predictive accuracy; however, the stringency of significance criteria used may obscure this ability for many protein-ligand interactions. because there is no obvious a priori approach to choosing a single structural template for screening a compound that may bind to multiple distinct motifs, our results suggest that using as wide an array of diverse templates as appropriate should be considered when running smap screens. this phenomenon may explain some of the false negative smap predictions for controls in this study.

antibacterial binding site and protein functional site analysis
next, we utilized the residue-resolution functional annotation of the previously generated e. coli gem-pro to identify whether the smap-predicted ligand binding sites overlapped with known functional sites, such as catalytic and substrate binding sites. such interactions could be expected to exhibit competitive inhibitory effects. for cases where an smap prediction was made on the basis of a protein complex structure, we also identified predicted ligand binding sites at the interface between subunits, which may lead to disruption or prevention of protein complex formation in vivo and therefore have a deleterious impact on enzyme function. overlap between predicted top binding sites and native nucleotide and substrate binding sites occurred on ribd, partial overlap with the catalytic site of ispu, and almost complete overlap with the catalytic sites of both enta and fabg. the predicted binding sites for  <dig> completely overlapped with the catalytic site of ispa and overlapped with the substrate binding site and mg2+ ion binding site of ispb. in the case of 2ob, predicted binding sites showed at least partial overlap with the catalytic sites of phea, cyob, enta, atpb, and acpp. predicted 2ob binding sites also had implications with respect to two protein complexes, not exhibited with respect to the complex subunits in isolation. the predicted 2ob binding site on the cytochrome bo terminal oxidase appears at the interaction site between cyob and cyoc. the 2ob binding site also overlapped with the heme binding sites of the sdhc and sdhd subunits of the succinate dehydrogenase complex as well as the protein-protein interaction region between these subunits. these last few predictions speak to the importance of the complex expansion of the gem-pro, without which such molecular predictions involving multiple subunit interfaces would not have been possible.

simulation of phenotypes from antibacterial target inhibition
finally, we turned to the metabolic network portion of the e. coli gem-pro, ijo <dig>  <cit> , to simulate the outcomes of known and predicted binding events leading to inhibition of protein activity and determine whether or not these events may be detrimental to growth. first, we tested the ability of the model to accurately predict the phenotypic impact caused by inhibition of known targets of all control compounds . inhibition of all known and predicted binding targets of bgc led to no decrease in growth phenotype, accurately predicting the known outcome of the negative control. inhibition of positive control targets led to no growth or reduced growth rates in the model. in combination, the collective inhibition of all known targets for each positive control compound led to complete growth inhibition, but remarkably, most of these targets individually also led to complete loss of growth if inhibited, only failing to predict deleterious growth phenotypes upon inhibition of fbaa, tolc, and fola individually.

the effects of inhibition of smap-predicted targets were then evaluated in the model. each of the individual predicted protein targets reported in table  <dig> exhibited decreased or no growth upon full inhibition in simulation. these predictions helped to pare down the list of significant smap predictions to those that satisfy both lines of evidence for antibacterial effects. with the exception of the folp-ytz binding interaction, all of the interactions reported in table  <dig> are previously unknown, which suggests that in the case of positive control compounds, we may have uncovered previously unknown antibacterial targets. for the antibacterial compounds with unknown mechanisms of action, we predicted that inhibition of ispa and ispb by  <dig> leads to decreased growth rate and that inhibition of  <dig> individual proteins and  <dig> protein complexes by 2ob leads to decreased growth rate. further details of the specific pathways impacted by these inhibitory activities were investigated in the flux balance model. the mechanistic models of antibacterial activity of  <dig>  2ob, and potential inhibitors of trpb are summarized in figure  <dig>  with more detailed network flux maps provided in additional file 3: figure s <dig>  in the mechanistic model for  <dig> , ispa and ispb are inhibited leading to decreased isoprenoid synthesis activity and ultimately no model growth. the mechanistic model for 2ob  includes inhibition of several proteins  and protein complexes  participating in a variety of metabolic pathways  ultimately leading to no model growth.

we also tested if inhibition of the individual protein targets predicted by gene-knockout phenotypes to be effective antibacterial targets leads to growth deficits in the model and found that all three individual inhibitions lead to no growth in the model . however, as previously mentioned, our smap screens only predicted potential inhibitors of trpb. the mechanistic model for antibacterial activity of these compounds is presented in figure 4b, where any of f6f, plt, 7mn, idm, or pls are expected to inhibit trpb activity, thereby inhibiting tryptophan synthesis and leading to no growth in simulation.

discussion
in this study, we have demonstrated the first structural systems pharmacology antibacterial screens for the model bacterium e. coli. this effort was enabled in part through the expansion of the e. coli gem-pro to include protein complexes. in this attempt at reconstruction of metabolic protein complexes, we chose to utilize only those structures supported by strong experimental evidence; however, the scope of this reconstruction could be further expanded through modeling of protein complex structures, as has been attempted by others recently  <cit> . our previous and current efforts at reconstructing the e. coli metabolic gem-pro have enabled in silico exploration of diverse forms of physicochemical stress, but much broader expansions are likely to emerge and enable still more diverse avenues of investigation.

one important lesson learned from this study is that availability of only a few static structures to represent proteins may limit the sensitivity of ligand binding prediction. prospectively, molecular dynamics simulations could be used to generate ensembles of structures  <cit>  for each protein to perhaps include the conformations necessary to uncover more binding interactions, lending greater sensitivity to the prediction approach. generating such ensembles for the proteins included in this study would be a substantial effort given the high number of protein structures included in this gem-pro and the long simulation time scales necessary to model the large conformational changes often important for ligand binding  <cit> . the expected resultant increase in query database size would also dramatically increase smap runtime. nevertheless, such an undertaking would likely provide a very useful extension of the gem-pro as a resource for such screens.

the limiting step of the overall approach is the smap runtime, which if implemented on a similar computing resource to that used in this study  would be limited to the order of hundreds of compounds screened against the e. coli gem-pro or tens of protein inhibitor screens against the ligand-bound pdb structures. therefore, orders-of-magnitude more powerful computing resources would be necessary for massively parallel screens.

this study builds upon previous examples  <cit>  illustrating how structural and systems biology may combine to have an effect greater than they are capable of in isolation. for example, some of the smap predictions of lesser quantitative significance showed promise as antibacterial targets in simulation, sometimes accounting for known antibacterial targets that otherwise would have been called as false negatives by smap alone. conversely, although metabolic model predictions have previously been shown to accurately predict the effects of many targeted gene knockouts  <cit>  and have been applied to select individual and multiple antibacterial targets  <cit> , these metabolic models have not yet been capable of pairing these targets with compounds. not only does the expansion from the gem to gem-pro framework enable prediction of candidate compounds, it enables prediction of specific molecular mechanisms  that explain how the candidate compounds may affect the function of their targets.

in addition to providing a promising proof of principle that such a structural systems biology strategy can be used to understand antibacterial mechanisms, we have made specific predictions of chemical inhibitors of a protein currently unutilized for antibacterial applications  and previously unknown mechanisms of existing antibacterial compounds, both those with and without established mechanisms. these predictions represent experimentally testable hypotheses and were generated entirely in silico. therefore, structural systems pharmacology may seed rapid discovery in the area of antibacterials.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we developed an approach that can be used to predict and characterize antibacterial mechanisms either 1) by proteome-wide ligand binding target prediction and subsequent simulation of the effects of such interactions on growth or 2) by metabolic simulation of lethal protein loss of function and subsequent inhibitor prediction. this in silico approach bridges the gap between structural and systems pharmacology, linking molecular interactions with phenotypic outcomes. the gem-pro in this study enables proteome-wide binding site prediction specifically for e. coli metabolism, covering protein conformations in the physiological context of multimeric complexes including potential binding sites at protein-protein interfaces. this is a foundational resource for antibacterial development for pathogenic e. coli and related species. the gem-pro was utilized to predict binding sites on protein targets for known antibacterials with unknown mechanisms , binding sites on previously uncharacterized targets of well-studied antibacterials , and potential inhibitors of trpb. furthermore, metabolic model simulations predicted specific essential processes by which these binding interactions would lead to antibacterial effects. these represent experimentally-testable hypotheses, and this study as a whole serves as a useful proof of principle for the structural systems pharmacology analysis of antibacterials.

