BACKGROUND
following injury of peripheral nerves in adults, significant regeneration occurs but at a rate slower than in the young  <cit> . for example, using radiotracer studies pestronk et al.,  <cit>  found the average rate of regeneration of rat sciatic sensory neurons occurs at a rate of ~ <dig>  mm/day in animals that are  <dig> mo old and slows to a rate of  <dig>  mm/day in animals that are  <dig> mo old. based on these numbers regeneration of a nerve with a length of  <dig> m could be accelerated from ~ <dig> years to ~ <dig> year if rates of regeneration found in younger animals could be achieved in adults. if we understand the mechanics of axonal elongation, it could be possible to devise strategies to speed regeneration of peripheral nerves from years to months, allowing the reinnervation of distal muscles before the occurrence of irreversible loss of muscle function  <cit> .

while the molecular influences  underlying poor regeneration of adult peripheral neurons have been extensively analyzed  <cit> , the intrinsic biophysical properties of individual neurons have only recently been investigated  <cit> . our recent work using embryonic sensory neurons suggests that axonal elongation occurs through a two step process where forces at the growth cone stretch the axon and new material is added along the axonal shaft  <cit> . our mathematical modeling predicts the rate of axonal stretching/elongation is a function of the level of force generation at the growth cone, the strength of adhesions of the axon to the substrate, axonal diameter, and the mechanical stiffness  of the axon  <cit> . to determine if there are intrinsic biophysical differences that could explain the slow regeneration of adult sensory neurons, we used force calibrated towing needles to characterize the biophysical properties of neonate rat and adult rat axons. we found no difference in the adhesion levels between the neonate and adult rat neurons, but a significant difference in axonal viscosity that increased with developmental age.

RESULTS
the rate of axonal elongation decreases with aging
we chose to focus our analysis of aging on the biophysics of outgrowth of sensory neurons from neonatal and adult rats because their outgrowth is well characterized at the molecular and cellular levels  <cit> . this system has been of interest because adult sensory neuron axonal regeneration is enhanced by prior 'conditioning' lesions, which activate and inactivate the expression of groups of proteins linked to embryonic regeneration  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows an example of the outgrowth of unconditioned neonatal and adult sensory neurons. we found, as has been previously reported  <cit> , that the elongation of adult sensory neurons was characterized by extensive axonal branching and a relatively slow rate of outgrowth ). neurons from neonatal animals, also exhibited extensive branching, but had a significantly higher rate of axonal elongation than neurons from adult animals . these data are fully summarized in table  <dig>  the rates of growth were significantly different with p <  <dig>  using a two tailed t-test. these results confirm the premise that the rate of axonal regeneration decreases during aging.

note the embryonic data were previously published  <cit> 

the axons of adult sensory neurons lengthen by stretching
to determine how the mechanism of axonal elongation changes during aging, we stained the mitochondria along the axons and monitored the movement of the docked mitochondria during normal growth cone mediated axonal elongation . in the sensory neurons from neonatal and adult animals, we found that axonal elongation was coupled with axonal stretching, but with quantitative differences in the velocity profiles . analysis of the velocity profiles, reveals that the velocity of bulk movement along the neonatal axons was consistently higher as compared to the adult axons. the differences observed here suggested that sensory neurons from neonatal and adult neurons regenerate in vitro by the same fundamental mechanism  as we previously reported for embryonic neurons  <cit> . it raised the question of whether the slower rate of growth of the adult neurons was due to a difference in axonal diameter, adhesion strength to the substrate, axonal viscosity, or force generation at the growth cone.

axonal viscosity increases during aging
to determine the viscosity and the strength of adhesions, we applied known levels of forces to growth cones to experimentally stimulate elongation and analyzed the movement of docked mitochondria to measure the biophysical properties of neurons as previously described  <cit> . we found that the overall viscosity  of the neurons from adult animals was significantly higher  by a factor of  <dig> than neurons from neonatal animals . in contrast, there was a small but significant decrease  in axonal diameter . because g is a function of axonal diameter, the underlying differences in the intrinsic viscosities  were even larger. the g value of the adult neurons was 4× higher  than the neonatal and adult neurons . we did not observe significant differences  in the levels of adhesion between the neonatal and adult neurons . together these results suggested that a substantially higher intrinsic viscosity was the key biophysical difference between the neonatal and adult neurons.

growth cone force generation is not reduced during aging
one possibility to explain the slower rate of adult axonal elongation is that the growth cones generate lower levels of force. to investigate, we estimated force generation at the growth cones of neonatal and adult neurons with eq.  <dig> 

  f0=vgη. 

taking the average velocities  of axonal elongation  and using the values of g and η from table  <dig>  we found the level of force generation  in the neonatal and adult growth cones to be  <dig> and  <dig> µdynes respectively . as these data show the level of force generation in neonatal and adult growth cones is similar, a reduction in force generation seems unlikely to be the underlying factor that causes the reduction in regeneration during aging.

note the embryonic data were previously published  <cit> 

changes in sensory neuron growth cone size have been observed during embryonic development. in particular, growth cones from embryonic day  <dig> neurons grown on polylysine are 146% greater in size than neurons from embryonic day  <dig> neurons  <cit> . to determine if growth cone size is changing between postnatal and adult neurons, we measured their area. we found the average area of the neonatal growth cones to be  <dig> +/-  <dig> µm <dig>  and the area of the adult growth cones to be  <dig> +/-  <dig> µm <dig>  while there was a trend for adult growth cones to be larger, we did not find a significant difference in growth cone size using a two-tailed t-test.

discussion
as we age our bodies and minds become less flexible. presumably, this is the result of changes that are occurring at the cellular level. to determine if there are intrinsic biophysical changes in individual neurons that could explain the slowing of axonal regeneration that occurs during aging, we used force calibrated towing needles to characterize the biophysical properties of neonate rat and adult rat axons. we chose this type of neuron because they have been extensively characterized in terms of growth and the molecular changes that occur during regeneration  <cit> . we found no significant differences in terms of axonal diameter, adhesion strength, or force generation by the growth cone, that could explain the slowing of axonal regeneration during aging. yet we did find a significant increase in viscosity of the axons that increased with developmental age.

the conventional model of axonal elongation suggests that axonal elongation occurs primarily through a mechanism that involves the assembly of new axon at the tip of an otherwise stationary axonal framework  <cit> . in contrast, our recent work on the rapidly growing  embryonic chick sensory neurons suggests a stretch and intercalation model which proposes axonal elongation occurs through a two step process where forces generated at the growth cone stretch the axon and new material is added along the axonal shaft  <cit> . at a biophysical level, there are two simple possibilities that could explain the slowing of axonal regeneration that occurs during aging. the first is that the rate of elongation differs because the mechanism of growth differs   <cit> . the second is that the mechanism of elongation is the same, but that rates of elongation differ because of quantitative differences in key parameters. to distinguish between these possibilities we stained the mitochondria along the axons and monitored the movement of the docked mitochondria during normal growth cone mediated axonal elongation . as we observed in the sensory neurons from embryonic animals  <cit> , here we found that in neonatal and adult animals axonal elongation was coupled with axonal stretching, but with quantitative differences in the velocity profiles . we take this as evidence that these neurons share the same basic mechanism of outgrowth but differ quantitatively in terms of their biophysical properties.

based on our mathematical modeling, the slowing of elongation with aging could arise from an increase in the strength of adhesions  between the axons and the substrate, an increase in the diameter of the axons , an increase the intrinsic viscosity  of the axons, a decrease in the forces generated by the growth cones , or some combination of these variables. to experimentally test our predictions based on growth cone mediated axonal elongation, we applied known levels of forces to growth cones and analyzed the movement of docked mitochondria to measure the biophysical changes in the neurons that were occurring during aging. these experiments strongly suggested that the key factor was not an increase in the strength of adhesions , but rather an increase in total axonal viscosity . to determine if the increase in g was the result of a change in axonal diameter or intrinsic axonal viscosity, we measured axonal diameter. we found that neurons cultured from older animals had a significantly smaller axonal diameter, which indicates that the intrinsic viscosity  of the axons is increasing. based on our measurements of average rate of axonal elongation, axonal viscosity , and adhesion strength , we estimated the force generation at the growth cone  for sensory neurons cultured from the neonatal and adult rats. this formula suggested that force generation was similar in these two type of neurons . altogether, the most conservative interpretation of our data is that the primary factor limiting the rate of elongation in the adult neurons is their high intrinsic viscosity .

a caution to be noted in interpreting the adhesion data  is that our experiments were conducted on neurons grown on polyornithine. in vivo, laminin and chondroitin sulfate proeteoglycans are modulated through development and upregulated after peripheral nerve injury  <cit> . in addition the receptors for laminin, integrins, are developmentally regulated and when expressed increase regeneration following axotomy  <cit> . while we did not observe changes in adhesion strength for neurons grown on polyornithine as a function of age , such changes may be occurring. further analysis involving systematic analysis of adhesion on physiologically relevant substrates is needed and may reveal significant differences in substrate adhesion during neuronal maturation.

as we have previously conducted a biophysical analysis of the elongation of chicken embryonic sensory neurons  <cit> , it is of interest to compare the results published here with our previous work. nonetheless it is important to keep in mind that differences between the properties of the chicken sensory neurons with the rat sensory neurons could be attributed to species or age. with these considerations, in our measurements of axonal viscosity we found both total axonal viscosity  and intrinsic axonal viscosity  increased substantially with the developmental age of the animal . statistical analysis between the published and new data, revealed significant difference between all three groups . this suggests there is a progressive increase in axonal stiffness through the embryonic, neonatal, and adult developmental stages.

a previous analysis of the cellular changes that are occurring in growth cones during developmental maturation demonstrated that a significant  decrease in sensory neuron growth cone size occurs between embryonic day  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . this is correlated with a decrease in the sensitivity of axonal elongation to cytochalasin and an increase in the stability of the microtubule and neurofilament cytoskeletons. while we did not observe significant differences in growth cone size between neonatal and adult sensory neurons , our results are on balance consistent with the findings of jones et al.,  <cit> . in particular, our observation that axonal viscosity increases with age could be explained by increased stability of neurofilaments, as they observed following treatment with cytochalasin; and/or reduced microtubule dynamics, as they observed based on levels of tyrosinated tubulin and eb <dig> comet velocity  <cit> .

our reported differences in axonal viscosity are likely to reflect changes in the expression patterns of genes involved in axonal elongation and regeneration  <cit> . viscosity is minimally a complex function of molecular events such as sliding of cross-linked polymers, microtubule and actin assembly in response to tension, and membrane addition to the plasma membrane  <cit> . during periods of rapid elongation associated with development and regeneration, tubulin expression is increased and neurofilament expression is decreased  <cit> . how changes in tubulin expression might change axonal viscosity are at present unknown, but as it has been shown that the application of forces to non-neuronal cells induces microtubule polymerization  <cit> , increasing the availably of tubulin may act to decrease the amount of force needed to lengthen the axon . in contrast, reduction of neurofilament expression may decrease axonal viscosity  <cit>  . finally, there are changes in the expression of maps and tau that are correlated with development and regeneration following axotomy in sensory neurons  <cit> . changes in the composition of cytoskeletal associated proteins could contribute to altered assembly dynamics and cross-linking , either of which could increase axonal viscosity in adult neurons. axonal regeneration involves changes in a multitude of molecular pathways  <cit> , a major challenge for the future is to link specific proteins to cellular biophysical parameters.

CONCLUSIONS
our work is the first to examine the biophysical changes that occur in individual neurons during aging. we found adult axons grew ~30% slower and were  <dig> times intrinsically stiffer than neonatal axons. taken together our results suggest targeted molecular approaches to decreasing axonal stiffness may be part of an effective strategy to accelerate the regeneration of axons in the adult peripheral nervous system.

