BACKGROUND
dimeric transcription factors often bind to bipartite genomic sequence elements  in promoters, which are composed of two adjacent degenerate motifs with four possible orientations, separated by a flexible nucleotide spacer of unspecified sequence  <cit> . for example, nuclear receptor transcription factors, which form homo- or heterodimeric complexes, can potentiate transcription of downstream target genes by binding of degenerate bipartite sites that display partial internal sequence symmetry  <cit> . characterization of these motifs, locating these sites, orientations and estimation of their binding affinities is crucial to understanding transcriptional responses to developmental and environmental cues.

bipartite sequence patterns can be discovered by de novo methods that enumerate, such as spaced dyad  <cit>  and structured motif  <cit>  algorithms, and with position weight matrices , such as those used by bioprospector  <cit>  and bipad  <cit> . given a set of unaligned dna sequences sharing a common bipartite or single-block pattern, the bipad algorithm finds such patterns that maximizes total information content  <cit> , which is computed from the information contents for left- and right motifs, and a gap penalty based on the surprisal function. the site information contents are related to their binding strengths  <cit> , which can then be verified in the laboratory  <cit> . bipad simultaneously searches each of the four possible types of orientations  for a given bipartite pattern. the single-block motif can be treated as a bipartite pattern with zero length nucleotide gap between half-sites. bipad outputs two pwm matrices for half-site models and associated gap distribution for a bipartite pattern search or one pwm matrix for one-block motif. using a stochastic greedy search strategy driven by a set of randomly seeds , bipad performs multiple local alignment and cyclic refinement of the search operation for a specified number of cycles. additional cycles lead the search toward the preferred solution and reduce the likelihood of producing inferior alignments that may arise during a single cycle.

bipad performed equivalently or better in both de novo single-block and bipartite motif discovery, particularly for sites with conserved binding sequences that are present on both strands  <cit> . we benchmarked bipad against other popular de novo local alignment software, including glam, gibbs sampler, and consensus, using experimentally-verified e. coli crp binding sites. bipad exhibited better sensitivity and specificity than gibbs and consensus and results equivalent to those obtained with glam  <cit> . for bipartite motif discovery, we compared bipad with bioprospector  <cit> . bipad is uniquely designed to recognize binding sites on either strand , increasing its sensitivity for detection of reverse direct and inverted half sites  <cit> . unlike bioprospector, bipad assumes a uniform underlying genomic composition. the objective function is thus reduced to one that minimizes shannon entropy, which simplifies the mathematical model and accelerates numerical computation. the convergence in each cycle is therefore very rapid; this property supports implementation of bipad as a distributed computational process that will be especially useful in aligning large datasets. indeed, bipad generalizes the bipartite motif discovery problem to allow any range of gap lengths to be specified and permits the two half motifs to be either homogeneous  or heterogeneous .

however, multiple local alignment algorithms such as bipad are susceptible to producing sub-optimal alignments that result from detection of local minima of the objective function, rather than producing a global optimal alignment. bipad avoids local minima by running a specified number of cycles, with each cycle initiating with different sets of binding site coordinates. this stochastic cycling strategy has proven to be efficient, but it does not ensure a global optimum  <cit> .

the bipad web server performs sequence pattern discovery of functionally-related dna sequences, typically containing binding sites recognized by a cognate protein, embedded within a heterogeneous sequence background. the public web interface, which is written in perl, executes the bipad program. the web program displays the bipartite  information model as a graphical sequence logo that reveals conserved sequence patterns and their corresponding gap histogram of spacer lengths. a table is also produced that indicates the individual information contents of each of the binding sites and other important model characteristics.

implementation
web input
the program is run once all required parameters are specified and sequences are either entered directly or uploaded from a file. results are either sent via email or are generated on-the-fly. a detailed description, a web snapshot and sample datasets are available on-line  <cit> .

registration
the bipad server can be accessed in either guest or registration mode. guests are required to enter a valid email address in order to receive results, since individual information theory is patented. graphical output  is produced only for registered users. a project title is required, which is also used to label the sequence logo of the binding site alignment. unless explicitly specified, text output is sent by electronic mail.

search pattern and alignment mode
a search pattern is defined in the most general sense. the search pattern can be either a single-block or bipartite motif which is specified by the lengths of the conserved sequence elements and lengths of the sequences, if any, which separate them. the sequence models may be constrained by specifying that the search identify either one site per input sequence  or zero or one sites per sequence . the respective half-site motifs may be homogeneous  or heterogeneous . the configuration of a bipartite pattern may have four potential half-site orientations: direct repeat , reversed dr , inverted repeat , and everted repeat .

the bipad program can search for all possible orientations on either a single strand  or on both strands . the alignment mode should be specified based on biological evidence or hypothesis, for example, structural or experimental evidence that a protein contacts sequences on a single or both strands. searches for the best alignments of sequences on both strands are slower than those involving a single strand.

the motif width for a single-block search is specified in the first box of the site width field. it is recommended that a variety of motif widths be explored based either on functional binding site laboratory data or empirical methods . if the optimal bipartite search pattern is requested, the left- and right-half motifs are specified in the first and second fill-in boxes, respectively. the minimum and maximum gap lengths are also respectively entered in adjacent fill-in boxes.

typical searches for bipartite patterns require about twice as long as single-block motifs having the same total width. note that a single-block is equivalent to zero-gap bipartite pattern, in which two motifs are merged together. lengthy gaps or broad gap length ranges can increase the time required to determine bipartite motifs, but in most instances, program completes within a minute . the default parameters for half-site and gap length widths have been restricted in order to ensure reasonable multiuser server performance. half-site widths are permitted to range between  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides in length. gap lengths between half sites can range from  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides.

number of cycles
in a single monte carlo cycle, it is possible for the bipartite local alignment to converge to a local optimum. however, large datasets, searches for subtle motifs characterized by low average information, and bipartite alignment on both strands each require additional cycles to ensure that the preferred alignment will be produced. increasing the number of cycles increases the confidence that results obtained are the best alignment achievable with this algorithm, at the expense of only a modest drop in server performance . a  <dig> cycle limit is imposed on model building due to finite server capacity.

the relationships between cycle number and run time, and between cycle number and total information content are illustrated by the bipartite alignment of chromatin scaffold/matrix attachment region binding sites . increases in cycle number are correlated linearly with the time needed to find the optimal alignment. in this instance, two cycles were sufficient to determine the best bipartite alignment, and further cycling was unnecessary. this default parameter is set to  <dig> cycles, however it is recommended that a variety of cycling criteria be tested to ensure that a stable solution is obtained.

dna sequences
fasta-formatted dna sequences are entered in the sequence field text box or files can be uploaded. only unambiguous lower or upper case nucleotide symbols are permissible {a, c, g, and t}. each sequence may be up to  <dig> kb in length and the number of input sequences is limited to a maximum of  <dig> .

refinement
model refinement is not performed unless this option is specifically requested. the refinement procedure batch executes a series of runs over the specified range of site and gap length widths. the procedure outputs a unit information incremental  plot, which facilitates comparison of information contents gained among a series of potential binding site models. the best model achievable with the bipad algorithm is the one exhibiting the maximum uii <cit> .

the specified range of core motif widths should be guided by experimental binding site evidence, if available. generally speaking, a range of half-site widths averaging 5-mer length half-site would be a reasonable starting point to perform multiple trials of many dna-protein interactions. input site lengths shorter than  <dig> nucleotides are more likely to generate false positive motifs and generally do not represent biologically meaningful binding sites  <cit> . very high sequence conservation across a putative binding site warrants further exploration of a wider range of binding site motifs in order to mitigate against the possibility that the model may be truncated at either end. false positive motifs with high information contents may be mitigated by eliminating or pre-filtering, recurrent, low-complexity tandem repeated sequences, if possible, from input sequences  <cit> . this is particularly important for sets of eukaryotic intergenic non-coding sequences which frequently contain runs of often imperfect homopolymeric sequences that produce minimum entropies that may not be relevant to protein binding.

other options
the lengths of sequences flanking a motif, and the output delivery method may be specified. flanking nucleotides are displayed in lower case and motifs are shown as upper case. if the specified flanking sequences extend beyond the boundaries of the input sequence, a dash is indicated at those positions. by default, flanking nucleotides are not displayed.

constraints on the number of aligned dna sequences, the maximum number of monte carlo cycles, maximum half-site widths and gap lengths can be relaxed upon request.

web output
results can be optionally displayed either on-line or sent to the user by electronic mail. if results are output via electronic mail , the bipad-mailer.pl program sends the bipad output text file to the destination specified in the username field. this file contains:  the search parameters and minimum entropy after search;  information weight matrix or matrices and a separate frequency matrix formatted for bipartite logo plotter ;  gap length distribution;  a list of nucleotide motifs, their sequence coordinates and information contents for each potential binding site; and  parameters used to generate sequence logo with bipad_logo.pl. the on-line display dynamically produces a sequence logo  drawn in pdf, png and eps formats. a bipartite logo is produced by inserting a central gap between two half-site motif logos at the zero coordinate. if the central gap length exceeds maximum permissible gap , a 10-nucleotide gap will be displayed. in addition, we provide an auxiliary sequence logo plotting function to display motif using pre-aligned or user-defined matrices .

bipartite sequence models  <cit>  dynamically generate a histogram in both graphic and text format that corresponds to the lengths of gaps between half-sites. in addition, a motif table is generated as part of the bipad text output which displays the names of the sequences taken from the fasta input and the corresponding half site and total individual information contents for each site.

auxiliary function: bipartite sequence logo plotter
given either a single frequency matrix or two half site matrices , the plotter will draw the corresponding sequence logos. the plotter is capable of performing several operations on the original matrices including transforming the "first" matrix by reverse complementation, transforming the "second" matrix through the same operation, transformation of "both" or "none" of the matrices. only untransformed  and "first" matrix transformation operations can be carried out on single-block matrices. the central gap length of the sequence logo may be specified for bipartite matrices, however the default size is  <dig> bp. other options, ie. logo name and size, can also be defined by the user. detailed input instructions and a working example can be found at  <cit> . the bipartite output file also includes a separate frequency matrix specifically formatted for use with the bipartite logo plotter.

RESULTS
case studies
to illustrate results produced by the server, we analyzed single-block and bipartite sequences recognized by several dna-binding proteins . hormone responsive elements  may be recognized by nuclear hormone receptors which bind as monomers , homodimers  and heterodimers . the server was also used to compute models of chromatin matrix attachment regions  which are composed of heterogeneous bipartite binding elements. bipartite models for the same datasets generated with either the oops or the zoops parameter produced identical alignments. the unaligned sequences used in the preparation of these models are available on the bipad website.

ftz-f1α  is an orphan nuclear receptor known to bind as a monomer to hres containing the consensus sequence, tcaaggtca. expression of ftz-f1α occurs in precursors of adrenal steroidogenic tissue and gonadal steroid-producing cells  <cit> . experimentally verified monomeric binding sequences  <cit>  were aligned with bipad. the motif width was set as  <dig> bps on forward strand and one cycle was run to find the motif, as this is a small dataset in which motif length is equal to the sequence length. the average information content is  <dig>  bits per site. the single-block sequence logo is indicated in figure 2a.

hnf4α  binds as a homodimer to dr hres separated by one or two nucleotides . hnf4α was initially identified as a transcription factor required for liver-specific gene expression, and later was shown to be expressed high level in liver, kidney, intestine, and pancreas and at low levels in the testis  <cit> . the average information model is based on  <dig> validated binding sequences and flanking sequences that have been collated from multiple genes and species  <cit> ; . due to limited available flanking sequence and experimental observation, the bipartite search pattern was constrained to 6< <cit> > <dig> and the optimal bipartite alignment was found in a single monte carlo cycle. assuming that all orientations could be bound, nearly all of the sites identified by bipad were dr. the average information content per bipartite site is  <dig>  bits. the discovered patterns are consistent with the experimentally verified sites  <cit>  and those produced by bioprospector.

in figure 2d, genomic elements of scaffold/matrix attachment regions , which delineate structural and functional organization in eukaryotic genomes <cit> , are modelled. a bipartite sequence element associated with s/mars has been reported based on sequences of  <dig> bipartite elements from different species . the resultant model is expected to detect a highly conserved subset of potential s/mar elements that are common to these and related species. the sequences containing potential sites were embedded on the same strand in an average human genomic background  to form sequences  <dig> nucleotides in length, allowing for a large range of potential inter-half site distances. five overlapping sites separated by 1-bp gaps were embedded, since bipad is not configured to handle overlapping binding sites. the proposed matrix attachment region recognition signature  is represented by a pair of degenerate asymmetric half-sites , separated by a nucleotide spacer of up to  <dig> bp in length. the bipartite search pattern was set to 16< <cit> > <dig> on the forward strand and  <dig> cycles was sufficient to locate all the embedded mrs sites, except for two left half-sites. in the first case, the half-site is shifted  <dig> nucleotides away from its original location and has higher information content  than the embedded sequence , whereas the second left half-site is  <dig> bps downstream of the implanted motif and its information content is very similar to that of the original site . for this reason, the aligned sequence motif has, on average, slightly more information  than the experimentally determined sequence  for left-half site. the total average information content per mrs site is  <dig>  bits, with the right-half site being more conserved  than the left-half . thus, the right-half is somewhat more highly conserved than the left-half site . the sequence logo reveals that the model to be more heterogeneous than the published mrs consensus sequence and the half site sequence patterns are somewhat different.

refinement
performance vs. sequence length
to examine the performance of bipad for detection of true binding sites in sequences of varying lengths, we embedded the mrs binding sites in background sequences having either a uniform equiprobable nucleotide distribution or an average human genomic composition . we embedded exactly one mrs site in each background sequence  and varied the lengths of each of the background sequences from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp . the average performance  in each group is shown in figure  <dig>  for sequences less than  <dig> kb in length, binding sites were detected with accuracy of over 80% regardless of background composition; however, as the sequence length increases, the performance decreases monotonically. it is interesting to note, however, that mrs sites embedded in a background having a composition similar to that of the human genome were more easily detected in longer sequences  compared to sites embedded in uniformly-distributed background.

CONCLUSIONS
the web service presented here can be used for either a priori detection or ab initio discovery of single-block or bipartite binding sites. the examples provided demonstrate that bipad can be broadly applied to many different types of motifs, regardless of their level of sequence conservation  <cit> . we evaluated server performance by constructing models of published binding sites for several transcription factors and chromatin binding proteins. the motif sites found by the bipad server are consistent with sequences that have been experimentally identified as binding sites. however, a domain-specific understanding of the protein-nucleic acid interactions for particular protein is essential in selecting realistic parameters  that take advantage of bipad's capabilities. site information contents predicted by bipad are related to their corresponding binding affinity and can be experimentally validated. by interactively exploring various pattern lengths and orientations, the web server efficiently provides reasonable computational models for experimentally-validated binding site data.

the bipad algorithm assumes zero or one bipartite site to be present in each training sequence. bipad does not utilize multiple degenerate tfbs recognized by the same factor in a single sequence; to include all experimentally validated sites in the same promoter in a bipartite model, intervals containing individual tfbs should be separated into different input sequences.

the software was originally designed and implemented for localizing nuclear receptor binding sites that are often bipartite patterns, some containing half-sites in all possible orientations. however, the program can be used to efficiently identify single-block motifs as well  <cit> , as this is a special case of bipartite motif definition.

we plan to extend bipad for large-scale genomic sequence analysis, however this task will be challenging. although many tools for discovery of tfbs elements have been developed, a comprehensive solution that accurately defines binding sites in genomic sequences has been elusive for a variety of reasons  <cit> . the known limitations in computational methods cannot be overcome until several significant laboratory-derived problems are addressed. collections of binding sites recognized by the same protein are known to exhibit pervasive systematic bias  <cit> . as we have shown, inadequate localization of binding sites in sequence data from chromatin immunoprecipitation assays can compromise accurate detection of subtle binding site signals. finally, false positive binding sites can be introduced through microarray- derived artifacts in chip-chip hybridizations <cit> . a complete and accurate biological understanding of dna-protein interactions is a prerequisite to the accurate identification of binding sites in long genomic sequences.

list of abbreviations
bipad – bipartite pattern discovery

availability and requirements
• project name: modeling bipartite cis-elements, bipad

• project home page: 

• operating system: platform independent

• programming language: c++ and perl

• other requirements: none

• license: see:

• use restrictions for non-academics: see 

authors' contributions
cb and pkr conceived of the project, and cb designed and implemented the algorithms. both authors wrote the manuscript.

