BACKGROUND
the 3d structure of a protein is an essential component in elucidating biological functions at the molecular level. protein-ligand binding sites and their interactions with binding partners provide strong correlations between structure and function and are thus critical for addressing a wide range of fundamental and practical problems in biology. knowledge of protein-ligand binding sites provides not only critical clues in elucidating the relationships to evolution, structure and function, but also contributes to drug discovery. knowledge of such sites may be used to identify and validate drug targets, prioritize and optimize drug leads, rationalize small molecule screening and docking, guide medicinal chemistry efforts and computationally evaluate adme/tox properties of preclinical drugs. to derive knowledge of the ligand binding site from the exponentially increasing amount of structural data, it is critical to develop a sensitive and robust algorithm that can identify and characterize the ligand binding sites of proteins on a proteome-wide scale.

shape descriptors representing protein structure, such as depth  <cit> , surface curvature  <cit> , extreme elevation  <cit> , solid angle  <cit> , surface area  <cit>  and volume  <cit> , have been used extensively to identify, study and compare protein-ligand interactions, protein-protein interactions and the respective binding sites. for example, the extreme elevation approach is used for geometric alignment during protein docking  <cit> . the match of small molecules to protein binding sites has been studied using the molecular shape complementarities of solid angles  <cit> . besides predictions of ligand orientations, one of the biggest challenges in any docking study is to obtain an accurate estimate of the binding affinity while including the intrinsic flexibility of the protein and the ligand. soft docking provides a solution to these problems  <cit> . the adaptive scoring function for soft docking requires a defined "hard" and "soft" interaction range between the protein and the ligand. furthermore, the accuracy in estimating binding affinity can be dramatically improved with the docking score index  from multiple ligand, multiple protein docking  <cit> . the use of a virtual ligand has been proposed to extend the dsi schema for genome-wide high throughput screening  <cit> . the success of the proposed dsi method critically depends on the generation of the virtual ligand, which is a negative image of the ligand binding site. it is still an open question how to define such a virtual ligand, or equivalently the boundary to the ligand binding site. geometry based methods are very useful in detecting pockets and cavities within the protein structure  <cit> , and can be applied independently or combined with other evolutionary  <cit>  or physical based methods  <cit> . although these existing methods  <cit>  can locate the binding pockets accurately, the accurate definition of the pocket boundary remains rather poor  <cit> . this inaccurate description limits further application for protein-ligand docking and functional site comparison. moreover, the geometrical measurement of pockets and cavities using shape descriptors such as volume and curvature alone is not a good indicator to distinguish true binding pockets from false positives  <cit> .

nevertheless, geometric constraints have been used extensively to assess the similarity between functional sites  <cit> . most of these studies focus on the local shape of the protein using distance, curvature, and side chain orientation that are sensitive to conformational changes of either the side chains or backbone. to extend the scope of functional site comparison algorithms, it is necessary to develop topological and geometric invariants that are less sensitive to the flexibility and uncertainty inherent in the protein structure, yet still provide a useful metric. in summary, there are several drawbacks in using conventional shape descriptors for the protein structure when applied to ligand binding studies. first, most of these measurements capture the local property of the protein structure and do not distinguish between the ligand binding and non-binding site. second, some shape descriptors require an all-atom representation of the protein structure, making the algorithm computationally intensive. finally, existing algorithms are sensitive to conformational changes in the protein structure and are intolerant to the uncertainty inherent in homology models and low resolution structures. given these shortcomings we propose a new method for protein shape description of the protein structure that is scalable to a large data set of proteins yet robust enough to handle the intrinsic properties of protein flexibility. inherent in the method is the provision of the location and boundary of any binding pocket, thus providing a new approach to the study of protein-ligand interactions.

details are given in the methods section, but in summary the topological relationships among cα atoms in the protein are established using delaunay tessellation  <cit>  of these atoms in 3d space. from the delaunay tessellation of the reduced representation of the protein structure, shape descriptors such as the direction of the cα atom relative to the surface can be determined. the notion of a geometric potential is further introduced to quantitatively characterize the so-called shape formed by the set of cα atoms. the geometric potential is analogous to the hydrophobicity or electrostatics potential in that it is dependent on both the global shape of the protein structure as well as the surrounding environment of the residue. the geometric potential has been successfully applied in a new algorithm for ligand binding site comparison . here we focus on a detailed description of the geometric potential algorithm and applications that predict the ligand binding site.

RESULTS
features of the geometric potential
as described in the methods section a new shape descriptor, the geometric potential, has been developed to characterize protein structures. the geometric potential is used to distinguish the ligand binding site from non-ligand binding sites. figure  <dig> shows the distribution of the geometric potential for residues  and residue clusters  that are involved and not involved in the ligand binding from the benchmark dataset, respectively. the geometric potential for the majority of non-binding site residues and residue clusters is close to zero, whereas it is centered around  <dig> for binding site residue clusters, and clearly separated from non-binding site residue clusters. this discrimination implies that the geometric potential can be used as a feature to distinguish ligand binding and non-binding sites.

unlike local measurements of geometric properties such as solvent accessible surface area, the standard deviation for the geometric potential for the majority of binding sites is quite small , as shown in figure  <dig>  the standard deviation in relative solvent accessible surface area with a probe radius of  <dig>  Å is above  <dig>  on a  <dig> scale for most of the binding sites. thus, the geometric potential proves to be synonymous with the binding site and can be used to segment proteins into biological meaningful residue clusters with clearly defined boundaries.

rank accuracy
the predicted ligand binding sites were ranked from highest to lowest based on the geometric potential for each protein . whether or not a binding site is predicted correctly depends on the tolerance of percentage of matched residues between predicted and known binding site. for predicted binding site residues with above 50% residues in common with the known binding site , approximately  <dig> % and 75% of known ligand binding sites are ranked as the top one and top three, respectively. alternatively, if the goal is to locate the ligand binding site, above  <dig> % and  <dig> % of test cases can be correctly predicted as one of the top one and three, respectively with a sensitivity above 10%. these results further indicate that the geometric potential is a useful feature to assess the significance of predicted binding sites.

boundary sensitivity and specificity
as stated previously, one weakness of most existing algorithms is the inability to accurately define the boundary of the predicted binding site. both sensitivity and specificity are important to define the boundary of the prediction. it is relatively easy to achieve high sensitivity and cover all of the binding site residues. in an extreme example, all residues in a protein can be predicted as a binding site so that the sensitivity is 100%. however, it is not trivial to predict the residue coverage with both high sensitivity and specificity. as shown in figure  <dig>  for the benchmark dataset the specificity of our algorithm is high, with greater than 90% of known ligand binding sites predicted with residue specificity above 80% . at the same time over 80% of known ligand binding sites are correctly predicted with sensitivity above 50%. taking both sensitivity and specificity into account, as shown in figure  <dig>  around 85% of binding sites can be identified with sensitivity above 50% and specificity above 80%. thus, besides accurately identifying the location of the ligand binding site, the algorithm also clearly defines the boundary. a clear boundary definition is important for application to protein-ligand docking, virtual screening, and ligand binding site comparison.

comparison to other algorithms
the convex hull and related α-shape algorithms  have been applied by others to identify ligand binding pockets  <cit> . these methods were developed on the basis of the all-atom representation of the protein structure. although it is possible to apply them to the cα only representation, extensive work on parameterization may be required. for example, it is not trivial to define the optimum value of one parameter, the probe radius, for the cα only representation using castp  <cit> . the standard setting of  <dig>  Å is too small to define the surface of the protein. as a result, extended tunnels are formed across the protein. conversely, a probe with a larger radius will leave a number of binding site residues inaccessible. figure  <dig> shows an example of ligand binding prediction by castp  <cit> . the prediction is quite sensitive to the choice of the probe radius using a cα only representation. the predicted binding site covers half of the protein with a probe radius of  <dig>  Å because of the formation of tunnels. the sensitivity and specificity of the correctly predicted binding pocket are close to the all-atom representation when the probe radius is  <dig>  Å . however, another pocket with a similar volume  and area  to the correct one is identified. it is not a real pocket but rather forms an interface between helices. increasing the probe radius to  <dig>  Å results in a number of the binding site residues being buried, thus the sensitivity of the predicted binding site drops significantly. moreover, the detected pockets from these algorithms could only be ranked with their volumes and areas. these shape descriptors are less significant in distinguishing the binding sites  <cit> . as a comparison, the ligand binding site from the same protein is ranked by the geometric potential at the top one with sensitivity of 100% and specificity of 90%.

time complexity
the algorithm is implemented using the java programming language and tested on a non-dedicated personal computer with  <dig>  ghz single processor and  <dig>  gb ram. as shown in figure  <dig>  the time complexity is approximated to o, but fast enough for real applications. for most proteins consisting of fewer than  <dig> amino acids, the whole structure can be scanned in less than  <dig>  seconds.

discussion
general concept of the geometric potential
the current implementation of the geometric potential is computationally straightforward and conceptually analogous to a residue's electrostatic potential or hydrophobicity, both of which depend on both the global shape of the protein structure and the surrounding environment of the residue. suppose that the protein is an insulator with a homogenous hydrophilic surface and surrounded by solvent with positive charge. each of the residues represented by cα atoms carries a unit of negative charge. the electrostatic potential essentially reflects the residue's geometrical characteristics at the surface and in the pocket/cavity. the electrostatic potential is most negative in a closed cavity, less negative in an open pocket, almost neutral on a flat surface, and most positive on a convex surface. thus, the geometric potential can, in theory, be computed using rigorous energy-based methods such as poisson-boltzmann for the electrostatic free energy  <cit>  on a protein structure with a reduced representation of residues and charges. in other words, if non-specific interactions such as van der waals interactions are used to predict ligand binding sites  <cit> , they provide almost identical information to that derived from geometric properties. however, the direct energy based method usually requires an all-atom representation of the protein and the accurate estimation of the interaction energy is not trivial. consequently, it is possible to integrate the geometric and topological properties characterized by the geometric potential with energy-based physical potentials into a unified framework to study protein-ligand binding.

relationship to other algorithms
the convex hull and related α-shape algorithm  have been applied by others to identify ligand binding pockets  <cit> . other approaches usually require an all-atom representation of the protein structure. here, with one simple parameter which uses the radius of the circumscribed sphere from the delaunay tessellation, a cα atom representation is sufficient. as a result, the algorithm is theoretically two orders of magnitude faster than all atom approaches because the time complexity of 3d delaunay tessellation is o where n is the number of input points. moreover, as shown, the algorithm is not sensitive to conformational changes of the protein, especially the side chains.

the geometric potential provides a more robust quantitative measurement of the geometrical and topological properties of the pocket and cavity taking into account both the global and local environment surrounding the amino acid residue and hence offers advantages over more conventional measurements such as depth  <cit> , travel depth  <cit> , surface curvature  <cit> , surface area  <cit>  and volume  <cit> . recent studies have shown that depth is a more important attribute than curvature, volume and other shape descriptors in distinguishing drugable binding sites  <cit> . however, the depth or the travel depth of an amino acid residue in a pocket cannot indicate whether the residue resides in a narrow or wide open pocket with the same depth. moreover, the depth cannot distinguish flat and convex surfaces if they have the same depths. the geometric potential distinguishes these cases. the depth used in our studies to initialize the geometric potential is quite simple and not as accurate as the travel depth proposed by coleman et al.  <cit> . however, it is straightforward to implement and incorporate the travel depth concept into our approach by replacing the distance to the closed plane with the travel depth during computing the geometric potential. other geometric or topological measurements such as the distance to the centric of the protein  <cit>  and closeness centrality  <cit> , which are able to distinguish ligand binding and non-binding sites, can also be used to initialize the geometric potential.

limitations of the algorithm and future work
ligand binding is primarily a physics phenomenon, depending on fundamental thermodynamics and kinetics. therefore, the ligand binding site may be best studied with an energy-based method, such as protein-ligand docking  <cit> , grid potential mapping  <cit> , or solvent/fragment mapping  <cit> . however, docking is not only time consuming computationally, but also inaccurate in estimating the binding energy. geometric properties of the protein structure, such as pockets and cavities, provide rational constraints to address the docking problem. another important constraint on the ligand binding site comes from evolution. the identification of conserved residues from sequence analysis significantly reduces the search space thus aiding the location of the ligand binding site. therefore, the identification of the location and boundary of the ligand binding site is best achieved by integrating protein features associated with geometry, evolution and energy. while not yet completed, the concept of the geometric potential as described here provides a quantitative framework to combine these sources of information.

the approach presented here is extensible and can be used to predict protein-protein binding sites. the majority of these sites are formed from relatively flat surfaces and thus their geometric potentials are less distinguishable than those of pockets and cavities. solvent vectors have previously been used to define protein-protein interaction interfaces  <cit> . the global direction of the residue from our algorithm provides a more robust method than the solvent vector to cluster the residues involved in protein-protein ligand binding and further define its boundary. moreover, if the real hydrophobicity and/or the electrostatic energy are used as the initial value for the geometric potential, it is possible to quantitatively distinguish the protein-protein binding site.

CONCLUSIONS
we introduce a new efficient and robust algorithm that quantitatively characterizes the geometric properties of the protein structure. the geometric potential is dependent on both the global shape of the protein structure as well as the surrounding environment of the residue. in this sense it is analogous to the hydrophobicity or electrostatic potential. when applying the geometric potential to ligand binding site prediction, the top three predictions contain more than 75% of the known binding sites and provide at least 50% coverage of the ligand binding site residues. approximately 85% of known ligand binding sites can be accurately identified with above 50% residue coverage and 80% specificity for all predicted binding sites. moreover, the algorithm is fast enough for proteome-scale applications. proteins with fewer than  <dig> amino acids can be scanned in less than two seconds. the algorithm provides a framework for integrating evolution, energy, and further geometry-based parameters to study protein-ligand interactions on a proteome-wide scale.

