BACKGROUND
the only known albino gorilla named snowflake  was a male wild-born western lowland gorilla  from equatorial guinea. he was brought to the barcelona zoo in  <dig> at young age  <cit> , where he gained popularity worldwide. snowflake presented the typical properties of albinism as seen in humans: white hair, pink skin, blue eyes, reduced visual acuity and photophobia. given his lack of pigmentation and thus reduced protection from uv light, the aged albino gorilla developed squamous-cell carcinoma that led to his euthanasia in  <dig>  <cit> .

snowflake was diagnosed with non-syndromic albinism . this is a group of mendelian recessive disorders characterized by the generalized reduction of pigmentation in skin, hair, and eyes. pigmentation is determined by melanin compounds, which are produced in melanocytes and are transported via melanosomes into keratinocytes of the epidermis and hair follicles. it has been widely studied in humans and four genes are found to be causative of this disorder:  oca1a/b  are caused by mutations in the gene tyr   mutations in the oca <dig> gene  can cause oca <dig> phenotype   mutations in tyrp <dig> cause oca <dig>  and  oca <dig>  is caused by mutations in slc45a <dig>   <cit> . tyrosinase and tyrp <dig> are critical in the melanin synthesis pathway whereas p protein  and slc45a <dig> are involved in melanocytes maintenance or formation.

a previous study tried to assess whether the causative mutation of snowflake’s albinism was located in the tyr gene but no causative mutation was found  <cit> . here, we make use of whole genome sequencing to provide a better characterization of all known genes related to albinism to try to ascertain the genetic component causing this phenotype and to study genome wide patterns that can help the field of conservation genetics. most of the knowledge about ecology, population dynamics, demography and social behavior about gorillas has been collected from mountain gorillas  and until recently this has not expanded to western lowland gorillas  <cit> . this effort has been extremely helpful to improve our knowledge and conservation of this endangered species. with the development of conservation genetics we have gained insights into population genetics  <cit> , demographic history  <cit>  and group relationships through the usage of both microsatellites and mitochondrial markers. the main difficulty of these studies is that non-invasive samples such as hair or feces cannot provide dna of high quality.

here, using high quality dna and next-generation sequencing, we have studied for the first time the whole genome of a wild born western lowland gorilla. it is important to stress that previous whole-genome sequencing projects of western lowland gorillas, involved captive-born individuals, kamilah  <cit>  and kwan  <cit> , individuals that do not belong to a wild population as it has been recently studied with microsatellite markers  <cit> . studying this unique albino gorilla, we find the first evidence of inbreeding in wild western lowland gorillas.

RESULTS
we sequenced the genome of snowflake at  <dig> × effective coverage using the illumina gaiix platform . we aligned the reads to the reference human genome  using gem  <cit> , and used samtools  <cit>  to identify single nucleotide variants  . we found  <dig>  homozygous non-synonymous snowflake’s mutations compared to the human reference genome. out of those,  <dig> were found within candidate genes for albinism , but a single mutation was private compared to two other sequenced gorillas   <cit> . this substitution is located in the last exon of the slc45a <dig> gene at the position hg19: chr5_33944794_c/g and it causes a substantial amino acid change, glycine to arginine,  in a predicted transmembrane region of the protein. we then resequenced this mutation using capillary sequencing and it was confirmed as homozygous in snowflake and heterozygous in all five tested non-albino offspring, as expected in mendelian recessive disorders. to rule out the possible participation of other candidate genes, we also looked for structural variants that may be disrupting other genes related to pigmentation. we applied computational methods based on paired-end and split read approaches to detect genomic deletions , followed by experimental validation using array-comparative genomic hybridization . we identified  <dig>  validated deletions totaling to  <dig>  mbps, a similar proportion of the genome compared to previous reports  <cit>  . these deletions overlap completely with  <dig> refseq transcripts and partially  with  <dig> transcripts  but none of them has a direct association with albinism.

several pieces of evidence support the hypothesis that the non-synonymous mutation found in scl45a <dig> might be responsible for snowflake’s albinism. first, this specific glycine residue is conserved throughout all available vertebrate taxa , suggesting a conserved role of this amino acid. second, we predicted whether this amino acid change may affect the protein structure and function based on sequence conservation and protein properties using sift  <cit>  and polyphen- <dig> <cit> . it is predicted as a “damaging” mutation by sift, and “probably damaging” by polyphen- <dig>  third, this gene was reported to be the genetic cause of albinism in several other species . last, previous reports showed that glycine to arginine mutations within other transmembrane regions of scl45a <dig> in humans result in severe albino phenotypes  <cit> .

we followed up on this finding with an experimental study to determine how this amino acid substitution affects the transmembrane segment where this mutation is present. for this purpose we used a functional assay based on escherichia coli inner membrane protein leader peptidase  that detects and permits accurate measurements of the apparent free energy  of translocon-mediated integration of transmembrane helices into the endoplasmic reticulum  membranes  <cit> . this procedure allows the quantification of the proper integration of the transmembrane region with the normal sequence and with the mutation. when we assayed the construct with the wild type sequence, we observed that 90% of the proteins were properly recognized for membrane insertion. however, translation of the mutant  found in snowflake resulted in a significant reduction  in the membrane integration capability , suggesting that the replacement of a glycine by an arginine residue lowers the affinity of the transmembrane region and possibly alter the topology of the slc45a <dig> gene product.

finally, the last piece of evidence supporting the role of the mutation in the phenotype is based on genome-wide patterns of heterozygosity in the genome of snowflake . we found that slc45a <dig> gene is located in a large run of homozygosity  orthologous to human chromosome  <dig> , meaning that this allele was inside a block identical by descent, which is characteristic for mendelian recessive disorders. the other three candidate genes are not found in any autozygous regions. overall, we found  <dig> large runs of homozygosity , and a general reduction of heterozygosity compared to the other known genomes sequenced of the same species . some of the runs of homozygosis are particularly large, such as a continuous  <dig> mbps segment in chromosome  <dig> . this reduction of variation might allow the emergence of certain phenotypes otherwise masked by dominance, and they could lead to inbreeding depression  <cit> , as previously reported in chimpanzee and other primates  <cit> .

these patterns of heterozygosity allow the estimation of the amount of autozygosity, i.e. long regions of the genome identical by descent as a result of inbreeding. the minimum threshold of these stretches has been estimated in humans ranging between 1- <dig>  mbp depending on the population  <cit> . we conservatively quantified the inbreeding coefficient in snowflake based on autozygosity  of  <dig>   compared to  <dig>  and < <dig>  estimated from the previously sequenced gorillas, kamilah and kwan respectively, using the same criteria . assuming no previous inbreeding in any of the parents,  <dig>  would correspond to parents being grandparent–grandchild, half-siblings, or uncle–niece/aunt–nephew. we performed a set of simulations that replicated the patterns of autozygosity in different pedigrees, accounting for the differential amount of recombinations derived from the number of meiosis and the sex of the ancestors that is known to influence recombination rates  <cit> . these simulations reconstruct the different recombination patterns in different possible pedigrees under a random paternal transmission, and we estimated which fragments may appear as autozygous in the offspring. finally, we compared the distribution of sizes and number of autozygous segments in snowflake with the different simulated outcomes to calculate a likelihood for each case. the uncle/niece or aunt/nephew combination is the most probable scenario, although there was not a unique best statistical pedigree .

discussion
we sequenced the whole genome of a phenotypically unique gorilla, identified and characterized the causative mutation for his albinism, and explored the origin of this trait. we found a private non-synonymous substitution in one of the candidate genes - the slc45a <dig> gene - associated with the oca <dig> class of albinism. we provided several lines of evidence based on evolution, human disease and a functional assay supporting that this mutation in a transmembrane domain can modify the topology of the translated protein, therefore reinforcing its causative role in this rare case of albinism. moreover, long runs of homozygosity in this wild born individual explain the emergence of this recessive trait through identity by descent, suggesting that inbreeding was an important factor towards the emergence of this phenotype.

we inferred that snowflake was an offspring of closely related individuals supported by an inbreeding coefficient of  <dig> . in general, inbreeding is avoided in the wild because the offsprings within gorilla societies disperse to other groups before maturity  <cit> . this is strictly true in patriarchal groups that are commonly composed of a silverback male and several females   <cit>  whereas in multimale groups, females can remain and have their first birth in the natal group. multimale groups are usually composed of related males and therefore, newborn females are likely to be also related to them . however, multimale groups have mainly been observed in mountain gorillas, while only two multimale groups have ever been reported in western lowland gorillas, suggesting that they are extremely rare in these populations  <cit> . therefore, it seems unlikely that a multimale group would explain the inbreeding found in this western lowland gorilla.

previous parentage studies in wild western lowland gorillas have never found inbred mating, suggesting that is probably a rare behavior  <cit> . despite this and considering that the observation of inbreeding in a single individual could be an extreme case, some social observations may point that inbreeding may still occur. first, gorillas seem to follow a patrilocal social structure, i.e. silverbacks are usually related to one or more nearby silverbacks  <cit> . additionally, females transfer several times during their lifespan after the dispersal from their natal group  <cit> , which may result in the arrival of a female to a new group where the silverback is related to her. although father-daughter inbreeding is completely avoided, this hypothesis is feasible because other mating relationships, with half-brothers or even full brothers, are possible; suggesting that females do not detect consanguinity  <cit> . other factors such as habitat loss, small population sizes and population fragmentation may influence the disposal of breeding groups and therefore of unrelated silverbacks which may in turn favor inbreeding  <cit> . other potential explanations are less likely; male takeovers are highly avoided and the death of a male silverback normally results in the disintegration of the group and female dispersal.

a previous study using microsatellite markers in captive gorilla populations showed that their genetic diversity is comparable to wild gorilla populations  <cit> . however, in our study, snowflake shows different patterns of heterozygosity compared to the captive born gorillas.. the gorilla studbooks show that kamilah  is a first generation captive-born gorilla, while kwan  is a second generation captive-born gorilla. when we compared the heterozygosity genome-wide, we observed that kwan is the gorilla with higher heterozygosity, despite we cannot rule out that this was a result of some false positives due to the lower sequencing coverage. kamilah and snowflake have lower heterozygosity, with the albino gorilla showing the lowest values compared to the other captive-born individuals  even accounting for the regions of inbreeding. this suggests that breeding programs could result in an increase of genetic variation but a bigger sample size would be needed to systematically explore this effect.

in this particular study, we show that high throughput sequencing can be used not only to unravel the genetic mechanisms of fundamental phenotypes  in non-model organisms, but also to provide insights into conservation genetics through the detection of inbreeding of endangered species such as gorilla. however, in order to systematically explore relationships and breeding patterns from wild specimens using whole genome sequencing data, high quality dna is required and in most field studies, non-invasive samples such as feces or hair are used, and the amount of dna extracted from such samples precludes the application of this methodology to conservation studies. still, it can be applied to analyze the genomes of wild born individuals in zoos where blood samples are usually taken during routine veterinary check-ups. however, sequencing technologies quickly and constantly improve, and recent developments that includes library construction with very little amounts of dna  <cit>  or single-cell sequencing  <cit>  may allow the implementation of this kind of analyses into conservation genetics in the near future.

CONCLUSIONS
here we make use of next-generation sequencing to study the complete genome of a wild born western lowland gorilla genome. using these data we have been able to identify the genetic cause of a rare phenotype --albinism-- in this non-model species and we provide several lines of evidence that reinforces this hypothesis, ranging from evolution to human disease. moreover, we have been able to characterize that this individual was descendant of close relatives by studying the patterns of autozygosity genome-wide, providing the first genetic evidence of inbreeding in this species. we discuss this finding from the perspective of gorilla societies and we link several pieces of information in order to provide plausible scenarios where this event could have happened. we envision that the analysis of whole genome data of endangered species will be a standard in future conservation and management studies and will make available relevant information that has been missed in previous studies.

