BACKGROUND
it has been shown that novel genes, that is, genes with a restricted taxonomic distribution, evolve faster than older genes. these genes are normally identified by performing blast searches  <cit>  in genomes of different organisms. when genes are detected in only one species or in a group of very closely related species, these genes are called orphan genes. orphan genes were shown to evolve very fast in bacteria  <cit>  and drosophila  <cit> . genes which are not strictly orphans, but also have a narrow taxonomic distribution, such as genes present only in rodents, also showed markedly accelerated rates  <cit> . in addition, mammalian genes which are present only in vertebrates exhibited higher evolutionary rates than genes of precambrian origin  <cit> . these observations were extended to mammalian genes classified in four different ages -old, metazoans, deuterostomes and tetrapods-, which showed increasingly faster evolutionary rates in genes of more recent origin  <cit> . similar conclusions could be deduced from fungi classified in different linage specificities  <cit> . therefore, the relationship between age and rate seems to apply to genes of all ages and to different taxa.

the relationship between age and evolutionary rate of genes not only has importance for using age as one of many predictors for protein evolutionary rate  <cit> , but also to understand the origin of novel genes. domazet-loso and tautz  <cit>  proposed a model to explain how orphan genes may arise from duplicated genes. in their scenario, one of the duplicates evolves so fast, probably by strong positive selection, that its sequence becomes unrecognizable by sequence homology searches. these genes probably acquire a new function in the lineage where they evolve. after the origination of the new sequence, evolution slows down due to the constraints imposed by the conservation of function. albà and castresana  <cit>  extended this model to genes of different times of origin, and not only to orphans, as one possible explanation for the correlation found between age and rate of genes. a logical outcome from this model is that genes evolve fast in their early stages and then slow down due to increased functional constraints. this same idea has appeared several times in the literature  <cit> . although sequence similarity is lost, the use of the protein structure might help to detect the original copy from which some of these genes arose  <cit> . thus, according to this model, and despite talking about "novel genes", genes do not appear de novo in the genome, but originate from a gene duplication. the name "novel genes" would be justified because the exceptionally fast rates in their initial stages, just after the duplication, made them unrecognizable from the sequence point of view and determine their point of birth from a functional perspective. this is a simplified model that could be appropriate for the origin of most novel genes. notable exceptions where different models may apply include the origin of slow-evolving orphan genes  <cit>  or the formation of some novel genes from noncoding dna  <cit> .

in most works where blast has been used to detect putative novel genes in other genomes, the logical concern was expressed that some of these genes may have been incorrectly classified as novel because, being fast genes, they simply were not detected by blast in other organisms. in the case of the study of mammalian genes of different ages  <cit> , this was supposed not to have a significant effect because the same correlation between age and rate was observed in a set of highly conserved genes, with nonsynonymous rates lower than  <dig>  substitutions/position, where blast would most probably always find homologues in all genomes. however, elhaik et al.  <cit>  argued that the assertion that new genes evolve faster is indeed an artifact due to the blast relative performance in sequences of different evolutionary rates. they based their argumentation on the results from blast searches using simulated dna sequences of the same age and evolving at different evolutionary rates. upon classifying these simulated sequences in different groups according to blast detection, dna rates had averages  similar to the nonsynonymous rates found in albà and castresana  <cit> . if the blast effect could explain the results, the proposed punctuated model for the origin of orphans and other novel genes  <cit>  would not be necessary, since these genes would be normal genes with just faster rates. however, there were several features in the work of elhaik et al.  <cit>  that made their conclusions difficult to extrapolate to other works. first, they used simulated dna sequences and calculated dna genetic distances, which cannot be directly compared to nonsynonymous genetic distances. second, they performed dna blast searches, which are much less sensitive than protein blast searches in which most studies are based. third, in their simulations all positions in the sequences can experience mutations during evolution, as if they were pseudogenes, and thus it is again difficult to extrapolate these simulations to functional proteins, which typically contain motifs and are easier to detect with blast.

an important issue regarding the power of blast to detect homology is that the information contained in sequences degrades as these sequences accumulate mutations. however, the point at which the information is completely lost depends on the type of mutational process. in the present work, we simulated protein sequences evolving with and without among-site rate variation in the mutational process, and with evolutionary rates equivalent to those of the mammalian genome. our results show that, when sequences were evolved with among-site rate variation, the large majority of mammalian genes were able to find their homologues in the most distant species considered in this work. this indicates that the large amount of novel genes found in the genomes of mouse and human  and the observed correlation between age and rate are not due to a pure blast artifact. instead, this correlation may have important biological implications, since it supports a model for the origin of novel genes that implies low constraints in the early stages after the duplication and an increase of constraints with time.

RESULTS
amino acid rate distributions of mammalian genes
our previous work showed that the distributions of nonsynonymous evolutionary rates of  <dig> mammalian genes classified in different ages -old, metazoans, deuterostomes and tetrapods – were very different, with the youngest genes having faster rates  <cit> . the species used to make the age classification by means of blast homology searches are shown in figure  <dig>  since genes of different ages were of different length, and to avoid any influence from this variable, we repeated the calculations with a subset of genes coding for proteins between  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids. due to this restriction, the total number of genes was smaller than in the original study , but now the average length of genes was close to  <dig> amino acids for all ages. in addition, since our simulations were performed at the amino acid level, we calculated the protein evolutionary rate of the translated sequences  instead of the nonsynonymous rate previously calculated from the dna sequences.

the shape and mean of the new rate distributions, controlling for protein length, was very similar to the distributions obtained with the original data set . there was also a fourfold increase in the mean rate from the oldest to the youngest genes:  <dig>  amino acid substitutions/position in old,  <dig>  in metazoans,  <dig>  in deuterostomes, and  <dig>  in tetrapods. genes of all age categories were involved in all types of biological processes  <cit> , and thus it is very surprising that the oldest genes are more conserved than the younger genes. could these rate distributions be due to a pure blast artifact, as previously proposed  <cit> ?

simulations of protein sequences
we set up our simulation experiments to know how many times the age of mammalian genes was misclassified by protein blast. in addition, we wanted to compare the actual observations about novel genes to the results obtained with the null hypothesis of a common origin of all genes . a key feature of our simulation was the use of rate heterogeneity. the rationale for using this assumption is that all mammalian sequences whose origin we wanted to elucidate are present, at least, in mouse and human , and all of them have an assigned go function. therefore, most of these sequences are very likely to be functional and evolve under a rate heterogeneity model. the basic approach was then to simulate sequences of  <dig> amino acids evolving under a rate heterogeneity model, and along a given phylogenetic tree. the branch lengths of the tree were proportional to the approximate times separating the plant, animal and fungal genomes that were used to classify genes in different ages . sequences c and d of this tree were included only to produce a more homogeneous taxonomic distribution and better view the simulated alignments. this tree was multiplied by different factors to obtain sequences of different evolutionary rates. we were specifically interested in knowing how blast behaves with sequences of evolutionary rates equivalent to the rates of mammalian genes. for this purpose, we measured the exact amino acid rate of each simulation  and, from the performed simulations, we randomly pooled a set of genes with the same overall distribution of rates than the real ones. then, we used blast to classify these simulated sequences as old, metazoans, deuterostomes or tetrapods. in this setup, we know that sequences not classified as old are misclassified due to blast detection errors. figure 2b shows that the number of misclassified genes is insignificant. total numbers of misclassified genes were  <dig> in metazoans,  <dig> in deuterostomes, and  <dig> in tetrapods . if we subtracted an equivalent number of misclassified genes from the distributions of real genes , these distributions would almost not change. thus, the blast effect seems to be very small and with no consequence for the age classification of genes. in addition, the results of these simulations do not fit the observed data, where a much higher number of novel and fast genes exists than predicted by the null hypothesis. the existence of such novel genes thus needs an explanation different from the blast artifact.

as expected, detectability values of blast  clearly showed a decrease with faster rates. for example, most of the genes with the highest rates  were clearly misclassified. but the bulk of mammalian genes is highly conserved, and for the rate categories where most of the genes are found detectability values approach 100%. this shows again that the blast effect is not sufficiently strong as to explain the high number of novel genes found in the mammalian genome and the tendency of younger genes to evolve faster, at least when blast is performed at the protein level and within eukaryotic genomes.

heterogeneity of evolution and blast detectability
as explained above, an important feature of our simulations was the use of among-site rate heterogeneity. when sequences were simulated without rate heterogeneity, blast misclassified much more sequences of the three youngest categories, affecting genes of almost all rate categories . this simulation experiment is more in line with the results found by elhaik et al.  <cit> . however, it is important to remark that all mammalian sequences we used have an assigned go category, are present in at least mouse and human, and therefore are most surely functional. functional sequences evolve in a heterogeneous manner: those sites which are most crucial for function are highly conserved, others are only moderately conserved, and others typically evolve very fast. if some conserved sites in a sequence are in close proximity, and even if the sequence has a high overall evolutionary rate, blast will find its homologues in very distant species. as an example, figure 3a shows fragments of sequences simulated under heterogeneous evolution, which contain some conserved sequence patches, and figure 3b shows homogeneously simulated sequences, where the conservation of all sites degrade equally with time. it is interesting to note that, despite deriving from the same tree, homogeneously evolved sequences look more divergent than heterogeneous sequences due to the lack of conserved positions in the former. on the other hand, heterogeneously evolved sequences have conserved positions, but the nonconserved positions are plagued with multiple substitutions, thus explaining that the same genetic distances are measured from both alignments. of course, blast behaves very differently in both types of alignments and detectability of homologues is much higher in the one evolved heterogeneously . heterogeneity of evolutionary rates within a protein sequence thus explains why blast sensitivity is quite decoupled from overall divergence, at least for moderately divergent sequences.

trivial correlation between rate and age in simulated sequences
simulated genes that escape blast detection, and are thus not classified as old, will tend to be fast evolving genes, creating an obvious correlation, as can be seen in figure 2b, and even more exaggeratedly in figure 2c. however, this cannot explain the observed relationship between gene age and evolutionary rate  <cit> , since the fact that genes that escape blast detection evolve fast does not mean that all fast genes escaped blast detection. as indicated above, what it is necessary is to subtract the misclassified genes from the set of real genes, and analyze if the correlation is maintained in the real genes. we have shown that the proportion of misclassified genes is so small – when sequences are simulated heterogeneously and with rates like those observed in mammalian genes – that the relationship existing between age and rate in the real data set cannot be explained only by a blast artifact.

CONCLUSIONS
the appearance of novel genes in genomes is one of the most intriguing aspects in evolutionary genomics. the danger of miss-classifying fast-evolving genes as novel by blast has been clearly exposed by elhaik et al. for homogeneously evolved sequences  <cit> . we have shown that, specifically for mammalian functional genes and for their detectability by protein blast within higher eukaryotes, the loss of sensitivity for the fastest genes does not affect significantly the overall assignment of the age and rate of genes. therefore, these data support a more complex scenario for functional sequences that involves the existence of a large number of novel genes, many of which happen to be relatively fast evolving. this correlation between age and rate may have a crucial biological interest, because it is consistent with a model of origin of novel genes that assumes that these genes arose through a gene duplication and an initial phase of exceptionally high evolutionary rates. the end of this phase, and the beginning of negative selection, would indicate the point of birth of these genes. from here on, increased functional constraints would be reflected in lower evolutionary rates. however, the history of every gene is very complex and may include many particularities that cannot be covered by the general type of study presented here. more detailed studies will be necessary to see if this model of origin of novel genes is true and to understand the molecular evolution of every particular novel gene.

