BACKGROUND
acute pain treated inappropriately after surgery can be magnified and has the potential to develop into a long-term postoperative pain as a result of central sensitization, which is much more difficult to manage  <cit> . preventive analgesia consists of all perioperative efforts to decrease pain and minimize consumption of analgesics in the postoperative period. this seems to be the most effective means of decreasing postoperative pain, because surgical incision alone is not the only trigger for central sensitization. other factors, such as preoperative pain and additional painful noxious intraoperative inputs such as retraction, as well as postoperative inflammatory processes, can all result in the development of an altered central processing of afferent input, which, in turn, is capable of amplifying subsequent postoperative nociceptive input  <cit> . the emphasis of preventive analgesia is on the pathophysiologic phenomenon that should prevent altered sensory processing, and thus investigation of a preventive analgesic effect requires comparison of two groups of patients receiving identical treatments that had been started before and after surgery, respectively  <cit> .

the concept of preventive analgesia was founded on experimental studies of pre-emptive analgesia in animal models of pain  <cit> . pre-emptive analgesia is an intervention given before incision or surgery that it is more effective than the same treatment administered after incision or surgery. there are only a few investigations fundamentally designed for comparing the pre- versus postoperative administration in veterinary patients  <cit> . in humans, the pre-emptive epidural analgesia with opioids or local anesthetics induces consistent postoperative improvements, and the pre-emptive infiltration of wounds with local anesthetic improves analgesic consumption and time for the first rescue analgesic request  <cit> . non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs  also can improve some aspects of postoperative pain when given before surgery compared to the administration after surgery in humans  <cit>  and dogs  <cit> . the nsaids inhibit peripheral and central prostaglandin synthesis, which reduces the inflammation that accompanies tissue injury, in addition to the attenuation of the response to noxious stimuli  <cit> .

vedaprofen is a nsaid that can control pain and inflammation associated with clinical and experimental musculoskeletal disorders in dogs  <cit> . it is available as a palatable gel formulation, which has a rapid and almost complete absorption after oral administration in dogs. the oral route has a terminal half-live of the same order of magnitude of the intravenous administration  <cit> , but with the advantage that the oral route is less stressful to the animal and can be easily administered by the owner during postoperative home care  <cit> . vedaprofen is known to preferentially inhibit the cyclo-oxygenase- <dig> in dogs  <cit> , and it is apparently safe in this species, as there was a low incidence of gastrointestinal changes, like vomiting and diarrhea after a long-term treatment for 30– <dig> days  <cit> .

although vedaprofen has proved to be an effective analgesic for postoperative pain control in dogs, no studies have investigated if the sublingual preoperative administration has a superior analgesic effect over the administration after surgery on postoperative pain control in this species. therefore, the aim of this prospective, randomized, double-blind study, was to investigate whether sublingual vedaprofen given before was more effective than that given after surgery for decreasing postoperative pain intensity and analgesic consumption in dogs undergoing maxillectomy and mandibulectomy. since the analgesic effect of sublingual vedaprofen was never assessed in dogs undergoing maxillectomy and mandibulectomy, we included a control group consisting of animals receiving ketoprofen, a nsaid known to provide adequate postoperative analgesia for this surgical procedure in this species  <cit> . our hypothesis was that the preoperative administration of vedaprofen would reduce postoperative pain and analgesic requirements more than would vedaprofen or ketoprofen given after surgery.

RESULTS
there were no significant differences among groups in terms of the study population. no significant differences in the duration of surgery  and time for extubation  were observed among groups. mechanical ventilation was not necessary in any group. no clinical complications or adverse effects were observed during recovery from anesthesia in any group.

in both groups, epinephrine and cortisol levels were significantly increased at 30 minutes after extubation compared to baseline . plasma norepinephrine and dopamine concentrations and pain and sedation scores were not significantly different within or among groups. there were no differences in analgesia or sedation scores within the groups or among them and rescue analgesia was not necessary in any dog . the highest scores in the nrs and cpss were, respectively,  <dig>  and  <dig>  at  <dig>  h in the pre group;  <dig>  and  <dig>  at  <dig>  h in the post group and;  <dig>  at 20 h and  <dig>  at 30 minutes in the control group.figure  <dig> 
plasma epinephrine levels .
pre dogs were treated with preemptive vedaprofen, post dogs were treated with postoperative vedaprofen, control dogs were treated with postoperative ketoprofen; *within a treatment, value differs significantly  from the baseline value.
serum cortisol  .
pre dogs were treated with preemptive vedaprofen, post dogs were treated with postoperative vedaprofen, control dogs were treated with postoperative ketoprofen; *within a treatment, value differs significantly  from the baseline value.
mean  postoperative pain numerical rating scale .
pre dogs were treated with preemptive vedaprofen, post dogs were treated with postoperative vedaprofen, control dogs were treated with postoperative ketoprofen.
mean  postoperative pain colorado pain scoring system .
pre dogs were treated with preemptive vedaprofen, post dogs were treated with postoperative vedaprofen, control dogs were treated with postoperative ketoprofen.



heart rate did not vary significantly throughout the study in any group. in the post and control groups, the map  was significantly decreased at extubation and at 30 minutes after extubation compared to baseline . at 24 hours after extubation, the map was significantly increased  and decreased  compared with baseline in the post and control groups, respectively. the respiratory rate  was significantly decreased at extubation and at 30 minutes,  <dig>  h,  <dig>  h and 6 h after extubation compared to baseline in all groups . in the control group, the fr was maintained significantly decreased at 20 h and 24 h after extubation compared with baseline and compared with pre and post groups at the corresponding time-points . the rectal temperature was significantly decreased at extubation, which was maintained until 4 h  and 6 h  after extubation compared to baseline . heart rate, map, fr, and rectal temperature values were always within the range of normal values for the species .table  <dig> 
vital parameters 



parameter
group
baseline
extubation
time after surgery

30 min
 <dig>  h
 <dig>  h
6 h
20 h
24 h
fr

hr heart rate, f
r respiratory rate, map mean arterial pressure, pre dogs treated with preemptive vedaprofen, post dogs treated with postoperative vedaprofen, control dogs treated with postoperative ketoprofen; *within a treatment, value differs significantly  from the baseline value; †within a time-point, values are significantly different  from the pre group; ‡within a time-point, values are significantly different  from the post group.



discussion
the main finding of the present study was that the preoperative administration of sublingual vedaprofen was as effective as the postoperative administration for postoperative pain control, indicating that vedaprofen had no preventive analgesic effect in the present study. regardless of the time of administration, vedaprofen given through the sublingual route was associated with low pain scores and was as effective as ketoprofen for controlling postoperative pain in dogs undergoing maxillectomy and mandibulectomy.

vedaprofen was chosen in the present study based on pilot registers made up on the authors’ experience. the dosing was the one recommended by a pharmacokinetic study of vedaprofen in dogs, describing that absorption of vedaprofen is rapid and almost complete after oral administration, which is followed by a terminal half-live of the same order of magnitude of the intravenous administration  <cit> . in the present study, the advantages of using the sublingual route were that one did not have to force the animal to swallow the medication and the absorption of the drug was ensured even in dogs that did not have a swallow reflex . vomiting was not observed in the present study, but the sublingual route would be another advantage over the oral route in these cases. the sublingual route was proven to be effective on absorbing vedaprofen, because both pre- and postoperative strategies resulted in pain scores as low as with ketoprofen, a nsaid known to be effective for controlling postoperative pain in dogs undergoing maxillectomy and mandibulectomy  <cit> . a group of dogs receiving ketoprofen was used as control due to ethical reasons, considering that the use of a placebo group is unfeasible in a study whose main objective is to find the best method to provide pain relief.

among all analgesic agents used routinely, the nsaids are the less likely to block central sensitization resulting from surgery, since they primarily act peripherally by blocking the release of mediators that have been found to sensitize peripheral nociceptors, thus, leading to a reduction in inflammation and pain perception  <cit> . even though, a previous study  <cit>  found that dogs receiving carprofen, a nsaid, were awarded lower pain scores during the first postoperative hour than the group of dogs that received carprofen at the end of the surgery for a variety of orthopedic and soft tissue procedures. therefore, one of the reasons for the lack of a preventive analgesic effect could be attributed to the fact that vedaprofen was administered in animals that were already experiencing some pain, considering the discomfort induced by the background disease that led to the indication for the surgical treatment. the crucial point in preventive analgesia strategies focuses in the administration of the analgesic before pain emerges, more than simply before surgical incision  <cit> . accordingly, a previous study found a preventive analgesic effect of carprofen in dogs with no background painful disease that were anesthetized for elective ovariohysterectomy  <cit> . in another study, the authors did not find a preventive analgesic effect of carprofen in dogs with femoral or pelvic fractures, even though they had received the nsaid before surgical incision  <cit> .

alternatively, a preventive effect could have been revealed beyond the period covered by vedaprofen after a single administration   <cit> . this is because a study in human patients found that 86% of the patients who received preemptive epidural analgesia with opioids and local anesthetics were pain free at  <dig>  weeks, in comparison with only 47% of the control patients  <cit> . this analgesic approach is more likely to block central sensitization because it is delivered directly into the epidural space. however, it was less likely to observe an improvement in pain control after long-term treatment with vedaprofen, considering that nsaids act reducing inflammation peripherally and, therefore, are expected to be more effective in the acute postoperative phase.

another explanation for our findings could be attributed to the subjective judgment of pain scores. since pain represents an unpleasant sensory and emotional experience, a direct measurement of a subjective experience is challenging and imposes difficulties, especially when evaluating it with a single tool. therefore, in order to minimize variations, pain was assessed using two scoring systems in the present study. in addition, objective evaluations, such as physiological data, and serum cortisol, epinephrine, norepinephrine and dopamine were measured as indirect measurements of pain, in order to reduce the subjective nature of the pain scores. the stress caused by a painful stimulus can increase heart rate, map, fr and serum cortisol and catecholamine levels  <cit> . therefore, it is unlikely that the postoperative decrease in fr and temperature compared to baseline was a response to pain. in fact, these changes were found in all groups, suggesting they were attributed to the residual effects of isoflurane, rather than caused by differences in the nsaid used or in the time they were administered  <cit> . less likely explanations could be the residual effects of acepromazine or an increased fr and temperature at baseline caused by fear and stress experienced prior to the pre-anesthetic medication  <cit> .

the preoperative vedaprofen induced no significantly differences in the serum cortisol and catecholamine levels compared to the postoperative administration. in both groups, the norepinephrine and dopamine concentrations did not vary significantly throughout the study, which is in accordance with the other measurements. nevertheless, both groups had increased cortisol and epinephrine levels at 30 minutes post-extubation compared to baseline. this was the only pain indicative in the present study and it was not in-line with the changes observed in pain scores and physiological variables. the cortisol levels, however, were similar to a previous study that found an effective pain control in dogs receiving tramadol, codeine, ketoprofen alone or in combination for the same type of oral orthopedic surgical procedures  <cit> . therefore, the changes on cortisol and epinephrine were attributed to a stress response that probably was not caused by pain. for instance, the stress caused by a different environment  is capable of activating the pituitary-adrenal system in dogs  <cit> . despite of the hormonal postoperative changes, the dogs had no other signs of pain. they all had good appetite and ate normally when they were offered food 5 hours after surgery, which supports the fact that the increase in cortisol and epinephrine levels was due to stress not induced by pain.

if the analgesic efficacy for the pre- over the postoperative administration was not proven advantageous, then the lack of information about the potential intraoperative adverse effects could preclude their preoperative use  <cit> . one may choose to start the analgesic therapy with nsaids at the end of surgery in order to prevent a possible increase in bleeding time intra-operatively  <cit> . however, since vedaprofen is known to be a preferential cyclo-oxygenase- <dig> inhibitor in dogs  <cit> , it would be advantageous for causing less adverse effects than other conventional nsaids, allowing long-term treatment with low incidence of gastrointestinal and renal adverse effects or on increase in bleeding time  <cit> . however, controversial findings were reported on clinical studies in dogs. a multicenter clinical trial reported that mild and transient side effects, such as diarrhea, vomiting and loss of appetite, were observed in 11% and severe side effects, such as bloody diarrhea and/or repeated vomiting, were observed in 5% of dogs with musculoskeletal disorders receiving vedaprofen for 14 days  <cit> . another study described mild and transient side effects in  <dig> % of the dogs and treatment had to be stopped in  <dig> % of the dogs receiving vedaprofen for 56 days  <cit> . the incidence of these adverse effects was similar to that found with the meloxicam in both studies. in addition, in other species, such as horses, vedaprofen was found to be cyclo-oxygenase- <dig> selective in experimental studies  <cit> , although clinical studies in this species showed no such adverse effects  <cit> . in the present study, although data were not recorded during long-term treatment, adverse effects were not observed in any dog during surgery or within 24 hours of administration of vedaprofen.

although the preventive analgesia concept supports the assumption that blocking central sensitization reduces overall pain perception and duration, it is not known, however, at which point is preventive intervention most important, if it is blocking the nociceptive input at surgery or blocking the postoperative pain resulting from surgery in the immediate postoperative period. a study in humans indicates that whether or not the nociceptive input of surgery was blocked through the administration of long acting local anesthesia, overall postoperative pain perception was the same  <cit> . therefore, regardless of the timing of the vedaprofen administration, both pre- and postoperative strategies are ethically justified by their efficacy on pain relieve observed in the present study.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the results of the present study showed that vedaprofen had no preventive analgesic effect, since the preoperative administration had no advantages over the postoperative administration. however, both pre- and postoperative vedaprofen given by the sublingual route were as effective as ketoprofen administered by the intramuscular route for postoperative pain control in dogs undergoing mandibulectomy and maxillectomy.

