BACKGROUND
during human embryonic development, the somatic cellular component of the gonads develops from the gonadal primordia, whereas the primordial germ cells  originate outside the gonadal primordia. the pgcs present in the posterior part of the yolk sac, close to the allantois and hindgut wall, need to migrate to colonize the prospective ovary or testis. interestingly, when the pgcs arrive in the gonadal primordia, male and female gonads are morphologically identical, but due to extensive remodelling by week  <dig> of gestation, w <dig> , the gonads become clearly dimorphic. in females, the number of germ cells increases until w <dig>  but declines from w <dig> until birth  <cit> . however, every woman is born with still about a million of resting primordial follicles in their ovaries  <cit>  and it is only in cycling females  that the follicles sequentially mature, leading to the ovulation every month  of about one mature oocyte. in vitro, gametogenesis has proven very challenging to mimic and knowledge to improve each step of the process in particular concerning human gametogenesis is needed.

during gonadogenesis and gametogenesis, the formation of both a defined somatic compartment and a defined germ cell compartment is paramount for the dual functionality of the gonad, the production of mature gametes and its role as endocrine gland in the hypothalamic-pituitary-gonadal axis. in the testis, the germ cell compartment formed by a group of seminiferous tubes, is surrounded by a basement membrane  of extracellular matrix , whose major components are laminin, collagen iv and fibronectin, that provide structural support  <cit> . in the ovary, the follicular bm also provides structural support to the developing follicles, maintaining cellular organization, but it also regulates the highly selective process of follicular growth and maturation, because it binds and retains growth factors and hormones that affect the development of both the granulosa cells and the oocyte itself  <cit> .

the continual remodelling of the ecm in the follicular bm during folliculogenesis up to ovulation has been studied in various animal models, but in humans, most of the studies on the distribution and composition of the ecm in the ovary have examined pre-ovulatory follicles, corpora lutea and the surrounding ovarian stroma  <cit>  and knowledge about the dynamics and composition of the bm during gametogenesis and early folliculogenesis is lacking.

here, we have focused on the development of the human follicular bm and its associated ecm main components during first trimester, second trimester and early folliculogenesis by immunofluorescence. our results reveal a higher degree of similarity regarding the initial compartmentalization of human gonads in ovarian cords and seminiferous cords. here, we underscore the existence of a follicular bm from the time that the first primordial follicles emerge in the ovarian  mesenchyme. understanding the dynamics in follicular bm may prove important to develop successful protocols to recreate the environment needed for successful folliculogenesis in vitro  <cit> .

RESULTS
collagen iv-rich basement membranes showed the presence of ovarian cords in fetal female gonads at w9-w12
at w6- <dig>  we observed a low number of germ cells colonizing the human female gonads . many structures in the mesonephros, including the mesonephric glomeruli, tubuli and duct, were clearly delineated by a bm rich in collagen iv, however the developing gonad contained only few collagen iv fibrils without an apparent organization . laminin and fibronectin also seemed ubiquitously present in the female gonad .figure  <dig> 
collagen iv, laminin and fibronectin expression in human fetal female gonads during early development w <dig> .  collagen iv  expression identified the mesonepheric glomerulus, mesonephric and paramesonepheric ducts, and is present in the gonad.  laminin  , and fibronectin   expression during early development of female gonads . germ cells  were identified by the early marker oct <dig>  and late marker vasa . the same secondary antibody was used to detect oct <dig> and vasa, because the two proteins localize to different cellular compartments  and their expression can therefore be clearly distinguished. the white asterisks marked individual germ cells expressing collagen iv and laminin. scalebars are 100 μm.



by w9-w <dig>  the female gonad showed a higher density of germ cells in the cortex, with the occasional germ cell in the medulla and absent from the ovarian surface epithelium  . unexpectedly, already at w <dig>  collagen iv showed a distinctive expression pattern, strongly reminiscent of the bm surrounding the developing male seminiferous tubes in gonads of similar developmental age , suggesting that in females the organization of germ cells in ovarian cords occurred much earlier than previously reported  <cit> . konishi and colleagues  have showed by electron microscopy that germ cells were in ovarian cords in the human ovary by w <dig>  but not at w <dig>  immunostaining for the ecm component collagen iv revealed that this organization in ovarian cords is in fact occurring much earlier in human development, in a process that may be common between males and females.figure  <dig> 
collagen iv expression in human fetal female and male gonads during first and second trimester.  longitudinal sight of w <dig>  and transversal sight of w <dig>   female gonad showed a distinctive expression pattern of collagen iv .  collagen iv  detected in the bm surrounding the developing seminiferous tubes in male gonad of first trimester .  collagen iv  expression in the bm of ovarian cords in female gonads  and in the bm of seminiferous tubes in male gonads . germ cells  were identified by the early marker oct <dig>  and late marker vasa . the same secondary antibody was used to detect oct <dig> and vasa, because the two proteins localize to different cellular compartments  and their expression can therefore be clearly distinguished. red arrows point to the bm of the ose, yellow arrows point to the bm of the primordial follicles, green arrows show the bm of the seminiferous tubes and ovarian cords, white arrows to the bm of blood vessels, and white asterisks marked individual germ cells expressing collagen iv. note that occasional autofluorescent red blood cells are visible as red/orange cells inside blood vessels. scalebars are 100 μm.



fibronectin expression in the mesenchymal compartment also revealed ovarian cords at w9-w12
to further support the existence of ovarian cords at w9-w <dig>  we have immunostained female gonads for the two other main components of ecm, laminin  and fibronectin . laminin was highly expressed throughout the cortex of the ovary with no specific enrichment in ovarian bm, except for the bm enveloping the developing blood vessels ; whereas in males, laminin was concentrated in the bm of the seminiferous cords and the blood vessels . moreover, we noted that few scattered  germ cells seemed to contain prominent collagen iv-rich and laminin-rich granules in their cytoplasm . by performing 3d reconstructions on confocal images, we confirmed that the granules were indeed in the cytoplasm of female germ cells  and male germ cells . in general, the granules of laminin seemed more numerous than those of collagen iv.figure  <dig> 
laminin expression in human fetal female and male gonads during first and second trimester.  longitudinal sight of w <dig>  and transversal sight of w <dig>   old female gonad showed a distinctive expression pattern of laminin .  laminin  detected in the bm surrounding the developing seminiferous tubes in male gonad of first trimester .  laminin  expression in the bm of ovarian cords in female gonads  and in the bm of seminiferous tubes in male gonads . germ cells  were identified by the early marker oct <dig>  and late marker vasa . the same secondary antibody was used to detect oct <dig> and vasa, because the two proteins localize to different cellular compartments  and their expression can therefore be clearly distinguished. red arrows point to the bm of the ose, yellow arrows point to the bm of the primordial follicles, green arrows show the bm of the seminiferous tubes, and white arrows to the bm of blood vessels, and white asterisks marked individual germ cells expressing laminin. note that occasional autofluorescent red blood cells are visible as red/orange cells inside blood vessels. scalebars are 100 μm.
fibronectin expression in human fetal female and male gonads during first and second trimester.  fibronectin  expression in the mesenchymal compartment of developing female gonads  and male gonads  during first and second trimester. germ cells  were identified by the early marker oct <dig>  and late marker vasa . the same secondary antibody was used to detect oct <dig> and vasa, because the two proteins localize to different cellular compartments  and their expression can therefore be clearly distinguished. red arrows point to the bm of the ose, and white arrows point to the bm of blood vessels. note that occasional autofluorescent red blood cells are visible as red/orange cells inside blood vessels. scalebars are 100 μm.
collagen iv and laminin granules in human fetal germ cells. collagen iv  and laminin  granules  in the cytoplasm of germ cells  in both developing female first trimester  and second trimester  gonads. the same secondary antibody was used to detect oct <dig> and vasa, both germ cell markers, because the two proteins localize to different cellular compartments  and their expression can therefore be clearly distinguished. 3d reconstructions from high magnification confocal z-projections from two different angles show that these granules are present throughout the cytoplasm of the germ cells. scalebar is  <dig>  μm.



in w9-w <dig> females, similarly to laminin, fibronectin marked the bm of the developing blood vessels . however, in contrast to the ubiquitously expression of laminin, fibronectin was diffusely expressed but exclusively by the mesenchymal compartment of the ovarian cortex, revealing the structure of fibronectin-negative ovarian cords . this expression pattern was similar to that observed in males , suggesting that the deposition of ecm created a clear physical separation between the  mesenchymal compartment  and the ovarian cords in females and seminiferous tubes in males in a similar fashion in both sexes around w9-w <dig> 

no ecm-rich basement membrane separating the ose from the cortex
at w9-w <dig>  we expected to observe of a clear bm between the ose and the cortex. however, this was only the case in a small area of the ose close to the region of the ovarian hilus, showing a bm of collagen iv, laminin and fibronectin , but not in the region of the ose surrounding the ovarian cortex . this suggested that due to the absence of a bm the cells of the ose may still be able to traffic easily into the cortex.

at w17-w <dig>  male and female gonads still show similarities in organization
at w17-w <dig>  we observed two distinct regions in the ovarian cortex  . this was previously observed by anderson and colleagues  <cit>  that showed that in the second trimester ovaries peripheral germ cells were exclusively marked by the early markers oct <dig> or nanog , whereas more interiorly located germ cells were exclusively marked by the late markers vasa or dazl , with very few germ cells showing colocalization. as we were interested in the total population of germ cells in the gonad, we used both early and late germ cell markers  combined, making use of the fact that oct <dig> and vasa have different cellular localizations, nuclear and cytoplasmatic respectively.

the region of the cortex closer to the surface  was morphological similar to that of the first trimester cortex . however, in the more interior region of the cortex , the separation between the mesenchymal and the ovarian cords became now even more pronounced by collagen iv and laminin . in zone  <dig>  the ovarian cords increased in diameter, as the germ cells matured and some, by their nucleus morphology, seemed to have entered meiosis; whereas the mesenchymal compartment of the cortex also increased in size and contained numerous blood vessels surrounded by a collagen iv-rich and laminin-rich bm . interestingly, some of the ovarian cords still closely resembled the organization of the seminiferous tubes , although the ovarian cords seemed to contain a relatively higher density of germ cells. moreover, the expression of collagen iv and laminin showed that the female mesenchymal compartment of the cortex was more compacted and seemed more irrigated with blood vessels than in the males of similar developmental age . furthermore, collagen iv and laminin-rich granules were also present in the cytoplasm of second trimester female germ cells  and male germ cells . both in males and females, collagen iv concentrated in bms, whereas laminin was present in bms and expressed diffusely in the mesenchymal compartment . using available deep-sequencing data from facs-sorted male and female germ cells from w18-w <dig>    <cit> , we confirm that germ cells express high levels of many chains of laminin and collagen iv . this in contrast to adult mature oocytes, that express laminin b <dig> and fibronectin, but particularly high levels of zp <dig>  <cit>  .

as in the gonads in the first trimester, at w17-w <dig>  fibronectin was also diffusely expressed by the cells of the mesenchymal compartment in females  and was detected in the bm of developing blood vessels . this pattern was similar to that observed in the male gonads, but the expression of fibronectin in males was generally very faint .

follicular bm developed in the fetal female gonads at w17-w20
one major structural difference between gametogenesis in males and females is the development of individually encapsulated primordial follicles in females, consisting of a single germ cell  surrounded by one layer of squamous granulosa cells. around w17-w <dig>  we observed emerging primordial follicles for the first time at a characteristic location, individually embedded in the  mesenchymal compartment, physically separated from the rest of the germ cells in the ovarian cords. moreover, those emerging primordial follicles were clearly surrounded by a bm of collagen iv . therefore, the bm delimited- mesenchyme compartment contained bm-delimited blood vessels and bm-delimited primordial follicles. the bm surrounding the primordial follicles in the  mesenchymal compartment were also laminin-positive .

together, collagen iv, laminin and fibronectin demarked the development of the  mesenchymal compartment in the female gonads during the first and, even more pronounced, during the second trimester facilitating the embedding of blood vessels and more importantly the assembly of primordial follicles.

collagen iv, laminin and fibronectin expression in adult ovary
we next investigated the presence of collagen iv, laminin and fibronectin in human adult ovaries during early folliculogenesis. after haematoxylin and eosin  staining, an increasingly thick bm was observed surrounding the developing follicles, from primordial, to early primary, to primary and finally secondary follicles . this bm was collagen iv-rich  and laminin-rich .figure  <dig> 
composition of the bm in early stage follicles in human ovarian tissue.  histological analysis of human ovarian tissue revealed an extracellular bm  surrounding primordial, early primary, primary and secondary follicles.  collagen iv  expression in the bm  of primordial, early primary, primary and in secondary follicles.  laminin  expression in the bm  of primordial, early primary, primary and in secondary follicles.  fibronectin  expression in the mesenchymal compartment of the ovarian cortex. sporadically, we observed fibronectin expression in the bm of secondary follicles . scalebars are 25 μm.



as in the fetal gonads, fibronectin expression was diffusely observed throughout the  mesenchyme and sporadically in the bm of secondary follicles . collagen iv, laminin and fibronectin expression was also detected diffusely throughout the  mesenchymal compartment of the ovarian cortex, but in particular in the tunica albuginea . moreover, collagen iv and laminin, but not fibronectin, showed prominent expression in the bm under the ose .figure  <dig> 
extracellular matrix components in the cortex of human adult ovarian tissue.  collagen iv , laminin  and fibronectin  expression  in the bm underlying the ose  in the adult ovarian cortex. scalebars are 50 μm.



discussion
ecm revealed a higher degree of organization in human developing gonads
here, we show that basically from the time the pgcs arrive to the gonads , the ecm contributed to create a “germ cell” niche where the germ cells could develop their sex-specific characteristics . more importantly, not only in males, but also in females a specific organization in germ cell cords became apparent after immunostaining for ecm components at w <dig>  our results in human are in agreement with a recent study in cow  <cit> , suggesting a higher degree of organization in female gonads and much earlier than previously thought  <cit> . well-defined ovarian cords have also been described in other mammalian species, like pig and sheep  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
model of ovarian cords and mesenchymal compartment organization in fetal ovaries during gonadogenesis up to early folliculogenesis. in female gonads, a specific organization in ovarian cords appear. the majority of germ cells in the first trimester ovary are early germ cells, but in the second trimester both early and more mature germ cells  were present and segregated spatially in the ovary: early germ cells located closer to the surface whereas the more mature  germ cells are located in the inner part of the cortex  <cit> . from w <dig>  individual primordial follicles become embedded in the mesenchymal compartment and at birth all germ cells are present as individual primordial follicles in the mesenchymal compartment which supports the further development of these follicles up to ovulation in adulthood.



interestingly, a strong ecm layer between the surface epithelium of the developing ovary and the cortex was not observed, whereas this was clearly the case with the surface epithelium contacting the hilus of the developing ovary. this is in agreement with studies proposing that cells from the surface of the developing ovary could be a common precursor for both the somatic cells within the ovarian cords  and the cells of the adult ose  <cit> .

primordial follicles contain a collagen iv-rich and laminin-rich basement membrane
in line with the suggestion that ecm contributes to the generation of a microenvironment important for follicle integrity, we report here that in humans, as in cow  <cit> , the primordial follicles became individually embedded in the ecm-rich  mesenchymal compartment as they were formed . it is interesting to note that both the capillaries and primordial follicles present in the  mesenchymal compartment showed a strong collagen iv-rich and laminin-rich bm.

multiple collagen iv-rich granules and laminin-rich granules were observed in the cytoplasm of germ cells in the first and second trimester in both females and males. it has been proposed that ectoderm-derived cells are able to produce collagens, laminins and glycosaminoglycans, whereas fibronectin is produced mainly by mesenchymal cells  <cit> . our study suggests that human germ cells, in both female and male gonads, may be able to produce both collagen iv-rich granules and laminin-rich granules perhaps directly contributing to the formation of the prominent basement membranes delineating the seminiferous tubules, the ovarian cords and  follicles.

ecm composition during  folliculogenesis in humans and other mammals
in human, we observed collagen iv staining in primordial to primary to secondary follicles, which is consistent with studies in cow and mouse  <cit> , but contrasts with a study in mouse where collagen iv was not observed in the bm of early follicles  <cit> . during late folliculogenesis, collagen iv, albeit with different levels of expression for the different chains, has been described in the bm of antral follicles in cow  <cit> , mouse  <cit>  and human  <cit> .

the pattern of fibronectin expression in humans suggested that it may play an important role in defining the  mesenchymal compartment in particular during fetal stages, but it has a much less prominent role in the formation of the follicular basement membranes in human, mouse  <cit>  and cow  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study reveals that the human ovary is compartmentalized earlier in development than previously thought and that it resembles the male gonads regarding the distribution of the main ecm components. in addition to data showing a spatial progression in the development of germ cells starting from the inner to the outer part of the ovarian cortex  <cit> , we now show that the formation or assembly of primordial follicles occurs in the  mesenchymal compartment  accompanied by the formation of a follicular bm. the bm becomes more prominent as the follicles develop during adulthood. we provide an initial characterization of the molecular niche during human gametogenesis and early folliculogenesis in vivo and this may prove important to develop successful protocols to progress through folliculogenesis in vitro. we envisage that in vitro maturation could occur more efficiently in 3d scaffolds integrating ecm components to facilitate and support the integrity and growth of the follicles and their basement membranes.

