BACKGROUND
recombinant dna and protein technologies have taken a leading role in many forms of research over the past 40 years  <cit> . recombinant proteins have found their way to the core of most biomedical research. classical methods of protein purification can be divided into methods that utilize chemical properties of the protein including solubility  <cit> , physical characteristics, e.g. isoelectric points and size  <cit> , and those that use selective endogenous or engineered  <cit>  protein affinity. of this latter category, fusion proteins have emerged as a prominent method for purification. fusion proteins are created by appending a full length or truncated protein to a terminal region of the protein of interest. for affinity fusion proteins, the appended protein will bind to a third, typically small, molecule that is immobilized on the surface of a polymer resin. the fusion protein will selectively bind to the surface while other proteins are washed away  <cit> . in column chromatography methods, protein lysates are eluted through columns that are packed with polymer particles. alternatively, the affinity matrix can be mixed directly with the protein lysates, agitated for some amount of time, centrifuged and collected in batch selection methods. fusion proteins are genetically tagged with a protein of known affinity. the glutathione s-transferase -protein is frequently used to tag a protein of interest because of its affinity for the reduced form of the tripeptide, glutathione  <cit> . during the elution process, excess glutathione is added to remove the tagged protein from the affinity matrix.

traditionally, glutathione is covalently linked to the surface of activated agarose beads . a thiol bond is formed between the glutathione and an alipathic spacer that is linked to a hydroxyl group on the surface of the agarose bead  <cit> . since the inception of using glutathione as a capture agent for gst fusion proteins, almost all scientific supply companies carry a variation of glutathione conjugated polymeric beads, and at least one patent has been awarded  <cit>  for its utility in proteins. agarose has been widely used for glutathione conjugation. the chemistry of this linkage has multiple reaction and purification steps that restrict in-house production of these beads to chemistry laboratories  <cit> .

thiol-ene “click” chemistry has been shown to reproducibly form covalent thioether bonds between thiol and alkene-containing molecules. glutathione  has been covalently linked to alkene groups in poly   polymers  <cit> . while glutathione linkage to pnipam was confirmed, a detailed validation of the interaction with gst tagged proteins was not presented.

using a modified form of thiol-ene chemistry and readily available materials, we demonstrate a simple, one-step method for creating gel homogenates and beads with affinity toward gst tagged proteins. specifically, our method employs thiol-ene addition of glutathione to low molecular weight poly diacrylate . under standard conditions, the resulting polymer forms hydrogels with typical radical initiators. these gels were readily homogenized, washed, and used to purify soluble gst proteins. in our proof of concept study, gst-fused, red shifted green fluorescent protein  was purified with pegda:gsh homogenates. we also demonstrate a novel method for creating glutathione-laden pegda microspheres using reverse-phase emulsion polymerization. like the homogenates, pegda:gsh microspheres exhibited affinity to gst-gfp and can be used to purify the protein. either of these methods can be implemented in almost any laboratory using readily available, inexpensive reagents.

RESULTS
challenging economic times combined with the influx of new scientists in biomedical research makes funding opportunities less frequent and resources increasingly strained. in response to these environmental pressures, scientists must adapt by using any available resources as tools for discovery. newer, cheaper methods will replace traditionally more expensive techniques. although many kits are available, most of these kits have substantial mark-up that is not always combined with quality.

to create a low-cost approach using widely available laboratory chemicals for purifying gst tagged proteins, we have utilized thiol-ene addition of reduced glutathione to low molecular weight pegda. we chose to look predominately at homogenization of gels as a batch purification method because most laboratories have access to plastic eppendorf homogenizers or similar. this simple method was shown to be reproducible and effective. we further develop a more complex method that has more uniformity and compares well with commercially available gst affinity beads.

creation of vectors & protein expression
to create a model protein for purification, we chose to use the gfp for its solubility and ease of visualization  <cit> . the vector, pet 15b , was constructed by inserting a flexible spacer sequence, a hexa-histadine tag and thrombin cleavable sequence . the sequence was isolated by pcr  and cloned into pgex 6p- <dig> adjacent to the gst sequence . gfp was isolated from gwiz-gfp by pcr that added a separate spacer region and a second hexa-histadine tag . gfp was inserted into the pgex vector for expression . the second hexa-histadine tag of the protein was not utilized in these experiments, but is relevant and must be noted because ni-nta was used to purify the gst-gfp for several of the experiments being discussed. the effect of dual hexa-histadine tags had on purification of the gst-gfp protein was not analyzed. it is clear that these dual tags did not negatively impact the protein activity  or binding capability to gsh. resulting colonies were screened for gross fluorescence of the colonies  and sequenced. gst-gfp was readily observed  and purified with a yield of approximately 300 mg/l of culture . the nickel purified protein fraction was run on a sds-page gel to confirm size and thrombin cleavability . the functionality of gst-gfp protein was confirmed by its increased affinity to nickel  and glutathione beads, its green color and fluorescence, and its cleavability by thrombin. with our model protein produced and validated, we proceeded to validate the purification process. 

affinity of gst-gfp to hydrogel homogenates
hydrogels were made as described with varying pegda to gsh ratios, and the gels were homogenized, washed, and incubated with 60 μg of gst-gfp for 2 h. when purified protein was incubated with the gels , a significant decrease in gst-gfp was found in the solution after two hours compared to gel-free controls in the 1: <dig> , 5: <dig> , 20: <dig> , 40: <dig> , and 80: <dig>  pegda to glutathione ratio gels . there was clear increase in bound purified gst-gfp protein  when gsh was incorporated in the gels at the highest extent. the 1: <dig> and 5: <dig> ratio gels were statistically different from all other groups while the lower incorporation ratios did not associate with significantly differing amounts of gst-gfp. these experiments demonstrate significant protein association with gel homogenates harboring gsh compared to controls. as the pegda:gsh ratio decreased, more gst-gfp was able to associate with the homogenized gels.

after homogenization and washing, pegda:gsh homogenates were used to specifically purify gst tagged gfp. further, we demonstrated that decreasing the pegda:gsh ratio from 80: <dig> to 1: <dig> resulted in increased gst affinity to gel homogenates. the pegda:gsh ratio was not further optimized because gsh inhibits polymerization reactions and gel formation at higher concentration. gsh is a known radical scavenger that decreases the number of free radicals available to sustain the polymerization cycle  <cit> . gsh also incorporates into acrylate groups and stops chain growth by eliminating alkene groups necessary for polymer propagation  <cit> . at some point the pegda:gsh ratio will become low enough that no usable gel will form. in this report, we focused on gels that had qualitatively acceptable and manageable physical properties, i.e. handlability for homogenization.

specificity of gst-gfp to gsh laden hydrogel homogenates
to confirm the specificity of the interaction, nickel-purified gst-gfp was incubated in the presences of homogenates made with equimolar gsh  or cysteine . there was no appreciable gfp observed in the cysteine-containing gels while the gsh-containing gels were visibly fluorescent. for homogenates made with glutathione, 10 mm gsh  was able to elute the gfp completely while 10 mm cysteine  was unable to elute the protein. elution of the gst-gfp was found to be specific to gsh. no protein was eluted with gsh  from hydrogels lacking gsh incorporation or eluted by cysteine  from gels including glutathione. proteins of appropriate molecular weight  were eluted with gsh from gsh-containing gels.

purifying gst-gfp from e coli protein extract
these experiments indicate that specific interactions take place between the gels and gst fusion proteins. this is not necessarily indicative of the ability of the materials to purify proteins from total bacterial lysates. using the homogenized 5: <dig> pegda:gsh gels, crude lysates including gst-gfp from the induced, soluble protein fraction was batch selected over 2 h and eluted with 10 mm gsh. from soluble lysate, it was difficult to elucidate the gst-gfp protein . following nickel purification , the enriched fraction showed a high degree of purity and appropriate size as a monomer in absence of glutathione  or as a dimer in the presence of glutathione . without gsh incorporation, little protein and no purification was achieved with pegda gels . a significant single predominant band was obtained when purification took place in the presence of pegda:gsh gels . the size of nickel purified gst-gfp eluted with imidazole  is half the size of gst-gfp eluted with glutathione . a protein of this mass is present in all samples and being twice of the size of the gst-containing monomer suggests dimerization. the absence of the gst monomer with excess gsh further suggests that the dimer would be the predominant protein present. it is known that the gst acts as a homodimer with its substrate between the two monomers  <cit> . from 1 ml of the initial soluble gst-gsh lysate associated with the pegda:gsh homogenates,  <dig>  μg were eluted from the pegda homogenates, and 15 μg were eluted from the pegda:gsh homogenates. this indicates an approximate  <dig> fold increased affinity of the gst-gfp to 5: <dig> pegda:gsh compared to pegda. 

the homogenates were examined with fluorescence microscopy  and it was noted that the areas of fluorescence differed in intensity inversely correlating with the thickness of the homogenized piece. further, there was expected variation between the size of the homogenized pieces that were between 10 μm and 500 μm . although we felt the homogenization method may be acceptable for labs with the facilities to make the particles and that these experiments allowed us to optimize the parameters necessary for protein purification, we felt that further improvements were possible. in order to improve the yield of gsh:pegda purified protein and consistency, we sought more homogeneously distributed, smaller particles as we expected these to allow for more efficient association of gst-gfp to the hydrogels.

creation of pegda:gsh microspheres and establishing affinity to gst-gfp
we prepared microspheres using a reverse phase emulsion technique  <cit>  to obtain more control over size and shape of the particles. the spheres were more homogenously distributed between 10 μm and 200 μm . in addition, spheres made with 5: <dig> pegda:gsh showed significant and uniform association with the gst-gfp . microspheres made from pegda:gsh had significantly greater affinity than pegda microspheres. in addition, there was no significant decrease in affinity to gst-gfp than purchased spheres made from gsh-agarose . we hypothesized that homogenous sized, spherical microspheres would increase gst-gfp association with the hydrogels by increasing the surface area of the polymer available for protein association. microspheres were produced with pegda:gsh ratios as low as 5: <dig>  but yields decreased at lower ratios . spheres at a 5: <dig> pegda:gsh molar ratio displayed significant interaction with gst-gfp over control gels without gsh. these easy to fabricate and inexpensive particles have great potential for protein purification. this is particularly true since the microspheres interact similarly to purchased gsh-sepharose® beads. homogenates were able to remove 35% of the gst-gfp from the protein solution  while microspheres bind a similar amount of gst-gfp  at  <dig> fold less mass. microspheres demonstrate an increased binding capability compared to the homogenates. this increased binding may well be attributed to an increased surface area of the microspheres compared to homogenates, but further experiments would be needed to test this hypothesis. 

association of protein through gst-gsh interactions on the surface pegda microspheres introduces the exciting possibility of using these spheres for delivery of protein therapies. building upon our previous work using proteolytically activated hydrogels  <cit> , we envision using fusion proteins to release therapeutic proteins in response to disease-specific proteases. therapeutic proteins would be released in the interstitial space  <cit>  or intracellularly  <cit>  by specific protease sites engineered between the gst and the therapeutic protein. alternatively, high intracellular concentrations of reduced glutathione  <cit>  could be used elute the gst-protein from the glutathione-containing material. several proteases, including matrix metalloproteainse  <dig> , have been shown to be upregulated in many cancers  <cit> . specific, short amino acid sequences have been discovered that are cleavable by mmp- <dig>  <cit> , and could be incorporated between a tag gst and a therapeutic protein. in this way, the gst-gsh interaction could act as an anchor, holding the therapeutic protein on a hydrogel until mmp- <dig> cleaves the therapeutic protein from the gst anchor. such an approach would be comparable to natural protein release from the extracellular matrix by mmps. this biomimetic approach would advance the ability to bind protein therapeutics to hydrogels for disease-specific release. further studies are underway to assess the potential for such a system in drug delivery.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown a simple and effective method for conjugating glutathione to pegda. these materials specifically purify gst-tagged gfp. the purity of the gfp is similar to that purified by commercial ni-affinity agarose, and the purity and yield are compatible to purchased gst-agarose beads. in challenging economic times we believe this simple and inexpensive method will be useful as an in-house alternative to purchasing more expensive commercial products in addition to other uses.

