BACKGROUND
despite the advances in hospital care and the introduction of a wide variety of antimicrobial agents, pseudomonas aeruginosa continues to be a major nosocomial pathogen particularly in patients who suffer from immunosuppression  <cit> . p. aeruginosa is a ubiquitous pathogen prevalent in the hospital environments, and can cause severe nosocomial infections  <cit> . the latter involve a broad spectrum of infections including the respiratory, gastrointestinal, and urinary tracts as well as wound infections, sepsis and others  <cit> . various possible sources of p. aeruginosa infection in hospitals have been identified; such as tap water, medical equipment, hospital personnel and other patients  <cit> . p. aeruginosa accounts for 10% of all hospital acquired infections, a site specific prevalence which may vary from one unit to another and from study to study  <cit> . among data on site-specific infections, p. aeruginosa appears to be the major cause of ventilator-associated pneumonia with a high rate of attributable mortality  <cit> . moreover this organism can contaminate a number of other medical equipment such as respirators, endoscopes, bronchoscopes, transvenous pacemakers, urinary catheters, and dialysis equipment, leading to site-related infections  <cit> . during the last year, the average prevalence of p. aeruginosa nosocomial infections in our medical center was 18%. such a high rate prompted us to study the p. aeruginosa genotypes circulating in the various units to reveal the clonal relationship between clinical and environmental isolates and to allow elucidating the source and mode of transmission of this important bacterium at this medical center.

RESULTS
our data have shown that several mechanical devices were associated with p. aeruginosa infection in our patients with 55% due to mechanical ventilation and the remaining 45% due to polysite catheters, foley catheters and different types of surgery.

rapd analysis have shown  <dig> genotypes present among the clinical and the environmental isolates . thirty eight of ninety  of the clinical isolates and 10/ <dig>  of the environmental isolates showed genotype  <dig> to be distributed among the medical center units. each of the genotypes 2– <dig> represented from 1–8% of the strains. antimicrobial susceptibility testing has shown that susceptibility patterns between clinical and environmental isolates were similar with most drugs showing > 90% susceptibility, with the exception of tobramycin and gentamycin which showed lower susceptibility  in the environmental strains. data is in concordance with previous reports in this institution  <cit> . enzymatic assays determined that genotype  <dig> in addition to other  <dig> genotypes, in clinical and environmental isolates, were positive for all virulence factors tested for. all other genotypes were all positive for the production of protease, lecithinase and coagulase and positive in 83–89% of the cases for the production of the other  <dig> virulence factors . table  <dig> shows the relationship between the various genotypes, to source, antibiograms and virulence factors.

discussion
the strain distribution based on rapd analysis showed that clinical and environmental isolates distributed in one or more than one unit, included genotypes 1– <dig> and  <dig>  with predominance of genotype  <dig> in all investigated units. this may indicate that cross contamination among patients lead to the spread of this genotype among the various units, possibly through transient hand carriage by health care personnel due to contact with contaminated surfaces or by patient contact with contaminated surfaces or medical equipment  <cit> . our findings suggest that cross colonization may be an important means of p. aeruginosa spread and infection especially after identification of a potentially virulent clone  of this organism that had been propagated in various units over a period of  <dig> months. this could indicate that the patients were continuously infected with a strain originating from an exogenous source. the importance of cross colonization of p. aeruginosa in nosocomial infections was previously reported, by bergmans et al who studied  <dig> patients admitted to an icu ward; cross colonization accounted for 50% of all cases of acquired p. aeruginosa colonization, the other 50% of patients were probably colonized from endogenous sources  <cit> .

the remaining genotypes were isolated exclusively from the clinical specimens of patients and were not detected among environmental isolates. most of these genotypes did not harbor all the virulence factors tested for. not being encountered in environmental sources may indicate that these strains may have been endogenously acquired. high rate of colonization with p. aeruginosa from endogenous sources occurs mainly in the respiratory and gastrointestinal tracts  <cit> . hospitalization may lead to increased rates of carriage, particularly in the lower respiratory tract in patients undergoing mechanical ventilation, upper respiratory tract due to broncho- pulmonary colonization and infection, in the gastrointestinal tract of patients receiving chemotherapy for neoplastic diseases, or at virtually any site in patients treated with antibiotics  <cit> .

prevalence of strains with resistance to all antimicrobial agents will constitute a major risk for hospitalized patients. in our study, though, the most prevalent strain of genotype  <dig> was susceptible to all antimicrobial agents and does not constitute a problem in treatment. however, its potential of producing all virulence factors and being spread by various means in the hospital, unlike other genotypes that harbor all virulence factors, may render genotype  <dig> a high risk pathogen specially in the immunosuppressed and debilitated patients. the fact that genotype  <dig> remained susceptible to all antibiotics lead to the conclusion that patients could be continuously infected with a strain originating from an exogenous source.

in addition to mechanical spread by personnel, this genotype may carry a number of adhesins that enhance its colonization in the hospital environment and render it more accessible to patients. studies are underway in our laboratory to detect by pcr, genes encoding a number of adhesins and determine their transcription levels in genotype  <dig>  in comparison to other encountered genotypes. this will shed light on the possible role of adhesins on the prevalence of this genotype in the hospital environment. the extracellular enzymes or toxins produced, on the other hand, will contribute to the breaking down physical barriers and help the organism to penetrate, impair host defenses, and render its new milieu more conducive to its physical, nutritional and reproductive requirements  <cit> .

in summary, our data have shown the predominant prevalence of a potentially virulent p. aeruginosa genotype  <dig> in clinical and environmental specimens, circulating in the various hospital units. from a practical point of view, the results of our study emphasize the need to reinforce implementation of infection control measures, and to limit the transmission of p. aeruginosa among patients and from environmental sources to patients. screening for p. aeruginosa carriage in all patients with nosocomial colonization or infection should also be done in research settings using both rectal and respiratory tract specimens to determine the source of colonization/infection and hence get informed on whether it was acquired endogenously or exogenously.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our data have shown the predominant prevalence of a potentially virulent p. aeruginosa genotype  <dig> in clinical and environmental specimens, circulating in the various medical center units.

