BACKGROUND
environmentally inflicted stresses such as extreme temperatures, low water availability, high salt levels, mineral deficiency and toxicity are frequently encountered by plants both in natural and agricultural system that affect plant productivity. according to bayer  <cit> , abiotic stresses are estimated to reduce yields to less than half of that possible under ideal growing conditions. the efforts to improve crop performance under environmental stresses have been moderately successful as the fundamental mechanisms of stress tolerance in plants are yet to be completely understood. conventional approaches to breeding crop plants with improved stress tolerance have thus far met with limited success because of the difficulty of breeding tolerance associated traits from diverse plant backgrounds. hence, an increasing emphasis has been directed to molecular strategies targeted at enhancing the intrinsic ability of the plants to survive stress conditions. current approaches proposed to date focus attention on identification of genes associated with salinity, drought and abiotic stress resistance, followed by genetic modification of the plants expressing genes enabling them to withstand restrictive growth imposed by unfavourable environmental conditions  <cit> .

functional screening of microorganisms that express heterologous cdna libraries is a powerful tool for identifying genes with specific functions, independent of the regulation of their expression  <cit> . the screening of e. coli or yeast expressing plant cdnas has been used successfully to identify genes that are involved in enhanced stress tolerance  <cit> . functional screening of sodium-sensitive yeast expressing a cdna library of the halotolerant plant sugar beet resulted in identification of the eukaryotic translation initiation factor , and overexpression of the eif1a has been reported to increase salt tolerance of yeast and arabidopsis  <cit> . cadmium -sensitive yeast mutant ycf <dig> has been employed to screen arabidopsis cdna library to identify cadmium resistance gene, atpcrs  <cit> . the genes for allene oxide cyclase and the cytosolic chaperonin containing tcp-1a homologue  <cit>  have been isolated as salt tolerant genes from b. sexangula by functional screening on nacl-containing medium using e. coli as the host organism. more recently, ezawa and tada  <cit>  reported functional screening in agrobacterium as an effective supplemental method to pre-screen genes involved in abiotic stress tolerance. these results demonstrate that microbial functional screening is an effective tool to quickly identify stress tolerant gene candidates in plants.

genetic engineering and modern molecular breeding methods have been used to isolate key genes involved in abiotic stress response from characterized model plants such as arabidopsis, and several economically important crops  <cit> . directly applying these strategies to non-model plants is often challenging. several other approaches such as dd-rt-pcr, subtractive hybridization, microarray analysis and fox screening have also led to identification of genes regulated during stress response  <cit> . however, a functional effect of the gene identified on stress resistance is not always clearly established from such experimental approaches  <cit> . while it has been possible in certain instances to extend and utilize the information available on genes regulating and/or conferring salinity, drought and abiotic stress resistance in model plants, the ability to uncover novel or target plant specific genes/pathways regulating abiotic stress tolerance would be limited without a de novo screen.

jatropha curcas , a member of euphorbiaceae family has been identified as a biodiesel plant in tropical countries  <cit> . being a euphorbiaceae member, j. curcas, is to a certain extent, drought tolerant and has been documented in certain instances to grow in heavy metal contaminated soils  <cit> . commercial plantation of j. curcas has been proposed as a sustainable source of biodiesel mainly due to high seed oil content, lipid composition similar to that of fossil diesel and non-competing demand with edible oil supplies  <cit> . prospecting of novel genes expressed during stress tolerance from j. curcas and utilizing genetic information to modify and enhance the stress tolerance ability of this plant may enable development of j. curcas lines capable of producing growth in poor and marginal soils with acceptable oil yields. besides, these novel genes isolated from j. curcas may also be applied for genetic improvement of other agriculturally important crops mediated via heterologous gene expression or to develop saline and drought tolerant varieties.

however, due to limited genome information, large scale gene prospecting to identify genes that are linked to resistance to abiotic stress in j. curcas has been challenging. to overcome this limitation, we describe a functional genetic screen that utilizes yeast as a surrogate system to identify and isolate genes involved in stress tolerance. we have used yeast gal <dig> regulated, cdna expression libraries derived from j. curcas, to develop replica printing based functional screen for identification of yeast transformants expressing heterologous genes that confer abiotic stress tolerance. through the above screen, we have demonstrated the ability to isolate several novel genes specific to j. curcas expressed during abiotic stress tolerance.

RESULTS
identification of salt stress condition for wild-type yeasts and isolation of salt hypersensitive yeast mutants, shs- <dig>  shs- <dig> and shs-8
to identify and isolate j. curcas genes involved in salt tolerance, yeast cells were used for functional screening. yeast cells have been shown to exhibit salt stress, which is reflected as retardation in cell growth. wild type yeast strains have been reported to show salt sensitivity from  <dig> mm depending on growth conditions. in our assays we scored for survival of yeast-transformants that could survive at and beyond  <dig> mm nacl. this condition selected for the screen at a stringent concentration of  <dig> mm nacl, subjected the yeast transformants to ionic as well as osmotic stress, and imposed stringent conditions for salt and drought stresses. further, to enhance sensitivity of the screen, three salt hypersensitive mutants shs- <dig>  shs- <dig> and shs- <dig> were generated by random mutagenesis that exhibited growth retardation beyond  <dig> mm nacl . the salt hypersensitive mutant shs- <dig> was used to demonstrate the ability of recovered j. curcas genes to complement the salt sensitive defect in this mutant.

the underlying basis for the screen is the ability to use a catabolic regulated gal <dig> promoter  <cit>  to conditionally express a j. curcas gene in the yeast cells, cloned into a yeast shuttle vector  <cit> ; while scoring the relative survival of yeast cells exposed to salinity or other abiotic stress to the same yeast transformants, grown under repressed state, subject to similar stress or under control conditions. scoring the relative growth patterns allows the identification and characterization of the tolerant transformants by plasmid-rescue .

construction of cdna library from j. curcas to identify stress responsive genes
to understand the early salt-stress phenotypes and characterize the genes involved in early responses to salt stress on j. curcas, 3- <dig> week old seedlings were treated with various levels of salt stress . the phenotypic effects of salt stress resulted in observable wilting and drooping in j. curcas seedlings. the effect of salt stress was evident at a concentration of  <dig> mm nacl, and the effects were pronounced at higher salt concentrations, or when the seedlings were treated for prolonged time . further, from this time-course analysis, for salinity stress phenotype in j. curcas it was identified that the exposure of roots to  <dig> mm nacl for  <dig> h, at a relative humidity of 40-50% was sufficient to observe early effects of salt stress, which was marked by low level-wilting of young leaf tissue prior to stem drooping .

salt and stress pathways in plants are perceived by signalling networks and regulated by transcription machinery  <cit> . to enrich cdna libraries for transcripts that represent a greater proportion of early acting factor to later responding regulators, we sampled root tissue at the early-time points of salt stress. j. curcas root tissue samples treated at  <dig> mm, for  <dig> h time point were used in construction of cdna libraries using the smart cdna synthesis kit  <cit>  .

while plant genomes display large size variations, the number of expressed complement of genes involved in cellular processes are more conserved. based on the information available for model plant arabidopsis and rice, ~3000- <dig> genes out of a transcriptome of ~ <dig> genes are expressed in root tissue  <cit> . recent analysis indicates a modest genome size for the j. curcas, among euphorbiaceae members, with an estimated genome size of ~ <dig> mb that provide an approximation of transcriptome complexity  <cit> . to adequately represent root transcriptome, titers representing ~ <dig> c.f.u were recovered in each of the un-amplified pools that largely comprised of full-length cdna sequences in 45-50% of the genes. this library was used for subsequent functional analysis in yeast.

yeast based replica-printing method for isolating j. curcas genes involved in abiotic stress
to increase the probability of representation of each individual clone within these yeast expression libraries and to efficiently transform yeast, we amplified the copy numbers of clones contained in these libraries in e. coli . a total of  <dig>  yeast transformants  representing the j. curcas root cdna library was screened for salinity tolerance using a replica printing method . the replica printing process was devised to identify and isolate yeast transformants expressing heterologous gene sequences derived from j. curcas root cdna libraries, with a low-rate of false negatives. screening criteria included scoring relative survival advantage, for each transformant when subject to stress and gene expression status . this method increased efficiency of gene recovery and reduced the screening errors by providing additional, more exhaustive controls that allowed the identification and elimination of both false-positive as well as false-negative phenotypes. the screening conditions select yeast transformants that are capable of survival under stress  and are able to grow; while eliminating events due to lethality, non-expression and other experimental artefacts.

using the replica-printing based functional screen,  <dig> candidate yeast transformants expressing cdna  were isolated from a pool of  <dig>  yeast transformants. a representative data set showing results of phenotypic selection of salt tolerance is presented in . the transformed yeast cells displayed an enhanced ability to tolerate unfavourable conditions imposed by salinity stress at a stringent selection of  <dig> mm nacl concentration.

plasmid rescue, complementation of salt sensitive yeast phenotypes and sequence analysis
to determine and characterize j. curcas cdna gene sequences that conferred enhanced salinity tolerance at  <dig> mm nacl to yeast transformants plasmid rescue was performed as described in bates  <cit> . analysis of the dna sequence information, recovered from the yeast transformants showed that  <dig> sequences from  <dig> clones encoded full-length genes with assignable orf's derived from j. curcas; while the remaining were truncated cdna sequences. the ability to recover genes from j. curcas involved in these processes demonstrates the efficacy of our strategy.

to demonstrate the robustness of the screening method, we have re-transformed the rescued plasmids into wild-type yeast  and salt hypersensitive mutant shs- <dig> . we evaluated these transformants for growth at high-salt stress of  <dig> mm or higher concentration. several transformants of shs- <dig> mutant allowed growth at  <dig> mm nacl. the data demonstrated the ability of the plasmid encoded genes derived from j. curcas permitted survival of wild-type yeast transformants , and complemented several salt sensitive phenotypes of the shs- <dig> mutants. the data provided functional support for the consistent ability of the recovered genes to confer salt tolerance, and support cell growth at conditions otherwise detrimental to cell survival.

computational sequence, annotation and analysis reveals novel abiotic stress tolerant genes from j. curcas
further, sequence analysis and computational annotation reveals presence of novel genes from j. curcas involved in abiotic stress tolerance . to annotate the sequences, computational searches were performed for similarity to sequences deposited in plant sequence databases , that suggest the presence of plant specific regions within these sequences . in this analysis  <dig> out of  <dig>  sequences with assignable hit to the sequence databases showed matches greater than the accepted threshold as elaborated by altshul et al.  <cit>  to other known plant genes; while for a single sequence, significant matches to existing sequences in the sequence database was not apparent . this sequence could represent novel determinant of salinity and drought stress tolerance, whose role needs to be further established. of the  <dig> sequences,  <dig> sequences showed match to encoded ribosomal proteins, while  <dig> sequence was annotated as a eukaryotic translation initiation factor sui <dig>  twenty three sequences have been reported to have a strong role in conferring abiotic stress tolerance in other plant species .

*sequence ortholog with previous reports to abiotic stress tolerance have been marked with references in the table.

to understand the possible role of the genes and regulatory pathway for abiotic stress tolerance in j. curcas, we assigned functional classes for the gene sequences recovered in the present study. comparison of functional annotation for several of the sequences obtained from plasmid rescue indicated a possible role in tolerance to abiotic stress. some of the sequence orthologs of these genes have been reported to be involved in conferring stress tolerance in other plant species. we find among the list of known functions sequence classes mechanistically involved in abiotic stress tolerance due to wounding, response to cellular redox or oxidative damage, and modulation of cell physiology in response to stresses. for example, previous investigations indicate the involvement of metallothioneins  <cit> , thioredoxins, cellular redox machinery  <cit>  and factors involved in the regulation of protein translation  <cit>  to be associated with stress resistance in rice and arabidopsis. among gene sequences listed in table  <dig>  the most notable examples with implied roles in stress tolerance are discussed below: we isolated a sequence ortholog corresponding to allene oxide cyclase. sequences of allene oxide cyclase, isolated from mangrove have been reported to confer salinity stress tolerance in multiple organisms  <cit> . previous research data also indicate that accumulation of late embryogenesis abundant protein  transcripts in response to stress conditions such as cold, drought, uv light, salinity and wounding  <cit> . in this report, we isolated j. curcas lea- <dig> like sequences, suggesting a conservation in stress response pathway. additionally, we identified genes encoding major allergen pru ar1-like proteins, defensin and protease inhibitor/seed storage/lipid transfer protein family reported to get up-regulated upon pathogen attack and/or environmental stimuli  <cit> . plants have been known to have specific mechanism for detoxification of reactive oxygen species  induced in stress response which includes activation expression of antioxidant enzymes such as cytosolic ascorbate peroxidase- <dig> . experiments involving over-expression of apx- <dig> in transgenic tobacco, conferred enhanced tolerance to salt and water stress, by effectively detoxifying accumulated h2o <dig> in the chloroplasts  <cit> . mitochondrial atp synthase  <dig> kd subunit  is reported to be involved in nahco <dig> induced stress, whose over-expression in tobacco led to greater salt stress tolerance  <cit> . al-induced protein and copper chaperone have been implicated to provide protection to cellular function during cytotoxic reactions caused by metal ions  <cit> . we identified j. curcas sequence ortholog of a profilin. profilins have previously been implicated in root elongation and root hair system, a response that is directly linked to response of plants to adapt and source water during drought resistance  <cit> . the high frequency of occurrence of functionally conserved genetic components indicates a possible conservation in some of the genetic pathways and/or the genes regulating salinity and drought stress among diverse plants  <cit> . the fact that some of these factors are conserved suggests that certain aspects of mechanism of salt and water deficit stress sensing and response may be evolutionarily conserved among diverse taxa.

gene-expression analysis of selected j. curcas sequences involved in salinity stress tolerance using semi-quantitative rt-pcr
to understand and correlate the gene expression pattern of selected genes to functional roles in stress determination, we performed gene expression analysis in leaf and root tissues of j. curcas. in the present study, we selected five genes i.e., late embryogenesis abundant protein  <dig> , cytosolic ascorbate peroxidase , metallothionein, profilin and annexin, based on the diverse functional classes and varied mechanisms implicated in stress avoidance/tolerance pathways in model plants. while our functional screen has been designed to identify functional genes to abiotic stress tolerance, rather than rely on changes in gene expression; several reports have correlated changes in gene expression to possible gene functions mediating stress tolerance  <cit> . to correlate gene function and gene-expression status for each of the genes, semi-quantitative rt-pcr analysis was conducted. we assayed for changes in transcript abundance for each of the genes that have been normalized to actin, in both leaf and root tissue, that were either control treated or salt stressed, before sampling at various time-intervals . changes in expression for each transcript normalized to actin have been plotted in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> 

analysis of the gene-expression data suggests dynamic changes in the transcript abundance of these genes, with changes in transcript level being apparent from  <dig> h time-point, indicating an early regulation of the genes in response to salt stress. gene expression of the normalized transcripts suggests both up-regulation as well as repression of the transcripts. we noted increased expression of profilin in root tissue between  <dig> h to  <dig> h time-points of exposure to  <dig> mm salt stress; whereas profilin was repressed in leaves  consistent with previously reported function during salt stress  <cit> . in contrast, we observed an initial repression in the expression of annexin that was subsequently induced in the root-tissue, while the expression was down-regulated upon salt-stress in the leaves . transcript abundance in the levels of apx- <dig> and metallothioneins were down-regulated in roots, while a more dynamic expression pattern was observed in the leaf tissues, implicating a role in stress adaptive responses  <cit> . among the transcripts we profiled in this study, only lea- <dig> was up-regulated in leaves at the  <dig> h time interval, after initial down-regulation at the  <dig> h time-point; while in roots lea- <dig> expression was unaffected by salt stress. such an induction of lea- <dig> in leaf-tissue demonstrated either a longer range signal or the terminal effects of long exposure to ions by the roots. further experiments are required to de-lineate these effects. the gene-expression data, indirectly suggests varied modes of gene-regulation between the leaf and root tissue . the data indicates a complex framework for gene regulation during adaptation to salt stress in different tissues. the data in conjunction with gene function may help unravel certain aspects of plant abiotic stress response.

CONCLUSIONS
the approach described in the report provides a rapid and universal assay system for large scale screening of genes for varied abiotic stress tolerance within a short span of time. using the above screening strategy, we could isolate genes with previously known function in stress tolerance and novel sequences with unknown function in salt stress tolerance from j. curcas. the semi-quantitative rt-pcr expression analysis of selected genes revealed differential expression in leaves and roots in response to salt stress. the isolated genes could be over-expressed using plant expression system to generate and evaluate transgenic plants for stress tolerance as well as be used as markers for breeding salt stress tolerance in plants. with minor modification, the functional screening methodology reported in the present study may be extended to isolate plant genes that confer tolerance to a diverse array of possible abiotic stresses. the stress conditions that can be screened with this assay include a) ph stress  b) oxidative stresses c) unfavorable temperature d) heavy metal and e) dna damage/radiation .

