BACKGROUND
microhylidae is a large anuran family containing  <dig> species equivalent to 8% of all frogs  <cit> . this family belongs to the phylogenetically-nested anuran group, neobatrachia, and forms ranoides with afrobatrachia  and natatanura .

members of the microhylidae occur in most continents and several large islands, i.e., africa, eurasia , south and north america, australia, new guinea, and madagascar. since frost et al.  <cit> , the subfamilial classification of this family had been largely modified based on new findings from several molecular phylogenetic studies  <cit> . consequently, eleven microhylid subfamilies are now recognized  <cit>  and each subfamily generally occurs in one landmass area derived from the gondwana supercontinent as follows: asterophryinae ; cophylinae, dyscophinae, and scaphiophryninae ; gastrophryninae and otophryninae ; hoplophryninae and phrynomerinae ; and kalophryninae, melanobatrachinae, and microhylinae . despite comprehensive phylogenetic studies, the subfamilial relationships have not been well elucidated . further, this family contains  <dig> genera for which subfamilial affiliations have not been investigated  <cit> . the majority of these genera occur in south america, but two taxa are distributed in asia. these mysterious genera contain only one to three species and difficulty in collecting them has prevented herpetologists from using them in phylogenetic study. recently, we succeeded in obtaining specimens of the problematic asian genera, gastrophrynoides and phrynella. originally, gastrophrynoides was a monotypic genus but the specimen used here is a newly found species of this genus   <cit> .

because of their transcontinental distribution, microhylids have been regarded as an attractive research target for biogeography studies. since savage  <cit> , several biogeographic scenarios that incorporate the plate tectonics theory and breaking up the gondwanan landmass, have been proposed to explain the trans-continental distribution of anuran taxa including microhylids  <cit> . two molecular phylogenetic and dating analyses that aimed to elucidate the higher phylogeny, divergence ages, and formation process of the transcontinental distribution of microhylid taxa were recently performed  <cit> . these studies that used different taxa and molecular data resulted in different relationships and divergence ages for microhylid subfamilies. consequently, consensus on a biogeographic scenario to explain the microhylid distribution pattern has not been reached. furthermore, although these studies proposed different colonization scenarios for many microhylid taxa, they agree on a similar antarctic route scenario for the australian-new guinean taxon , as suggested in other vertebrate taxa distributed in australia .

it is generally considered that employing long sequence data, and increased taxon sampling in molecular phylogenetic inference, can clarify problematic phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . thus, in this study, we sequenced two mitochondrial  and six nuclear genes  from  <dig> microhylid specimens comprising eight out of  <dig> microhylid subfamilies, to determine the phylogenetic positions of the two problematic asian microhylid genera, and re-examine the phylogenetic relationships and divergence ages of microhylid subfamilies with the long sequence data and additional samples. based on our finding for the phylogenetic position and divergence age of the genus gastrophrynoides, we advance a novel colonizing scenario for the australian-new guinean microhylids.

RESULTS
molecular phylogenetic analyses
the  <dig> specimens analyzed in this study are shown in table  <dig>  briefly, we used  <dig> microhylid specimens from eight out of  <dig> known subfamilies, four afrobatrachians, five natatanurans, two hyloids, and two archaeobatrachians. from these specimens, we sequenced two mt and six nuclear genes approx.  <dig> kbp in total.

numbers in braces indicate the data from previous studies listed in references. born: borneensis collection, universiti malaysia sabah; iabhu: institute for amphibian biology, hiroshima university; kuhe: graduate school of human and environmental studies, kyoto university; kuz: department of zoology, kyoto university; uadba: université d'antananarivo, département de biologie animale; ukm hc: universiti kebangsaan malaysia, herpetological collection; zfmk: zoologisches forschungsmuseum alexander koenig; zsm: zoologische staatssammlung münchen.

adding our data to that from two previous studies  <cit> , we produced the longest aligned dataset  so far used with these taxa . maximum likelihood  and bayesian interference  analyses were performed on this dataset. the resultant ml tree is shown in figure  <dig>  the bi tree recovered an identical topology, except that one branch that was resolved in the ml tree collapsed to a trichotomy in the bi tree . our ml and bi trees strongly supported the monophyly of the family microhylidae, the monophyly of each microhylid subfamily , and the generic relationships within each subfamily . unfortunately, these trees could not fully elucidate subfamilial relationships .

relationships of microhylid subfamilies
the two most basal nodes among the microhylids, phrynomerinae and hoplophryninae, are both african in distribution. the remaining subfamilies are divided into two clades. one clade consists of two asian, one australian-new guinean, and one madagascan taxa, i.e., kalophryninae + ). the subfamilial relationships within this clade were well supported by bootstrap probabilities  and bayesian posterior probabilities . the other clade includes one american and two madagascan taxa, gastrophryninae + . the relationships within this clade and among the basal african taxa were not strongly supported by either bp or bpp values.

many alternative relationships have been suggested for these poorly-supported groups . we evaluated these alternatives using the likelihood based approximately unbiased  and kishino-hasegawa  tests and could not reject four of ten alternative relationships for the african, american, and madagascan taxa . considering the similar likelihood scores among our ml tree and the alternative topologies , the lack of statistical difference may be due to low phylogenetic signal in the dna sequences due to ancient rapid divergences of these microhylid taxa .

ml and lnl refer maximum likelihood and log-likelihood value. Δlnl indicates difference of log-likelihood value from that of the ml topology. for kh and au tests, p >  <dig> , <  <dig> , and <  <dig>  are shown by -, +, ++, respectively. *the maximum likelihood tree under the constraint of "gastrophrynoides is not monophyly with asterophryinae".

in our trees, the kalophryninae + ) clade seems to be well resolved. for these taxa, our dataset  was able to reject most alternative relationships proposed in previous studies . however, an alternative kalophryninae position suggested by van der meijden et al.  <cit>  could not be rejected . furthermore, when we used a data subset  that contained a member of the subfamily melanobatrachinae not present in the aln- <dig> dataset, a different kalophryninae position, melanobatrachinae + ), was recovered . this suggests that the melanobatrachini data affected the kalophryninae position. in contrast to the kalophryninae case, the asterophryinae +  clade was well supported by two data subsets having different taxon samplings . two recent molecular phylogenetic studies also suggested this clade and the relationships within  <cit> . thus, the monophyly of these australian-new guinean, madagascan, and asian taxa seems to be well established.

phylogenetic positions of mysterious microhylid genera
in this study, two asian genera, phrynella and gastrophrynoides, of which subfamilial affiliations have not been investigated, were analyzed. our ml and bi trees resulted in the genus phrynella being nested in the asian subfamily microhylinae . by contrast, the genus gastrophrynoides did not become a member of the asian group, rather this taxon possessed the most basal position of the members of the australasian-new guinean subfamily, asterophryinae . the au and kh tests clearly rejected the "non-monophyly of gastrophrynoides and asterophryines" . furthermore, the most basal position of gastrophrynoides among asterophryines was also supported by our data subsets . consequently, our analyses clearly elucidated the phylogenetic positions of these problematic asian genera. around the same time as this study, matsui et al.  <cit>  suggested the phrynella position within microhylinae and a close relationship of gastrophrynoides with asterophryinae from their analyses using 12s and 16s gene data.

the synapomorphy of the subfamily asterophryinae is direct developing eggs  <cit> . although the breeding ecology of the genus gastrophrynoides is not known, the pigment-less eggs and rudimentary webbings in g. borneensis  <cit>  suggest direct development. thus, we transiently regard this genus as a member of the subfamily asterophryinae. furthermore, the distribution of another asterophryine genus, oreophryne, in islands of south-east asia  has been noted  <cit> . however, asterophryine species have not been reported from mainland eurasia. thus, g. immaculatus from the malay peninsula is the first record of the occurrence of a species belonging to the asterophryine lineage in mainland eurasia.

generic relationships within microhylinae
this study contains the first molecular phylogenetic analysis that covers all known microhyline genera . our analyses largely elucidated the phylogenetic relationships of microhyline genera, excluding the positions of kaloula spp., chaperina, and micryletta . the ml and bi trees from the aln- <dig> dataset obtained the two major clades for microhyline genera with good statistical support: the microhyla +  clade and the clade including kaloula, metaphrynella, phrynella, and ramanella . in the latter clade, the monophyly of metaphrynella and phrynella was strongly suggested . our data subsets also supported this clade . thus, the precise phylogenetic position of the genus phrynella within the subfamily microhylinae is clearly elucidated.

it is noteworthy that our analyses suggested the polyphyly of the genus kaloula . the au and kh tests clearly rejected the monophyly of this genus . our data subsets and the analyses of van bocxlaer et al.  <cit>  also suggested that kaloula as currently delimited is not a natural group . because k. pulchra  is the type species of the genus kaloula, the generic name of k. taprobanica might be altered in a future study.

divergence times of microhylid taxa
using two data subsets  for which we had greater taxon sampling and our ml tree topology , we estimated divergence times. three distinct combinations of calibration points were applied for each dataset, for a total six dating calculations . the estimated divergence times from these calibrations are summarized in table  <dig>  and the detailed results are shown in additional file  <dig> 

node, roman numerals corresponding to fig.  <dig>  md, mean difference. na, not applicable. ns, not shown by the authors. *1they used two distinct dating methods and many distinct calibration point settings. the ages listed here were from the bayesian molecular clock method and a calibration point setting  used as main result in their paper. *2corresponding to the split age between cophylinae +  clade and asterophryinae +  clade in  <cit> . *3corresponding to the split age of phrynomerinae + gastrophryninae clade from other microhylids in  <cit> . *4corresponding to the split of otophryninae from other microhylids occurred between ii and vi.

similar divergence ages of microhylid taxa were estimated from the six calibrations; for most microhylid nodes, the median age estimated from one calibration was overlapped by the 95% confidence interval  values from the other calibrations. the exceptions were several node ages that differed between the calibrations a and f. the average ages  of the six calibrations for major microhylid divergence events are as follows .   <dig>  ma  for the split of microhylids from other ranoids.   <dig>  ma  for the initial divergence of extant microhylid subfamilies .   <dig>  ma  for the divergence of hoplophryninae from the remaining microhylid subfamilies.   <dig>  ma  for split of the gastrophryninae +  lineage.   <dig>  ma  for the split of kalophryninae from the asterophryinae +  clade.   <dig>  ma  for the splits of asterophryinae from the dyscophinae + microhylinae clade.   <dig>  ma  for the split of dyscophinae and microhylinae.   <dig>  ma  for the split of gastrophryninae from the cophylinae + scaphiophryninae clade.   <dig>  ma  for the split of cophylinae and scaphiophryninae.   <dig>  ma  for the split of gastrophrynoides from asterophryine genera.   <dig>  ma  for the initial divergence of asterophryine genera .

additional calibrations  based on two alternative topologies  also estimated similar ages for these microhylid divergences . two previous molecular dating studies  have focused on these taxa. our divergence times are similar to those from van bocxlaer et al.  <cit> , but are slightly older than those from van der meijden et al.  <cit> .

based on our estimations, the microhylid subfamilies diverged between  <dig> and  <dig> ma . these estimated ages suggest a rapid radiation of major microhylid lineages, within less than  <dig> ma during the late cretaceous. according to traditional plate-tectonic theory, gondwanan landmasses  had already fragmented  by this time. thus, although several vicariance hypotheses based on gondwanan fragmentation have been proposed for the trans-continental distribution of microhylids , our results can definitively reject a strictly vicariant scenario. rather, our estimated dates fit a dispersal hypotheses   <cit>  and/or the prolonged existence of land connections among the fragmented gondwana landmasses  <cit> .

colonization route of australian-new guinean taxa
this study could not resolve relationships among many microhylid subfamilies. however, the clade of madagascan dyscophinae + asian microhylidae and the sister relationship of australian-new guinean asterophryinae with this clade are well established. furthermore, we revealed that the genus gastrophrynoides, which is only found in areas derived from the eurasian landmass , occupies the most basal phylogenetic position among asterophryines, and this taxon split from other asterophryine lineages during the eocene .

an antarctic route  has been postulated by two independent studies  <cit>  as the colonization route of asterophryinae into the australian-new guinean landmass. however, our new phylogenetic placement of the genus gastrophrynoides and the estimated divergence times of gastrophrynoides from its related taxa seem to suggest an alternative colonization pathway, from asia to the new guinean landmass, for asterophryinae . in this context, the lineage split between asterophryinae and microhylinae  occurred in the indian landmass during the late cretaceous , and these ancestors colonized asia by the collision of india and eurasia. the lineages of gastrophrynoides and other asterophryines split during the eocene . then, the ancestor of major asterophryines moved from asia to the australian-new guinean landmass via islands and/or short sea straits around the late oligocene  when both landmasses had been closing, and southeast asian islands had been uplifting  <cit> . if the ancestor had acquired the direct development characteristics, the synapomorphy of asterophryines, which can eliminate the use of a freshwater environment for the egg and tadpole development, oversea dispersal of this ancestor would have occurred relatively easily  <cit> . finally, radiation of asterophryines mainly occurred in the new guinean area and several lineages moved to australia.

compared with the antarctic route, our proposed scenario accounts well for the very low species diversity of asterophryines in australia  relative to that on new guinea and for the recent divergence time of asterophryines , both of which are difficult to explain in the antarctic scenario  <cit> . furthermore, to explain the placement of gastrophrynoides under the antarctic scenario, one would have to assume long-distance overseas dispersal of the gastrophrynoides lineage from australia to asia during the eocene, when the southeast asian islands had not yet formed, followed by the extinction of basal asterophrynine taxa  only in australian and new guinean areas.

a weakness of our asian route scenario is a lack of confidence in the sister taxon of the asterophryinae +  clade, the limited taxon sampling of asterophryines in our analyses, and the absence of other basal taxa belonging to the asterophryine lineage in other asian areas, especially in india. thus, to support our hypothesis, further phylogenetic studies, ideally supplemented by the discovery of new fossils, and more comprehensive surveys for living microhylids in asian areas will be necessary. undoubtedly, the discovery of the unique taxon gastrophrynoides from asian area has revealed a new concept for the asterophryine evolution. further this finding has significance to show the possible presence of further microhylid taxa with unexpected evolutionary backgrounds and give a basis for future paleontological and biogeographic studies of asian anurans.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we performed phylogenetic analyses for higher microhylid taxa with the largest molecular data so far applied. our results clearly indicate that one of two problematic asian genera, phrynella, is a member of the asian subfamily microhylinae. by contrast, gastrophrynoides possesses the most basal position of the australian-new guinean subfamily asterophryinae , and it is estimated that gastrophrynoides split from other asterophryine occurred around  <dig> ma . the presence of the most basal asterophryine taxon in the eurasian area suggests the colonization route from asia to australia for asterophryines , although a colonization scenario via antarctica to the australian-new guinean landmass has been suggested for asterophryinae. the biogeographic findings on gastrophrynoides imply the possible occurrence of further microhylid taxa with unexpected evolutionary backgrounds and give a basis for future paleontological and biogeographic studies of asian anurans.

