BACKGROUND
as we move further into the post-genomic era it becomes increasingly clear that dna sequence data alone is insufficient to explain complex cellular and molecular processes. although the enormous volume of data generated by genome sequencing projects, expressed sequence tags , and cdna analyses has improved our understanding of many processes, they often fail to reflect the influence of posttranscriptional modifications and protein interactions or offer a true reflection of protein levels or activity. consequently, the role of specific proteins is relatively difficult to determine with confidence on the basis of mrna expression or genomic data alone  <cit> .

proteomic approaches offer a more realistic description of protein function and its influence on cell dynamics. although comparative analysis of phenotypically different biological samples, such as in diseased versus healthy tissue  <cit> , remains a challenge, those studies raise the possibility of identifying the protein "signatures" that underlie key biological phenomena  <cit> . furthermore, the use of bioinformatics to integrate data obtained using genomic and proteomic techniques could help to bypass the limitations of each approach and achieve a more comprehensive view of the information flow within cells.

planarians, an emerging model system for the investigation of stem cell and regenerative biology,  <cit> , have a unique population of stem cells called neoblasts , which can give rise to all of the differentiated cell types present in the adult organism during regeneration or normal homeostasis  <cit> . albeit a great deal is now known about the biology of these cells, most molecular data have come from cdna and genomic analyses. the neoblasts are particularly suited to proteomic approaches, however, as they contain chromatoid bodies  that are progressively lost during differentiation  <cit>  and can be employed as a marker for undifferentiated cells. the cb complexes are mainly formed by proteins and latent mrna molecules, which can distort the levels of gene expression in transcriptional analyses of neoblasts samples. moreover, since the neoblasts are the only dividing cells in the planaria  <cit> , they can be easily depleted by irradiation  <cit> . thus, these unique characteristics make planarians an ideal system in which to explore the use of proteomics to analyze the biology of processes such cell differentiation, stem cell behavior, homeostasis and an array of other events. as a first step in the development of such an approach, here we describe the methodological establishment and validation of a proteomic analysis of the planarian neoblast.

RESULTS
establishment of the planarian proteomic approach
different methods were tested to achieve a consistent and reproducible pattern on two-dimensional  gels. to optimize sample preparation, proteins were extracted from dissociated cells or from whole animals. the yield from dissociated cells was insufficient to establish an efficient 2d procedure. furthermore, the reproducibility of the 2d gel pattern was poor . prior to extraction from whole animals, a short treatment with 2% cysteine chloride in planarian water was used to eliminate mucous production, which is known to interfere with molecular techniques  <cit> . based on our tests and previous work by collet and baguñà  <cit> , we established a consistent method for 2d analysis from planarian samples . the different lysis buffers and sample cleaning procedures tested are shown in table  <dig>  between  <dig> and  <dig> μg of total planarian proteins were loaded on 2d gels to establish the best sample quantity in terms of spot definition. from  <dig> to  <dig> μg the spot resolution was acceptable. we selected the  <dig> μg as the optimal amount of protein to load onto 2d gels to achieve the maximum number of spots. a minimum of  <dig> μg was necessary for spot detection. different immobilized ph gradient strips were used and the second-dimension protocol was modified to avoid streaking problems . all these variables were tested on 12-cm 2d gels and scaled up to 24-cm gels for subsequent procedures.

samples:

dissociated cell extracts,
extraction buffers:
processing sample:


amersham 2d clean up kit,
acetone,
isoelectric focusing

:
linear ph 4- <dig> 
linear ph 7- <dig> 
other modifications:

general protease inhibitors,
all the different variables affecting protein sample production and 2d gel electrophoresis are listed on this table.

proteomic data
in order to identify proteins specifically expressed in neoblasts, we compared 2d patterns of two samples: wild type  versus irradiated animals . this method has been extensively used to study the effects of neoblast depletion  <cit> . extractions were done  <dig> days after irradiation, when animals remained viable but cell proliferation was absent . once the protocol was set up and the spot patterns were reproducible , the spots were compared and selected. although spot labelling by silver staining and dige was consistent in each case, we did not succeed in obtaining a uniform pattern with the two techniques. follow-up analysis was therefore done separately. with the aim of establishing the real potential of the silver-staining technique, only clear and conserved qualitative comparison based on silver staining was considered . image master 2d™software  was used to analyze the scanned gels. however, the potential bottleneck of this proteomic approach is the image analysis. many authors have highlighted the difficulties in obtaining good replicates  <cit> , and this has now been partially overcome with the use of dige. whereas our silver-staining results showed remarkable pattern conservation within replicates , the numbers after spot image analysis showed some variability. in order to improve signal specificity we used two types of gels, one loaded with  <dig> μg and another with  <dig> μg of sample protein. the differences between irradiated and non-irradiated samples that were conserved in both sample loads and also had three surrounding reference spots in both experimental conditions were selected after reviewing the correspondence in ip and mw . these restrictions reduced the number of selected spots substantially, but ensured a high degree of confidence in the differences selected, providing a better platform for validation of the technique. for dige staining, the standard protocol was followed without modifications and the analysis software was used with the default parameters. only clear and conserved quantitative changes  were selected, drastically reducing the number of final candidate spots . a total of  <dig> and  <dig> spots were selected for silver and dige staining, respectively .

summarized data are shown for the 2d gel analyses. image master 2dtm software  was used to analyze the scanned gels. sil, silver staining; 100-sil,  <dig> μg of total protein extract loaded on the gel; 500-sil,  <dig> μg of total protein extract loaded on the gel; dige, differential in gel electrophoresis.

computational analyses
mascot  <cit>  was tested against different open reading frame  datasets derived from ncbi-nr/refseq  <cit> , schmidtea mediterranea ests  <cit> , the contigs for the planarian genome wustl assembly version  <dig>   <cit> , and s. mediterranea whole-genome shotgun reads . of those datasets only ncbi-nr and traces are discussed here; the former is routinely used on this kind of analyses, while the latter yielded the largest number of peptide assignments . mascot assigned  <dig>  peptides to spectra for ncbi-nr, which mapped to  <dig> protein sequences. sequences from traces contained in the "forward" database were reversed to produce a "decoy" database containing sequences of the same length and composition but a different distribution of trypsin targets to those from the "forward"; figure  <dig> illustrates the whole process. mascot returned  <dig> hits per search on each trace database, both for "forward" and "decoy". this resulted in  <dig> hits per search, for a total ms-fingerprint of  <dig> different spots.

mascot predicted a total of  <dig>  and  <dig>  peptides for the forward and decoy databases, respectively, and these were mapped to  <dig> unique orfs , corresponding to  <dig>  and  <dig>  unique peptide sequences. when the same peptide was mapped on two or more urfs, the highest score was retrieved. figure  <dig> shows the score distribution of the two sets of unique peptides. assuming that the decoy database comprised reversed sequences, it would be expected that none of the peptide hits found there would be real. assuming that by chance some of the peptide sequences predicted for this set could be similar to those from the forward database, we can thus consider a false-negative error rate in order to determine a score threshold for both datasets. on this basis, for a 5% false-negative error rate in the decoy database,  <dig> peptides would be above the threshold. ranking the list of peptides, sorting by score, and taking 5% of the highest scoring peptides, the score threshold was set at  <dig> . when applying that score cut-off to the peptides obtained from the forward database,  <dig> of  <dig>  unique peptides  from that database were "decoy" filtered. translating this to the  <dig> urfs used to detect the peptides,  <dig> of these had at least one significant "decoy" peptide mapped onto it or was aligned with one such urf sequence. therefore,  <dig> % of the urfs can be considered more reliable than the rest.

the sequences of all the urfs for the forward database were uploaded into the blast2go software suite  <cit> . the first step was to compare those amino acid sequences to homologous proteins . of the urfs with scores above decoy threshold,  <dig>  had at least a significant blast hit. in contrast, only  <dig> out of  <dig> urfs with scores below the decoy threshold  also had one or more significant blast hits. it was possible then to obtain a functional gene ontology  annotation for those urfs having a blast hit against a known functionally annotated protein. results of the functional annotation are summarized in figure  <dig> 

after go assignment and the corresponding functional annotation of the sequences derived from our approach, enzyme codes were mapped by blast2go when possible. with such codes it was possible to retrieve the kegg pathway where the protein may play its role on the planarian molecular biology. however, less than one third of the sequences had a homologous gene/protein blast hit--especially for urfs dataset--, and from those many had a go functional assignment. a fraction of the sequences with at least one go hit was linked to an enzyme code, which would be related to a component of the kegg pathways:  <dig>  of  <dig>  clusters, mapping to  <dig> pathways, and  <dig> of  <dig>  clusters, mapping to  <dig> pathways, for mascot results on refseq and urfs respectively. all  <dig> pathways for urfs were also found using the refseq dataset. the lower ratio for the urfs set can be explained by species specific sequences, proteins or functions that are not yet annotated on the reference databases.  <dig> refseq clustered sequences had a match to  <dig> enzyme codes for proteins distributed on the  <dig> pathways.  <dig> urfs clustered sequences had a match to  <dig> enzyme codes for proteins distributed on the  <dig> pathways. the enzymes can appear on several pathways, due to the hierarchical structure of the kegg a match can be found on both, a general route as "metabolic pathway", and a more specific process, such as "glycolysis/gluconeogenesis". among the pathways found, metabolism routes of sugars and lipids were expected, as energy is required for cellular processes, regeneration among them. nevertheless, there are few candidate sequences that will deserve further analyses, as they appear on pathways close to development and regeneration: "selenoamino acid metabolism", "retinol metabolism in animals", and "mtor signaling pathway". additional data, including figures of all those pathways with color-highlighted boxes for proteins found, is available on the planarian proteomics web page  <cit> .

gene profile
as depicted in figure  <dig>  the annotated proteins cover a wide range of biological processes, of which four main groups can be emphasized: proteins involved in energy production and metabolism ; gene expression and transcription regulators ; proteins related to development and differentiation ; and proteins involved in stress-response pathways and the apoptosis . this functional distribution resembles the distributions described in previous studies of embryonic stem  cells  <cit> , proliferating cells  <cit> , and differentiating neural stem cells  <cit> , among others  <cit>  . additional protein sequence comparisons were performed using ncbi blast  <cit>   to extensively compare sets of candidate proteins from our refseq and urfs databases with the sequences described in those studies as stem-cell related. the same analysis was applied to the genes reported in two studies using high-throughput approaches to detect neoblast genes by rnai-feeding  <cit>  and by expression macrochip  <cit>  . a total of  <dig> sequences out of  <dig>  from the refseq dataset and  <dig> out of  <dig>  from the urfs dataset presented homology with at least one sequence in any of the studies. yet only  <dig>  from refseq and none from the urfs dataset had homology with sequences reported in the planarian studies.

functional studies
we performed functional analyses on some candidates from our lists to further assess the quality and accuracy of the approach used. candidates were selected from the refseq and the urfs from the traces . in the case of refseq candidates, the sequence was mapped onto the draft genome and primers were designed to clone a longer fragment of the protein for subsequent characterization. three main groups of genes were selected. the first two groups were proteins belonging to the ras superfamily of small gtpases and the heat shock proteins  family. the third group encompassed unrelated genes from different spots. the first family includes the genes rab-11b, rab- <dig>   <cit>  and rac- <dig>   <cit> . the second family contains hsps  involved in a wide variety of processes  <cit> . the last group contained the transcription factor hunchback-like   <cit> , prkc   <cit>  and lsm proteins   <cit> . this gene selection was done because no direct relation with neoblasts was established previously, with the exception of the hsps.

blast homologies to both refseq and urfs candidate sequences are shown. candidate sequences coming from mascot predictions over the refseq database were mapped onto the genome draft of schmidtea mediterranea to retrieve the specific sequences for this species. blastp was performed with the species-specific protein sequences against ncbi-nr in order to annotate their function accurately.

to assess the relationship between these genes and the neoblasts, we analyzed their expression patterns and rnai phenotypes . the observed expression patterns were variable. some of the genes were expressed in the blastema , where neoblasts migrate to after division in order to regenerate the missing body parts. others were expressed in the post-blastema , where the neoblast population is amplified by division to generate the cells that will form the blastema. finally, some genes were expressed in both blastema and post-blastema . these expression patterns disappeared in late stages of regeneration or developed over time to correspond to the typical expression pattern for neoblasts, distributed throughout the parenchyma with no expression in the pharynx or at the head tip anterior to the eyes  <cit> . in addition, for some of the genes, expression was only detectable under regeneration conditions, in which neoblasts are known to proliferate at higher rates. in that case, expression was barely detectable when only a basal number of neoblast cells was present in intact adult animals . therefore, the expression patterns for the candidate genes were consistent with neoblast expression.

since neoblasts are known to be the only source of cells for homeostasis and regeneration, the relationship between the selected genes and the neoblasts was validated by rnai experiments  <cit> . all injected animals, both intact and regenerating, died within a few days or weeks, except in the case of rab <dig> and hunchback-like , for which no phenotype was observed in rnai experiments. intact planarians showed a gradual head regression followed by lysis after several weeks, as shown in figure 6c, d and 6h. this phenotype has been linked to a lack of neoblast cells available for cell renewal  <cit> . in addition, regeneration was completely absent in fragments from rnai-treated animals, which produced small blastemas that never differentiated, or no blastema at all with indented wounds, as illustrated in figure 6a, e, f and 6i.

in a second screen to validate candidate urfs from the traces, the expression of some of these genes was analyzed by comparing intact and irradiated organisms. whole-mount in situ hybridization in intact adult organisms revealed parenchymal expression consistent with a neoblast distribution, whereas this expression pattern was not present in irradiated animals . this is consistent with neoblast-related genes, since high-dose irradiation destroys neoblasts. some genes showed additional expression around the cns that may have been associated with a non-dividing neural precursor cell type. while this expression pattern remained after irradiation, the signal in the parenchyma disappeared . finally, the planarian ortholog of c-type lectin-like was only expressed in the digestive system of irradiated organisms and never in intact animals , suggesting a role in cell renewal under stress conditions, given that the gut has the fastest cell turnover of all tissues. these data provide further support for the involvement of these candidate genes in processes linked to neoblast biology, such as proliferation, cell migration or the regulation of differentiation.

discussion
the results of this study show that we have successfully developed a rapid and reliable method for 2d analysis of planarian protein samples . this approach will provide the basis for future proteomics studies that will increase our understanding of a number of biological processes, in planarians and beyond, building upon data obtained using genomics and cdna-based approaches.

proteomic studies can help to fill gaps on the annotation of the planarian genome. despite the large number of entries already submitted, sequence databases such as ncbi  <cit>  or uniprot  <cit>  are far from complete. recent metagenomic projects have identified novel putative protein sequences not present in current sequence databases, thus extending the range of biological functions that may be represented  <cit> . for instance, yooseph et al  <cit>  report up to  <dig> in  <dig> orphan orfs from whole-genome shotgun sequencing of marine samples containing a mixture of prokaryotic organisms. our findings indicate that mascot can assign substantially more peaks on those spots selected from 2d gels when using the smed_urf database than with ncbi-nr/refseq, as would be expected.

the use of orf sequences in whole genomes without prior knowledge of where the genes, mainly the exons, are located presents a number of issues that can distort the measures used to discriminate between true and false peptide hits. these include the ratio of coding to non-coding sequences, which can be quite low , and the presence of more repetitive sequences in intergenic regions, despite the fact that some amino acid repeats are vital functional and structural regions in proteins  <cit> . moreover, the experimental spectra are compared to simulated ones that were computed from putative protein-coding regions directly translated from genomic sequences of the same species, not from related homologs from different organisms at different phylogenetic distances.

galindo et al.  <cit>  described a novel family of eukaryotic coding genes consisting of peptides shorter than  <dig> amino acids  with key biological functions during drosophila development. therefore, future searches will have to take this into account, for instance removing any length constraint when building up the orf databases.

identification of proteins
apart from the presence of metabolic proteins that indicate the high metabolic rate of neoblasts, several of the proteins detected in this analysis seem to be good candidates to be involved in neoblast-related functions, and thus in regeneration and tissue homeostasis. one of those, smed-smb, from the lsm family, has been analyzed in detail and shown to be essential for neoblast proliferation and maintenance  <cit> . moreover, other candidates belonging to the hsp class of proteins have been linked to the biology of neoblasts in recent studies  <cit> . the experimental results described in this paper support the use of an orf database built upon genomic sequences from the same species, which yields, as one might expect, more reliable results in subsequent proteomic searches, despite assuming nothing about the coding content of those orfs. this will bridge the gap between proteomic and genomic approaches to extend our knowledge of the functional components of emerging model organisms.

an initial proteomic picture of the neoblasts
the genes identified in this study represent the first list of neoblast-related candidate genes identified using a proteomic approach in planarias . the results show little correspondence to those of previous genomic studies  <cit> . interestingly, however, a number of the genes reported in this analysis were also present in studies designed to identify stem cell-specific genes in other model organisms  <cit> . in addition, five of the neoblast-related genes characterized through our proteomic approach  have also been analyzed in a planarian transcription macrochip, but only one of them was detected   <cit> . these findings support our proteomic strategy as a complement to genomic approaches. furthermore, the large number of putative neoblast-related proteins identified in this proteomic study will be of invaluable help in future research investigating the biology of the neoblast.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a proteomic approach to characterize specific planarian stem-cell  proteins. an accurate and reproducible method for protein purification, 2d gel electrophoresis and ms analysis was defined and an orf database of species-specific genomic dna was developed for peptide assignment of the retrieved ms spectra. subsequent computational analyses yielded a list of annotated candidate proteins, some of which were functionally validated as neoblast-specific genes by rnai and whole-mount in situ hybridization. substantial overlap was observed between the candidate genes identified in our study and those reported from previous analyses of embryonic stem cells, thus validating the specificity of the approach. in addition, we detected novel sequence candidates and expression changes that merit further investigation in future studies to determine their role in stem-cell biology.

