BACKGROUND
plants suffer constantly from herbivore pressure, and their defence responses are therefore highly evolved and tightly regulated. with more than  <dig>  secondary metabolites, plants directly resist microbial and insect attacks, animal predation  <cit> , and multiple environmental stresses  <cit> . the suite of secondary metabolites in plants is composed both of metabolites that are constitutively expressed in different plant tissues and of inducible compounds that complete the overall armament of plants in response to herbivore feeding  <cit> .

to ensure optimal defence responses, plants must be able to up- and down-regulate primary and secondary metabolic pathways at every level to exert temporal and spatial control in an effective and efficient way, thereby minimising damage and ensuring vegetative growth and reproduction  <cit> . for this purpose, plants have evolved constitutive and induced defence mechanisms. preformed molecular  <cit> , chemical, and physical mechanisms may reduce the accessibility or availability of the plant resources to herbivorous insects. for example, one of the most important groups of constitutive defence compounds that act against herbivores and pathogens are the condensed tannins   <cit> . these are polyphenolic compounds synthesised via the flavonoid biosynthetic pathway. analyses of specific pas have been performed in many tree species, such as poplar and oaks  and in herbaceous plants . in oak foliage, for example, different levels of condensed tannin content in combination with nitrogen content seem to be essential in determining the susceptibility to herbivorous insects  <cit> . in addition to the condensed tannins, the so-called hydrolysable tannins  are also important and have only recently become a focus of research into the defence response  <cit> . interestingly, insect specialists prefer lower tannin content than do insect generalists  <cit> .

inducible defence reactions involve a broad range of molecules whose synthesis is temporally controlled  <cit> . we know of at least two types of inducible defence responses: the direct defences that inhibit the growth or development of herbivorous insects and the indirect defences that include the plant volatiles, which may, for example, attract the parasitoids and predators of the herbivore  <cit> .

transcript profiling using dna microarrays has significantly improved our understanding of the regulatory and transcriptional networks of gene activation/inactivation in plants during plant-insect interaction  <cit> . however, while this technology is restricted to profiling transcripts that are represented by corresponding dna probes on the microarray, recent developments in rna sequencing  allow the genome-wide profiling and quantification of transcripts, and these approaches can be used to study plant defence responses in more comprehensive detail  <cit> . to date, the use of rnaseq in studies of herbivory has been rare. gilardoni et al. <cit>  analysed the nicotiana attenuata transcriptome using supersage and  <dig> sequencing after elicitation with fatty acid-amino acid conjugates known to act as elicitors in manduca sexta herbivory.

as transient or constitutive end products of the cascade that begins with gene activation, the constituents of the metabolome define the biochemical phenotype of an organism. thus, quantitative and qualitative measurements of the plant metabolome during herbivory can provide a wide overview of the biochemical status of the plant and essential information regarding the influence of metabolite levels on the phenotype  <cit> .

in the present work, we applied rnaseq and non-targeted metabolome analysis, performed using fourier transform ion cyclotron mass spectrometry   <cit> , to examine the transcriptional and metabolomic differences in pedunculate oak  varieties that differ in their degree of defoliation and susceptibility to herbivory by the green oak leaf roller . t. viridana is a specialist herbivorous insect that feeds only on species of the genus quercus <cit> . in central europe, the perpetual outbreak of the green oak leaf roller is one reason for oak decline events reported during the last century. during a past outbreak episode in germany in the years 2003– <dig>  in which t. viridana caused almost the complete defoliation of oaks in a selected forest stand in north rhine-westphalia, we observed that a few individual oaks were remarkably less defoliated than neighbouring trees. we defined these less-defoliated individuals as resistant  and the heavily defoliated trees as susceptible   <cit> . in recent work, we demonstrated that the resistance of t-oaks to herbivore attack by t. viridana is related to the amount and scent of herbivory-induced plant volatiles . in the same study, we showed that the t- and s-oaks differed in their polyphenolic leaf constituents  <cit> .

to unravel the underlying molecular mechanisms related to the resistance and susceptibility of oaks towards herbivory by t. viridana, we performed controlled laboratory experiments to identify candidate genes that exhibited induced differences in their expression patterns after insects feeding. moreover, analysing the unfed control plants aided in the identification of candidate genes that exhibit constitutive expression differences between the oak types. to complete our systems biological approach, we comparatively analysed the metabolome of t- and s-oaks to correlate gene expression patterns and metabolite profiles. moreover, this analysis provided the opportunity to identify the overall metabolomic differences between t- and s-oaks in addition to the local and systemic changes induced by t. viridana feeding or by developmental alterations in plant metabolite patterns.

RESULTS
transcriptional differences between t- and s-oaks after t. viridana feeding
as a first step, we used the mapman tool  <cit>  for displaying the transcriptional differences between t- and s-oaks after 16 h of t. viridana feeding to obtain a global overview of the related cellular pathways. all transcripts showing any difference in their expression level  between the t- and s-oaks after t. viridana feeding were included in this analysis. when comparing the two oak types,  <dig> mapman functional categories  showed a significantly different average bin response  compared to the response of all other bins. the most significant of these bins are related to photosynthesis and ribosomal protein synthesis, while other differences were identified in bins related to chromatin structure, redox, targeting to mitochondria, and other cellular functions .

in the second step, we selected candidate transcripts that were potentially involved in the different transcriptional responses of t- and s-oaks to t. viridana feeding. in total, we found  <dig> transcripts that were differentially expressed in response to t. viridana feeding. of these,  <dig> had higher expression values in t-oaks than in s-oaks , while  <dig> had lower expression values . figure 1a depicts the distributions of these transcript groups  with regard to bins. a strikingly higher percentage of transcripts of the tfed < sfed-group were present in the bins related to signalling, cell, dna, stress, and cell wall formation compared with the tfed > sfed-group. the bins rna and photosynthesis showed the opposite trend .

both transcript groups  were further analysed for a statistical over-representation of specific bins compared to the q. robur reference set that was used for transcript mapping. in the tfed > sfed-group, the rna synthesis and short chain dehydrogenase/reductase bins were significantly over-represented compared to the reference set . in contrast, the dna bin and the chromatin structure-related histone bin were over-represented in the tfed < sfed-group .

constitutive transcriptional differences between t- and s-oaks
to elucidate the potential differences between the constitutive transcript profiles of t- and s-oaks, we compared the transcript expression values between unfed t- and s-oak control samples. although these samples represent pooled samples of different s- and t-oak individuals, one has to consider that some of the differentially expressed genes identified from this comparison between s- and t-oak controls would contribute to other phenotypic differences than resistance to the green oak leaf roller.

considering all transcripts with any difference in the values between the samples,  <dig> bins were identified that showed expression differences that deviated from those of all other bins . among these bins were the e <dig>  bin and the flavonoids bin, which are related to secondary metabolism .

in total,  <dig>  transcripts showed constitutively different expression levels. of these,  <dig> transcripts had higher expression levels in t-oaks compared to s-oaks , while  <dig> transcripts had lower expression levels . it is obvious at first glance that a much higher percentage of the tco > sco-group transcripts  were present in the protein bin compared with those of the tco < sco-group . the same trend in distribution was also observed for the cell, photosynthesis, dna, cell wall, amino acid metabolism, and lipid metabolism bins . it is interesting to note that the cell, dna, and cell wall bins showed an inverse profile of transcript enrichment in the insect-fed leaves .

when we analysed the enrichment of specific bins in the tco > sco-group compared to the q. robur reference set, we observed that several bins showed significant over-representation ; among these were many protein synthesis-related bins. with regard to secondary metabolism, the farnesyl pyrophosphate synthetase bin of the cytosolic isoprenoid pathway was also over-represented in this group. two bins related to cell wall degradation, were also over-represented in the tco > sco-group:  the pectate lyases and polygalacturonases bin and  the cellulases and beta- <dig> -glucanases bin . in the tco < sco-group, transcripts corresponding to glutathione-s-transferases and metal handling  showed an over-representation. with regard to secondary metabolism, we observed a significant enrichment of transcripts related to flavonoid backbone biosynthesis in this group .

table  <dig>  and table  <dig>  summarise the  <dig> most differentially expressed transcripts in each group . we observed dramatically higher expression levels in the t-controls than in the s-controls  for transcripts weakly similar to arabidopsis thaliana transcripts encoding pdf <dig> , a protein phosphatase 2c family protein , and a gdsl-motif lipase/hydrolase family protein . lower expression levels in t-controls compared to s-controls  were detected for transcripts moderately similar to a. thaliana transcripts encoding the ubiquitin extension protein  <dig>  and osmotin  <dig> .

co
co
co
/ s
co
related sequences and genbank accession numbers are available in additional file  <dig> 

co
co
co
/ s
co
related sequences and genbank accession numbers are available in additional file  <dig> 

transcriptional responses induced by t. viridana feeding in t- and s-oaks
after comparing the transcript profiles of fed and unfed t- and s-oaks, we were interested in the transcriptional responses of t- and s-oaks that were induced by t. viridana feeding. as the expression values from the fed samples were derived from a different type of solexa reads  than the expression values from the controls , this bioinformatic analysis has to be interpreted carefully. nevertheless, we obtained a general overview of the cellular functions involved in the defence responses of q. robur to t. viridana and identified additional differences between the oak types.

all transcripts exhibiting an increase or decrease in their expression value after feeding , compared to the corresponding unfed controls were considered in a mapman analysis. in total,  <dig> bins showed significant different average bin responses compared to the response of all other bins in both t- and s-oaks . among these were bins related to the light reaction of photosynthesis, to the synthesis of prokaryotic and eukaryotic ribosomal proteins and to abiotic stress . changes in chromatin structure, especially in the associated histones indicate an involvement of epigenetic transcriptional regulation in the host defence .

bins that exhibited significant differences only in t-oaks comprised, among others, those related to cell wall degradation, gdsl-motif lipases, and protein targeting to the secretory pathway . in s-oaks, the bins related to steroid synthesis, squalene metabolism, metal handling, e <dig> ubiquitin ligases, and redox regulation were among those with a significant different bin response.

we further identified groups of up- or down-regulated transcripts after t. viridana feeding by comparing the expression values between the different treatments. considerably more transcripts showed an up-regulation  than showed a down-regulation  after t. viridana feeding in both t- and s-oaks . the expression value changes  that were induced by t. viridana feeding in both t- and s-oaks were mapped to the 'biotic stress’ drawing in mapman, which represents transcripts that may be involved in biotic stress . most of the induced transcripts were assigned to bins related to proteolysis, signalling, abiotic stress, cell wall, secondary metabolites, redox state, and heat shock protein. with regard to hormone signalling, transcripts assigned to ethylene, auxin, and jasmonate bins were the most mapped transcripts. most of the transcripts assigned to jasmonate, peroxidases, erf  and wrky transcription factor bins were up-regulated by t. viridana feeding in both t- and s-oaks .

transcripts expressing putative cell-wall-degrading enzymes
we observed an enrichment of transcripts encoding cell wall-degrading enzymes in the tco > sco group. in particular, the abundance of pectate lyase and polygalacturonase transcripts, in addition to cellulase and beta- <dig> -glucanase gene transcripts, was increased . thus, we became specifically interested in the differences in the expression of these transcripts between t- and s-oaks.

figure  <dig> shows the expression values of all transcripts that were assigned to the cell wall degradation bin and that exceeded a specific expression value in the t-oak controls  and s-oak controls . most of the transcripts showed higher expression values in t-oaks than in s-oaks .

experimental validation of differential expression of candidate genes by pcr
five genes with different expression levels for t- and s-oaks, namely, genes expressing a putative serine kinase, osmotin  <dig>  hsp <dig> , cel <dig> , a putative sesquiterpene synthase, and the housekeeping gene arp <dig> , were chosen for a pcr-based validation of their expression . the serine kinase  showed a high constitutive expression value in s-oaks  and an equally strikingly low expression value in both fed  and control  t-oaks . osmotin  <dig>  was chosen for its combination of an extremely high constitutive expression value in sco, a high expression value in sfed, and low expression values in both fed  and control  t-oaks . the expression levels of hsp <dig> were also high in s-oaks  and low in t-oaks . to represent genes with a high constitutive expression value in tco and a slightly increased expression value in sfed, the beta- <dig> -glucanase gene cel <dig>  was used . finally, a sesquiterpene synthase  showed very low constitutive expression values in sco but had high expression values in both tco and tfed and slightly increased expression values in sfed .

co
co
fed
fed
related sequences and genbank accession numbers are available in additional file  <dig> 

tco, unfed control of t-oaks; sco, unfed control of s-oaks; tfed, fed t-oaks; sfed, fed s-oaks. asterisk at tps and arp <dig>  mapping has been performed later than for the other candidates.

metabolomic differences between t- and s-oaks after t. viridana feeding
principal components analysis  identified clear metabolic differences between t- and s-oaks at 32 h after the onset of feeding by t. viridana larvae  by explaining a total of 15% of the variance in metabolites differences. furthermore, the distinct metabolic profiles of intact  and directly damaged  leaves showed that local and/or systemic defence responses were induced in the plant within 32 h of herbivore feeding.

to gain insights into the compounds correlated with each group, we performed a discriminant partial least squares regression  analysis  and annotated the significant discriminant masses  using the kegg, lmpk, hmdb, and chemspider databases . the identified metabolites showed a distinct metabolic accumulation that was characteristic of their metabolic pathway and cluster group . in general, we found that  <dig> metabolites were either up- or down-regulated in the two different t- and s-oaks , which suggests that these metabolites might be good candidates for molecular biomarkers of the two t- and s-genotypes.

each oak genotype displayed different levels of metabolites that could be grouped based on their kegg classification  <cit>  into metabolites belonging to amino acid, carbohydrate, cofactors, and vitamins, glycan, lipid, nucleotide, and secondary metabolism  classes . among the metabolites showing strong differences in levels between t- and s-oaks, we focused our attention on the most abundant metabolites measured. nicotinate ribonucleotide, an important precursor of nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide , was found to be strongly up-regulated in t-oaks. several end-products of secondary metabolism, particularly galloylated flavonol glycosides , were found to occur at levels that were 10- to 20-fold higher in t-oaks than in s-oaks. the amounts of these compounds did not differ between d and i leaves, which indicates that they likely show constitutive differences between t- and s-plants. the concentration of corilagin, a tannin and galloyl derivative, was higher in t-oaks. the amount of ellagic acid, another galloyl derivative typically found in oaks, was also greater in t-oaks. in addition, many biosynthetic precursors of condensed tannins were found at higher levels in t-oaks. amongst these were flavan 3-ol derivatives, such as epigallocatechin, a catechin with an additional phenolic hydroxyl group. additionally, some phenolic intermediates, such as coumaric acid, sinapoyl malate, coumaroyl quinic acid, were much more abundant in t-oaks than in s-oaks.

conversely, s-oaks showed higher levels of basic flavonol glycosides. luteolin glycoside, quercetin glycoside, and a methoxykaempferol glycoside were highly abundant in s-oak leaves  and also showed a greater relative difference between t- and s-oaks  < -1; additional file 5). additionally, free, unconjugated flavonols, such as luteolin and quercetin, showed relatively greater abundance in s-oaks than in t-oaks .

in terms of lipid metabolism factors, the phospholipid glycerophosphoinositol was more abundant in t-oaks than in s-oaks. conversely, the abundance of the glycerophosphodiester glycerophosphoglycerol was higher in s-oaks.

globally, s-leaves showed higher levels of metabolites related to sugar metabolism, particularly the monosaccharides  and disaccharides , melibiitol from galactose metabolism, and different sugar intermediates . t-oaks also contained higher amounts of other sugars, such as glucarate  and ribose 5-diphosphate, compared to s-oaks. metabolites from nucleotide metabolism were significantly more abundant in s-oaks, which had relatively high levels of cyclic adenosine monophosphate  and cytidine monophosphate.

we could generally characterise the developmental changes in leaf metabolism using  <dig> metabolites that exhibited significantly altered expression in our study. leaf maturation was associated with an increase in amino acids related to phenylalanine derivatives, while it was also associated with decreased levels of tryptophan, aspartic acid, and homoserine derivatives . young leaves were rich in sugars, whereas older leaves showed a large accumulation of fatty acids  that are related to herbivore defence . leaf development was also characterised by strong differences of the levels of specific flavonoids and phenolic compounds.

local and systemic responses were indicated by significant changes in the levels of  <dig> metabolites between d- and i-leaves. directly damaged leaves exhibited a greater accumulation of fa, fa oxidation products related to wounding responses, signalling compounds, and healing agents, such as traumatic acid, tuberonic acid, tuberonic acid glucoside, linolenic acid, and 13-l-hydroperoxylinoleic acid. conversely, intact leaves had relative higher levels of carbohydrates and secondary metabolites .

combined mapping of metabolites and transcripts to metabolic pathways
in an initial study  <cit> , we described differences in the emission pattern of hipvs among t- and s-oaks. t-oaks displayed higher emission rates of sesquiterpenes , while the hipv pattern of s-oaks was dominated by monoterpenes and the irregular acyclic homoterpene  <dig> -dimethylnona- <dig> ,7-triene , a derivative of the sesquiterpene nerolidol produced by oxidative degradation by a cytochrome p <dig> monooxygenase. moreover, we found distinct differences in the phenolic compound composition of t- and s-oaks, and these differences were analysed in more detail, as described above. in the present analysis, we observed a significant enrichment of transcripts related to the biosynthesis of flavonoid backbones in the tco < sco-group . moreover, there were significant changes detected in the flavonoids bin as well as the related chalcones bin when comparing all transcriptional differences between the t- and s-oak controls in mapman . to gain deeper insights into the regulation of these two metabolic pathways in both oak genotypes, a combined mapping of transcriptomic and metabolomic data to these pathways was performed.

ratios  of transcript expression values and mass intensities were mapped to the kegg pathways of terpenoid and flavonoid backbone biosynthesis . the data clearly show an increase in the transcript levels of the plastidic 2c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate  pathway for isoprenoid biosynthesis in s-oaks compared to t-oaks . only one transcript mapped specifically to the mevalonate pathway  with higher transcript levels in t-oaks compared to s-oaks. the other two transcripts that mapped, i.e., acetyl-coa c-acetyltransferase  and hydroxymethylglutaryl-coa synthase , are known to be involved in several kegg pathways.

figure  <dig> summarizes the transcriptomic and metabolomic data with regard to flavonoid backbone biosynthesis. most of the transcripts and metabolites showed higher levels in s-oaks compared to t-oaks, which indicates an increase in the biosynthesis of basic flavonoid compounds in s-oaks after t. viridana feeding. only chalcone synthase , the first enzyme in the flavonoid pathway, was expressed at a higher level in t-oaks than in s-oaks . the transcripts from this gene did not specifically map to flavonoid biosynthesis. therefore, the specific contribution of the expressed transcript to flavonoid backbone biosynthesis cannot be deduced from the transcript data.

discussion
in the present study, we aimed to discover the underlying genetic and metabolic basis for the differing susceptibilities of t- and s-oaks to t. viridana feeding.

plant defence responses to herbivory are driven by both herbivore-induced factors  and plant signalling   <cit> . figure  <dig> summarizes the constitutive and induced transcriptomic and metabolomic differences in t- and s-oaks responding to green oak leaf roller herbivory. the transcript levels of cell wall degrading enzymes  are constitutively high in t-oaks  but were found to be more inducible in s-oaks . changes in hormone signalling are likely to occur via the cdpk  and mapk  cascades. moreover, transcriptional changes at transcription factor genes are most likely responsible for the eventual activation of several defence response genes, such as those involved in the synthesis of volatiles and pathogen-related genes . the activated cascade results in a different response in t- and s-oaks mainly characterised by transcriptomic and metabolomic differences in the biosynthesis of tannins, flavonoids and terpenes .

the cell wall as the first barrier for invading herbivores
the plant cell wall is the first line of defence against invading pathogens and herbivores. plants have evolved sensory mechanisms to detect pathogens and herbivores, including the indirect sensing of the impact of the invader on the host cell wall   <cit> . in the present comparison, we discovered higher transcript levels of plant cwdes  in t-oak controls , including increased levels of transcripts for the putative cellulase cel <dig> . at first glance, it is striking that t-oaks constitutively express higher levels of transcripts encoding enzymes that are normally inhibited by plants, e.g., by secreting polygalacturonase-inhibiting proteins, when being attacked by the polygalacturonases of a pathogen  <cit> . conversely, cell wall-degrading enzymes may activate defence responses by releasing oligosaccharides as elicitors. thus, the increased expression of several beta- <dig> -glucanase genes, such as cel <dig>  in t-oaks  may result in higher constitutive levels of oligosaccharides. additionally, cellulose-derived oligosaccharides have been shown to act as elicitors  <cit> . so far, there are no reports on the influence of higher constitutive expression levels of plant beta- <dig> -glucanases and polygalacturonases on pathogen resistance. however, it was shown that tobacco and arabidopsis plants expressing a fungal polygalacturonase are more resistant to microbial pathogens and have constitutively activated defence responses  <cit> .

oxidative burst, protein phosphorylation signalling and hormone signalling
beyond the cell wall, the response cascade continues within the cell membrane . oral secretions from herbivores can initiate plant cell trans-membrane potential  depolarization, an early response to herbivore feeding that is associated with the opening of voltage-dependent ca2+ channels, changes in the intracellular ca2+ concentration and the generation of reactive oxygen species , such as h2o <dig>   <cit> . immediately after this event, protein phosphorylation signalling via mitogen-activated protein kinase  cascades, as well as via calcium-dependent kinases , triggers the production of phytohormones. after t. viridana feeding, we primarily observed the induction of transcripts associated with ethylene, jasmonic acid, and auxin production in both t- and s-oaks . genes related to jasmonic acid  formation, for example, are already constitutively expressed at high levels  and exhibit greater induction in s-oaks than in t-oaks .

transcriptional differences in transcription factor genes and histone genes
hormone signalling may also trigger transcriptional changes at transcription factor genes , which in turn may activate different defence response genes . differences in the constitutive and induced expression levels in t- and s-oaks were observed for a number of transcription factors, including, e.g. several members of the erf  and wrky transcription factor families .

differences in the expression of genes related to dna structure, especially histones, were highly apparent . among the transcripts with higher constitutive expression levels in t-oaks compared to s-oaks, an enrichment of histone transcripts was obvious . for example, a transcript weakly similar to an a. thaliana histone 3b gene showed a distinctly higher level of expression in t-oaks . functionally, dna-associated histones may be involved in chromatin remodelling. among the mechanisms of transcriptional regulation, chromatin remodelling accomplished through the activity of histone-modifying enzymes and atp-dependent chromatin-remodelling complexes is emerging as a key process in the orchestration of plant biotic stress responses  <cit> . whether the observed transcriptional differences in histones are related to differences in chromatin remodelling in t- and s-oaks remains an open question.

defence responses: metabolites
metabolically, t-oak leaves were very rich in galloyl flavonol glycosides, condensed and hydrolysable tannins, and phenolic glycosides. conversely, leaves of the s-oak genotype had a greater abundance of flavonoid glycosides and some related intermediates, of plastidic terpenoid intermediates, and of sugars and nucleotides. the results of our analysis are in agreement with those of our earlier investigation of soluble polyphenols performed with high-performance liquid chromatography , which showed higher constitutive concentrations of some quercetin 3-glycosides and the pa precursor catechin in t-oaks than in s-oaks  <cit> . moreover, the non-targeted metabolomic analysis revealed higher levels of plastidic terpenoid intermediates in s-oaks, which could be sustained and may therefore explain the increased herbivore-induced emission rates of monoterpenes previously observed in these lines  <cit> .

flavones and tannins
flavonoids, particularly condensed tannins such as pa, are biologically active compounds that play an important role in plant-insect interaction  <cit> . the higher levels of galloylated flavonol glucosides in t-oaks compared to s-oaks after feeding  may play a role in oak resistance. once, it was believed that tannins were “quantitative defences” limiting protein digestion by herbivorous insects  <cit> , but now it seems that the most important role of tannins is their pro-oxidant activity  <cit> . the oxidation of phenolics in the guts of insects produces ros , which can damage both essential nutrients and midgut tissues and therefore negatively influence insect performance  <cit> .

the concentrations of hydrolysable and condensed tannins in quercus robur have been considered to be negatively correlated with insect abundance since the first pioneering study  <cit> . many other studies in different woody plant species have demonstrated the functional role of hydrolysable and condensed tannins as plant defences against generalist insects  <cit> . there are also counter-examples where generalists, such as the forest tent caterpillar, are sensitive to hydrolysable tannins, while others, such as the white-marked tussock moth  <cit>  and the gypsy moth  <cit> , are tannin-resistant. the same is true for condensed tannins  <cit> . the defensive effects of condensed tannins in quercus sp. are even stronger on specialist insects  <cit> . for the autumnal moth , it has been shown that high gallotannin concentration reduces the growth rate of this insect, whereas pas impair larval growth only when the gallotannin content is low  <cit> . a more recent study  <cit>  concluded that ellagitannins are the most bioactive tannins, while gallotannins have intermediate to low bioactivity and condensed tannins have low oxidative activities. although we observed clear genotypic differences in tannin patterns and galloylated flavonol glycoside levels, the biological effect of these differences on green oak leaf roller larvae seem to be rather marginal. our previous study  <cit>  showed that larval mortality was equal on both oak genotypes, but larvae developing on t-oaks needed more leaf biomass to gain similar weights to larvae reared on s-oaks. therefore, we speculate that the enrichment of gallotannins, such as corilagin, in the foliage of t-oaks may play a role in the defence properties in this resistant oak type. furthermore, in our previous study, we found that some substances in s-oaks seem to attract female t. viridana <cit> . in a recent study with a chrysomelid beetle, luteolin-7-glycoside was identified as a key substance in determining the attractiveness of plants to the females  <cit> . the beetles preferred the plants with high amounts of luteolin-7-glycosides  <cit> . this finding fits very well with our observation of high levels of luteolin-7-glycosides in s-oaks.

terpenoids
in a previous study, we showed that t. viridana avoided t-oaks, which may have occurred because their blend of volatile organic compounds contained a higher ratio of sesquiterpenes and higher emission rates of α-farnesene and germacrene d  <cit> . the transcriptomic data  support the higher sesquiterpene activities and emission rates measured in t-oaks. we found higher expression levels  of a putative sesquiterpene synthase in t-oaks , which showed 75% amino acid identity to a germacrene d synthase of vitis vinifera .

we observed a clear increase in the transcript levels of plastidic mep pathway-related genes and metabolites in s-oaks after pathogen feeding . because the biosynthesis of monoterpenes originates in the plastidic mep pathway  <cit> , the observed transcriptomic and metabolomic data agree well with the more pronounced herbivory-induced emission of monoterpenes from the susceptible oak type observed in our previous study  <cit> . herbivore feeding elicits the accumulation of traumatic acid , as observed clearly in damaged oak leaves. this dicarboxylic acid is a potent wound-healing agent in plants that is associated with ja biosynthesis. the volatile form of ja, methyl jasmonate, induces the activation of sesquiterpene synthases  <cit> . therefore, the different emission patterns of sesquiterpene  and the nerolidol  derivative dmnt  observed in t- and s-oaks  <cit>  might be under the control of the phytohormone ja, which was synthesised at different levels in these two lines . however, further studies are needed to determine whether there is a direct involvement of ja in controlling the different terpenoid profiles of the t- and s-oaks.

different defence strategies of t- and s-oaks
the differences in the results of transcriptomic and metabolomic profiling between t- and s-oaks led us to the assumption that the two oak types follow different defence strategies. there are several theories about effective plant defence strategies against pathogens and herbivores. these include the quantitative defence theory  <cit> , the optimal defence theory   <cit> , the growth-differentiation balance  hypothesis  <cit> , and the resource availability hypothesis   <cit> . furthermore, there has been much general discussion of the advantages and disadvantages of constitutive and induced defence responses  <cit> ; and references cited therein). however, the complexity of the defence response in plants often also leads to questioning of the proposed theories  <cit> . herms and mattson  <cit>  got to the heart of all these theories with the title of their review “the dilemma of plants: to grow or defend”. this title highlights the recurring theme in all defence theories, which is that defence is costly.

the most important advantage to possessing constitutive defence, exemplified in t-oaks by the high levels of bioactive tannins, is the fast response during herbivore attack. these plants are defended from the first moment of attack, whereas a 'just-in-time’ induced defence strategy can take hours to days to protect the plant against such an attack. furthermore, a constitutive defence can perhaps lead to a reduction in the number of attackers because, when volatile substances act as a direct defence, the insects may not even lay their eggs on the resistant plants. we suppose that this is the case for our t-oaks  <cit> . our hypothesis that t-oaks follow a constitutive defence strategy is further supported by the higher levels of constitutive expression of sesquiterpenes and cell wall-degrading beta-glucanase genes.

plants with induced resistance might have an advantage  <cit>  if constitutive resistance against herbivores incurs fitness costs, such as reduced reproduction or lower growth rate. this advantage has been shown for the sticky monkey flower , where genotypes with higher resin concentrations had a lower growth rate  <cit> . such allocation costs occur when large quantities of fitness-limiting resources are reserved for resistance traits. quercus robur is one of the tree species that host the highest number of herbivorous insects  <cit> . thus, most oaks are permanently attacked, but severe defoliation, e.g., by green oak leaf roller larvae, only occurs every five or six years and then only for one or two years in a very strong manner. it is therefore questionable whether the costs of these attacks justify a permanent resistance. the t-oak genotypes seem to follow the strategy of constitutive direct defence against the herbivores with the success to become less defoliated by the green oak leaf roller than s-oaks  <cit> . interestingly, s-oaks have high constitutive transcript levels of a gene encoding the defence substance osmotin  <dig>  which is known to function in the defence against biotic stress  <cit> . we do not know whether the specialist t. viridana is already adapted to a high level of osmotin <dig>  however, the capability of forest insects to adapt to defence substances does exist, as demonstrated for the resistance of lymantria dispar to tannins  <cit> .

a commonly found trade-off between constitutive and induced defences occurs when the investment in constitutive defence is already high. in this case, fewer inducible defence responses exist  <cit> . this is exactly what we found for the two different oak types . in light of the present data, we conclude that the t- and s-oak types differ in their metabolic profiles and the levels of key metabolites and that t-oaks rather follow the strategy of constitutive defence, while s-oaks follow the 'just-in-time’ strategy of induced defence .

CONCLUSIONS
the transcriptomic and metabolomic differences identified in this study, together with our previous physiological and behavioural results, deepen our understanding of plant defence responses to specialist herbivore attack. our data provide valuable information that paves the way for the identification of molecular and biochemical biomarkers. we identified several promising candidate genes in the functional groups 'protein’, 'secondary metabolism’, 'dna’, and 'cell’. these sequences, together with transcripts of other functional groups, will be checked for snps and indels that may explain the differences in defence between the two oak types. additionally, further tests will be performed for the development of biochemical markers. the knowledge gained from this study provides the basis for developing a method for the early selection of potentially green oak leaf roller-resistant genotypes in natural pedunculate oak populations.

