BACKGROUND
the maintenance of body iron homeostasis is the result of a delicate balance between intestinal absorption and obligatory losses. because of the lack of a specific excretory system, iron losses are mostly associated with bleeding and tissue sloughing, which, in healthy individuals, are compensated by similar amounts of iron absorbed in the duodenum. traditionally, intestinal iron absorption is divided into three steps, named the uptake, intracellular and transfer phases. the uptake phase involves the transport of food iron from the intestinal lumen into the enterocyte cytoplasm by membrane transporters such as heme carrier protein  <dig>   <cit>  and divalent metal transporter  <dig>   <cit> , while the transfer phase involves the transport of intracellular iron from the cell cytoplasm into the blood circulation, a process mediated by the iron-export transporter ferroportin <dig>   <cit> .

little is known about the intracellular step, although 80-90% of the incoming iron is retained intracellularly  <cit> . newly entering iron integrates into a cytosolic pool of weakly bound iron called the cytosolic labile iron pool , constituted by iron bound to substances such as phosphate, nucleotides and amino groups  <cit> . from the clip, iron is either transported into the blood circulation by ferroportin <dig> or distributed to mitochondria, ferritin and other iron-requiring proteins. recently, poly -binding protein  <dig>  was reported as a putative iron chaperone capable of delivering cytosolic iron to ferritin  <cit> .

ferritin is the only well characterized iron-storage protein in living organisms, widely distributed from archaea and bacteria to mammals  <cit> . the  <dig> subunits in maxi-ferritin form a hollow shell that can accept up to  <dig>  fe3+ atoms in the form of crystallized diferric oxo-hydroxyl complexes  <cit> . mini-ferritins , found in bacteria and archaea, have  <dig> subunits but share many structural features with maxi-ferritins  <cit> . ferritin plays a fundamental role in controlling cellular iron availability. it stores iron in an accessible and non-toxic form through a series of oxidation-reduction processes. the kinetics of iron entrance and exit have been characterized in vitro, with rate constants of  <dig>  mol fe/mol ferritin/second for the formation of the diferric peroxo complex  <cit>  and  <dig>  mol fe/mol ferritin/second for exit from the protein  <cit> . provided that the iron storage capacity is not exceeded, these data predict that iron released from ferritin should be quickly recaptured by the protein.

ferritin is regulated by the iron regulatory protein/iron responsive element  mrna system whereby high iron concentrations induce synthesis . ferritin synthesis is also transcriptionally regulated by pro-oxidants through an antioxidant response element  present in the 5'-untranslated region of l- and h-ferritin genes and a number of other genes such as thioredoxin reductase, nadph quinine oxidoreductase and heme oxygenase; bach  <dig> represses are genes and is derepressed by heme-bach  <dig> interactions  <cit> .

in intestinal cells, as in all cells, ferritin concentrations are regulated by iron dependent control of protein synthesis and degradation  <cit> . data show that absorbed iron not exported from the enterocyte is stored in ferritin, but the recent awareness that, in solution at least, ferritin protein is a dynamic manager of iron, suggests the possibility of a dynamic role for ferritin during the process of intestinal iron absorption that has been little considered. ferritin may play a role in the retention of absorbed iron, since under conditions of iron-deficiency, when ferritin iron concentrations and the total amount of ferritin protein cage is low, most of the absorbed iron passes directly from the cell to the plasma. in contrast, under iron repleted conditions a considerable part of the absorbed iron is retained in ferritin, some of which is lost into faecal excretion from epithelia sloughing  <cit> .

a continuous source of iron to the clip derives from ferritin turnover. in caco- <dig> intestinal cells, reported values for ferritin concentration and ferritin half-life are  <dig>  pmol per mg of cell protein and  <dig> h, respectively  <cit> . considering a mean load of  <dig>  iron atoms per molecule of ferritin, turnover will provide about  <dig> pmol of iron per mg protein per hour, an amount comparable to the uptake of  <dig> pmol/mg protein/h by iron-starving caco- <dig> cells  <cit> . thus, during the process of intestinal iron absorption there can be an exchange between iron that enters the clip, iron utilized by the mitochondria and iron-containing proteins, iron that comes from ferritin turnover, iron that is captured by ferritin and iron that is transported to the blood plasma.

at present, there is no mathematical model that describes potential contributions of ferritin in controlling the clip during the process of intestinal absorption. previously, a mathematical compartment model was generated to account for the three phases of intestinal iron absorption in patients with hereditary hemochromatosis. the model predicted that the transfer of iron from the cell into the blood was the main site of regulation in these patients  <cit> , but ferritin was not considered to be a dynamic interactor and controller of the clip and ferritin mechanism was not fully taken into account.

in this work, we present a novel mathematical model to study the dynamics of iron storage and distribution in ferritin and to reveal its relevance in the process of cytosolic iron management in caco- <dig> cells during intestinal iron absorption.

RESULTS
standard ferritin sedimentation curve
in the supplementary material , the sedimentation properties of ferritin with different iron contents in a 1-25% sucrose density gradient are shown. clearly, ferritins with higher amounts of iron migrate towards a higher density zone of the gradient. however, the relationship between iron content and sedimentation follows a non-linear relationship. this sedimentation pattern should be the result of changes in particle density and particle diameter as reported  <cit> . the mode of the protein distribution for a given iron load was chosen as representative of its iron content, resulting in the calibration curve shown in figure  <dig> 

steady states
the kinetic mathematical model was initially tested for its ability to recover the experimental steady states of iron load distribution in ferritin protein cages. figure 2a shows the distribution of ferritin protein cages in the sucrose gradient after being loaded with different iron-to-protein contents, ranging from a small amount of iron  to a system closer to empirical saturation . as the iron content in ferritin increased, the protein sedimented into more dense fractions. interestingly, sedimentation developed into broad peaks, an indication that the in vitro iron loading conditions used produced an heterogeneous mineralization of the ferritin protein cages, as observed in vivo  <cit> . results in figure 2a show that the fraction of protein cages with a high iron content increases as the total amount of iron in the system increases, i.e. increasing the amount of iron in the system shifts the distribution of iron on ferritins to the right. ferritin from caco- <dig> cells cultured with varied amounts of iron in the culture media also yielded broad sucrose sedimentation patterns, with an average content of about  <dig>  fe/ferritin protein cage. increasing iron concentrations in cultured cells were accommodated in part by increased ferritin subunit synthesis . these results suggest that an iron-to-ferritin ratio of 1: <dig> is optimal for the iron buffering capacity of ferritin in cultured cells, which is close to the average iron content of many plant and animal ferritins.

the steady states achieved when the experimental conditions were used to simulate the model are shown in figure 2b. simulations were performed using parameters and initial conditions shown in table  <dig>  ferritin levels were kept constant and the total amount of iron was set according to the experimental iron to ferritin ratios . the simulation results, after a non linear transformation given by the calibration curve, are very similar to the distributions observed experimentally. in particular the overall shape of the iron distribution is captured by the model.

dynamic behavior
the dynamic behavior of the model was studied for an iron to ferritin ratio of 1000: <dig> to be consistent with experimental data  <cit> , . figure  <dig> shows the iron content distribution in ferritin over time. figure 4a shows that after an iron influx pulse, iron is initially more abundant in the clip and it is quickly taken-up to produce an abundant initial pool of low iron content ferritins, because empty ferritin protein cages use their multiple active sites  to capture ferrous irons , creating an initial mineral core. from then on, ferritins follow the mechanism previously proposed, i.e. they would either loose or capture  a package of iron, or degrade, releasing all their iron content  <cit> . all these mechanisms working together simultaneously lead to an increase in the heterogeneity of ferritin's iron content in time, causing a shift in its distribution. in fact, as time progresses, the average ferritin iron content increases, as well as the number of ferritins operating at maximum capacity, conditions that occur in vivo during iron overload and which are accompanied by the formation of a degraded, toxic product called hemosiderin. the shift of the iron distribution over time shown in figure  <dig> illustrates this enrichment process.

the amount of time required by the simulated model to reach steady state was determined to be in the order of  <dig> × 10- <dig> h. diffusional phenomena are not considered since a perfectly mixed system was assumed. for the sake of simplicity and comparability, all simulation results were normalized to the time when the respective system reaches steady state.

simulation results shown in figures 4a and 4b indicate that three distinct stages can be identified in ferritin iron mineralization. figure 4a illustrates how the distribution of iron stored in ferritin changes over time. figure 4b shows the total iron in the clip and ferritin species as a function of time for early simulation times.

stage 1: the first stage corresponds to iron uptake by ferritin which extends until  <dig>  units of nondimensional simulation time. as shown in figure 4b this process exhibits a fast dynamic, causing as a main consequence that the steady state for the clip is achieved early in the simulation. during this period, the iron distribution and average iron content in ferritin also changes rapidly . in addition, the fraction of total cell iron in ferritin  increases, reflecting the relative magnitude of the kinetic constants in the association-dissociation equilibrium, kaso/kdis ≈  <dig> ×  <dig> 

stage 2: from  <dig>  to  <dig>  units of simulation time, the total amount of iron captured by ferritin and the clip stabilizes . however, as shown in figure 4a, the distribution of iron stored in ferritin continues to change, although it does so more slowly than in the first stage. the distribution shape broadens in this stage, accounting for an increase in the diversity of iron content in the population of ferritin protein cages.

stage 3: at  <dig>  units of the nondimensional simulation time, a final stage develops. in this phase, the iron distribution in ferritin changes much more slowly, reaching the final steady state at  <dig>  units of nondimentional simulation time .

lip control
it has been proposed that ferritin plays the role of an iron buffer in the cell  <cit> . the simulations described here support and supplement such a model. figure  <dig> shows the iron amount in the clip and ferritin species at the steady state achieved by the model system in simulations starting from different iron-to-ferritin ratios. notice that when the iron-to-ferritin cage ratio is greater than the maximum iron capacity of ferritin , iron accumulates in the clip. in vivo, hemosiderin, which is an insoluble toxic degradation product of ferritin from which iron can be leached out into the clip, begins to appear at this stage.

the model also predicts that when the iron-to-ferritin ratio is in the operational range  the clip remains almost constant. in fact, in the range from 500: <dig> to 2000: <dig>  the slope of the clip in figure  <dig> is such that a change of  <dig> units in the iron to ferritin ratio causes an average change of only  <dig> % with respect to the reference value. this indicates that ferritin acts indeed as a buffer, keeping the amount of iron in the clip essentially independent from the iron-to-ferritin ratio. such a buffering capacity is crucial in cellular systems and emphasizes the relevant contribution of the genetic endproducts of the cellular iron homeostatic system, ferritin protein cages, which act through consumption and stabilization of the regulatory signal  during mineralization. in the face of rapid changes in cellular iron content ferritin activity provides the first quick cellular iron homeostatic response, which can be subsequently followed by the activation of slower regulatory processes at the transcriptional or translational levels which have a response time-scale several orders of magnitude larger than enzyme kinetics.

an interesting observation can be extracted from figure  <dig> for iron-to-ferritin ratios under 500: <dig>  in fact, it is evident that the amount of iron in the clip shifts down for these low iron  conditions. however, the ferroxidase activity of ferritin is not turned off during iron starvation conditions. ferritin retains the same catalytic activity in all simulation experiments along the entire range of iron concentrations. the observed behavior is due to the continuous and dynamic nature of the iron capture and release processes that transport iron into and from the ferritin mineral core, which do not have a fixed steady-state equilibrium point with respect to the total iron amount. as a result, the dynamics of the ferritin system leaves the amount of iron in the clip to vary directly as a function of the total amount of iron available in the system at low iron concentrations . interestingly, the ferritin iron storage system lets the cytoplasmic iron pool grow as the amount of iron available for the cell increases, but always keeping it below a certain threshold concentration. when the iron concentration becomes excessive and possibly dangerous, the ferritin dynamic storage system is able to tightly control the amount of iron in the clip and prevent iron from reaching toxic concentrations by keeping the clip at an essentially constant level , but iron is left almost freely available for the cell at lower concentrations. hence, no oxidative damage will occur inside the cell, because the amount of iron in the clip is always kept at very low levels, both at low and high iron concentrations.

experimental results show that the clip increases transiently following an iron challenge, but the change is homeostatic in nature. however, this homeostatic capacity is surpassed in the case of iron overload, which results in an increased clip that is able to initiate oxidative damage cascades  <cit> . the model predicts that ferritin progressively looses its iron buffering capacity when the iron to ferritin ratio increases beyond  <dig> . this occurs because these conditions imply a saturation of ferritin protein cages with iron. hence, if more iron enters the system, ferritin is unable to capture the excess iron atoms and the clip increases. this is a saturation behavior that is typical for all chemical and biological buffers and is in agreement with experimental observations.

the dynamic behaviour of iron in the clip related to ferritin activity in response to a perturbation in the amount of labile iron is shown in figure  <dig>  these graphs show that the steady state amount of clip is essentially insensitive to the addition or removal of iron, due to the buffering capacity of ferritin. for example, doubling the amount of labile iron gives an increment of only  <dig> % on the final steady state amount of clip . resistance to a simulated decrease  in the labile iron pool is also clear . here, ferritin reacts by immediately releasing iron to the clip to reach a steady state which is only  <dig> % less than the previous one. the effect on the clip and ferritin iron content after a violent unphysiological 20-fold increase in the clip is shown in figure 6c. here, the pulse of iron equals the initial iron given at t =  <dig>  doubling the total iron in the system. after the perturbation, ferritin is able to immediately mineralize most of the extra iron. as a result, the amount of iron as clip in the new steady state is only  <dig> % higher than the previous one.

qualitative and quantitative analysis of the kinetic constants
whether simulating the steady state amount of clip or sudden changes in the clip, the simulation results show the high capacity and effectiveness of ferritin protein nanocages to quickly react and control changes in the amount of clip. the simulation results indicate that a given set of kinetic constants, specifically a given ratio between the kinetic constants, determines the setpoint control level of the clip, i.e. the amount of iron allowed to be present in the clip under normal cellular circumstances. the absolute value of those kinetic constants in the ferritin system is very high, which determines the fast buffer reaction of the system. in fact, the effectivity of the buffering system is exclusively based on the combination of fast and continuous iron uptake and release processes. if one of these processes is lost or its rate is too slow, the buffer function collapses, intracellular iron control becomes defective and the cell's probability of survival is diminished.

in this same way, it is interesting to analyze the values of the kinetic constants to gain insights about other proposed ferritin functions. in particular, ferritin has always been associated with an iron storage function inside the cell. indeed, the model simulations show that ferritin is able to perform such a function, but this role does not require values of the iron entrance constants, i.e. kaso, kdis and kcat , as high as those found in ferritin. in fact, much smaller rates should be enough to ensure a correct iron storage function.

ferritin has also been associated with an antioxidant function, which is also supported by the fact that its synthesis is activated through regulators associated with oxidative stress  <cit> . ferritin prevents oxidative damage by sequestering pro-oxidant and free-radical forming iron ions and dioxygen  from the cytoplasm and keeping them in an inactive form. when analyzing the kinetic rates associated with ferritin, it is interesting to note that high iron release rates from the inactive mineral core of ferritin protein cages are probably unfavorable for this antioxidant activity, unless the pores are held closed by a molecular clamping mechanism  when iron is in excess. hence, a protein with a lower or no iron release rate should be better than ferritin itself to control oxidative processes associated with high iron concentrations.

therefore, the particular combination of measured high kinetic constant rates of ferritin, both for iron uptake and release, seems to have evolved primarily to create a powerful intracellular iron buffering system. in comparison, the iron storage and antioxidant functions of ferritin are not optimally evolved, but seem to be subordinated side-effects of the buffer function. thus, contemporary ferritins probably evolved as a multifunction protein to perform a major iron buffering inside the eukaryotic cell, retaining secondary iron storage and antioxidant roles. in some bacteria separate genes encode ferritins that respond either to oxidant or iron stresses; the role of ferritin as an antioxidant appears to be especially important in human pathogenic bacteria and in anaerobic archea.

CONCLUSIONS
a mathematical model based on the structure/function of ferritin protein nanocages and purely kinetic considerations about the mineralization/dissolution of the ferritin iron mineral core was proposed to elucidate functional characteristics of the dynamic behavior of ferritin in vitro and in vivo. kinetic parameters and enzymatic constants for the model were directly taken or calculated from published works. simulation results were compared to steady state distributions of iron in ferritin obtained experimentally. the experimental results effectively showed a non-uniform distribution of iron content in the population of ferritin protein cages, i.e. all ferritin cages do not contain the same amount of iron, even though the initial ferritin population is homogeneous . the model was able to capture the main features of the experimental distributions, validating the feasibility of the mechanistic structure proposed and parameters used.

specifically, the model predicts that the main function of ferritin is to operate as an extremely fast, high-capacity, iron buffer that maintains mobile iron concentrations  until transcriptional or translational regulatory processes occur . in this sense, the model indicates that the mineralization/demineralization process effected by ferritin is able to maintain intracellular clip levels approximately constant, even when large perturbations in intracellular iron levels are introduced.

the ferritin iron buffering system operates effectively in a broad iron-to-ferritin range with high robustness. interestingly, ferritin does not sequester iron in iron starvation conditions, but tightly controls iron availability when iron is in excess, which demonstrates the fine-tuning and effectivity of the ferritin iron buffer system. the analysis of the magnitude of the kinetic parameters of the ferritin kinetic model indicated that iron buffering and clip stabilization are possibly the main functions of ferritin in the cell, and iron storage and antioxidant functions are arguably subordinate functions derived from the main buffering activity.

finally, model simulations showed that the iron uptake process by ferritin is extremely fast, which is in agreement with experimental observations, but iron release was shown to be equally fast when pore folding provides no impedance as observed in recombinant ferritins in solution  <cit> . these fast equilibrium mechanisms are able to provide immediate protection from abrupt changes in iron concentrations during the period when slower responses to stress such as transcription and/or translation are activated.

