BACKGROUND
bacterial adhesive proteins, proteinaceous adhesins, are frequently the most critical factor at the onset of a bacterial infection  <cit> . the identification and characterization of such adhesins at the molecular level is therefore crucial for the detailed understanding of bacterial pathogenesis, for the design of vaccines and for the development of novel antibacterial drugs  <cit> . although some bacterial adhesins have successfully been produced on a large scale and described in detail , this type of molecules are often difficult to express by conventional techniques or they possess a complicated structure  <cit> . this has in many cases hampered further characterization of bacterial adhesins and various surface display techniques and alternative expression methods have been developed for the analysis of adhesive polypeptides. however, commonly used surface display techniques suffer from the drawback that they rely on the attachment of the gene product of interest to the surface of the carrier, for example the phage  <cit> , the bacterium  <cit> , or the ribosome  <cit> , which may compromise correct folding of the polypeptide of interest. reports on high-level extracellular secretion of heterologous proteins in gram-negative bacteria are scarce and these expression techniques are currently a field of active research  <cit> .

the adhesion of the important and highly versatile human pathogenic bacterium staphylococcus aureus to host surfaces is mediated by a range of adhesins, some of which are very well characterized  <cit> . the majority of s. aureus adhesins belong to the group of microbial surface components recognizing adhesive matrix molecules, mscramms  <cit> , whereas others represent secretable expanded repertoire adhesive molecules  <cit> . some of the known s. aureus adhesins have been identified by phage display based on staphylococcal genomic libraries, a technique also used for identification of secreted proteins of the bacterium  <cit> . bacterial surface display and ribosome display have been exploited for the mapping of s. aureus epitopes recognized by human antibodies and for the identification of peptide motifs that mediate entry into eukaryotic cells  <cit> . nevertheless, on the basis of genomics and proteomics data, a number of surface proteins and approximately  <dig> proteins of unknown function in the proteome of s. aureus remain to be characterized  <cit>  and among these also lie putative novel adhesins.

we recently described an efficient technique for the secretion of foreign proteins into the growth medium of a secretion-competent derivative of the escherichia coli k12-strain called mks <dig>  <cit> . the genes encoding the flagellin , the flagellar cap , and the common type  <dig> fimbriae have been deleted from the chromosome of this strain. secretion is facilitated by the use of an expression-secretion cassette that includes dna elements from the flagellin operon of e. coli.

in the current report, we further develop the secretion technique  <cit>  into a tool for molecular microbiology and biotechnology and demonstrate its application for the human pathogenic bacterium s. aureus. we chose the versatile and important pathogen s. aureus as a model organism and constructed a library of random flag-tagged staphylococcal polypeptides in the secretion-competent host e. coli mks <dig> . we sequenced all the inserts carrying a flag-encoding sequence and screened the flag-tagged polypeptides directly from cell-free growth medium for adhesive properties. the majority of the secreted polypeptides did not bind to the tested target molecules, but we identified totally eight adhesive polypeptides from the library. as a result, we were able to generate a technique, which allows rapid screening of novel bacterial polypeptides directly from the growth medium of e. coli.

RESULTS
construction of a primary genomic library of s. aureus in e. coli
we constructed the vector psrp18/ <dig>  carrying the expression-secretion cassette previously shown to efficiently facilitate secretion of heterologous polypeptides in e. coli mks <dig>  <cit> . an ecorv restriction site was inserted for cloning of blunt-ended dna fragments between the dna fragment carrying nucleotides 1- <dig> of the flic gene , which in our previous work has been shown to facilitate extracellular secretion of heterologous proteins in e. coli mks <dig>  <cit> , and the flag-tag encoding sequence  <cit>  added for later screening purposes; a stop codon was added at the 3' end of the flag sequence.

purified chromosomal dna from s. aureus subsp. aureus  strain nctc 8325- <dig>  <cit>  was sonicated into fragments mainly  <dig> to  <dig> bp in length . the polished, blunt-ended dna fragments were ligated into psrp18/ <dig> and transformed into the secretion-competent strain e. coli mks <dig> to generate a primary genomic library including more than  <dig>  <dig> colonies. by colony pcr, the cloning efficiency, i.e. the% insert-carrying transformants of all transformants, was estimated from  <dig> randomly picked colonies to be 60% and the average insert size of  <dig> randomly picked insert-containing clones was estimated to be approximately  <dig> bp. the pcr primers used are shown in figure 1a.

generation of the final flag-tag positive  library in e. coli
the  <dig>  <dig> colonies of the primary genomic library were screened by colony blotting using anti-flag antibodies for exclusion of transformants carrying an empty vector or insertions out-of-frame in relation to the flag tag. totally  <dig> clones were confirmed to carry gene products with c-terminal flag tags and these were included into the final ftp library. colony-blot analysis showed that mks <dig>  with the empty vector reacted with monoclonal anti-flag antibodies as weakly as mks <dig> carrying no plasmid , thus confirming that the ftp colonies did possess an insertion in their plasmids.

sequence analysis of the ftp library
the coverage of the ftp library was determined by sequencing the inserted dna fragments in both directions in all the  <dig> ftp library clones. the sequencing primers are shown in figure 1a. the sequence of the insert was successfully determined in  <dig> clones using the 017f primer and in  <dig> clones with the 071r primer. when projected over the genome sequence of s. aureus nctc  <dig> using genomic blast searches  <cit> , the  <dig> sequences obtained using the 017f primer corresponded to  <dig> nt in total and covered  <dig> nt of the genome. for the later  <dig> sequences obtained with the 071r oligonucleotide, the corresponding values were  <dig> nt and  <dig> nt, respectively. the sequenced inserts overlapped totally  <dig> nts of the genome, thus the overlap of the ftp library was 63%.

comparison of the ftp library sequences with the gene sequences of s. aureus nctc  <dig> using blastn revealed a significant match for  <dig> and  <dig> of the  <dig> and  <dig> determined insertion sequences. the inserts showed homology to  <dig> and  <dig> gene sequences, respectively, and covered in total  <dig> gene sequences in s. aureus nctc  <dig>  the matches were distributed randomly and evenly over the staphylococcal chromosome . based on genomic and proteomic data, the theoretical number of encoded proteins in s. aureus nctc  <dig> is  <dig>  <cit> , which indicates that our final ftp library covers approximately 32% of the staphylococcal proteome. in comparison to advanced but laborious proteomic methods  <cit>  this coverage can be considered reasonable and most of all, it could have been increased by construction and screening of a larger primary genomic library, which had created a higher number of ftp clones. for a summary of the sequence data obtained from the ftp library, see additional file  <dig> table s <dig>  which shows that several gene fragments encoding polypeptides of known staphylococcal adhesins such as igg-binding proteins protein a and sbi, fibronectin-binding protein a , clumping factors a and b, elastin-binding protein ebps, extracellular matrix  -binding proteins ebh and emp, the sd-rich fibrinogen-binding protein as well as enolase  <cit>  were present in the library.

nucleotide sequencing of the ftp clones also showed that three types of inserts existed . in the optimal cases, which represented 31% of the ftp library, the clones carried only one staphylococcal gene or gene fragment which was in the same reading frame as the flic fragment, added to the construct to facilitate extracellular secretion, and the flag-tag. this type of constructs was exemplified by clones named Δnarg, Δfnbpa, Δebh and Δcoa. in another case, the staphylococcal gene was in the same reading frame only with the flag-tag rendering a gene product without an n-terminal flic sequence. in the third type of clones several staphylococcal orfs were identified in the cloned dna fragment; e.g. two in the clones named Δpurk, Δscor, Δusp and Δispd or three in the clone named Δpbp, although only the distal gene product carried the flag tag. we hypothesize that the translation of a flag-tag positive gene product in the later two cases, which represented 69% of the library clones, proceeds from the staphylococcal ribosomal binding site  detected in the 5' untranslated region  of the orf closest to the flag-tag encoding sequence. hence, the expressed product would be encoded by the last gene fragment of the cloned dna sequence, would not carry the n-terminal flic sequence, but would be flag-tag positive. phage display results obtained by rosander and coworkers  <cit>  as well as our results from sequencing and western blot analysis  of selected library clones support the hypothesis of translation of the flag-positive gene products from a staphylococcal rbs in e. coli. the flag-tagged polypeptides observed in the cells of clones Δpbp, Δpurk, Δscor, Δusp and Δispd did not react with anti-flagella antibodies whereas the polypeptides of clones Δnarg, Δfnbpa, Δcoa and Δebh did react . this result further supports the hypothesis of translation starting from staphylococcal rbss.

* in base pairs

† in s. aureus subsp. aureus nctc 8325

‡ open reading frames  in the clones are partial, the number refers to the systematic gene identifier saouhsc_no. in the genbank database, a locus_tag

§ <dig> abbreviations of tigr family names: narg, nitrate reductase α-subunit; purk, phosphoribosylamino-imidazole carboxylase atpase subunit; scor, short-chain oxidoreductase; usp, universal stress protein family; pbp, periplasmic binding protein; abc, atp-binding cassette

§ <dig> abbreviations of the protein names: fnbpa, fibronectin binding protein a; ebh, extracellular matrix binding protein homologue; ispd, 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase

¶ the reading frame is in relation to flic and flag sequences

# molecular mass in kilodaltons. the molecular mass of flic1- <dig> and flag-tag included when present in the gene product

adhesive properties of flag-tagged polypeptides in cell-free growth media of ftp library clones
with the goal to detect known and novel staphylococcal proteinaceous adhesins but on the other hand also to test the applicability of the technique, we analyzed in an enzyme-linked immunoassay  the binding of cell-free growth media of the  <dig> ftp library clones to a restricted selection of purified human proteins, which are well-known staphylococcal ligand molecules. these target proteins, i.e. fibrinogen , plasma fibronectin , type i and type iv collagens  as well as the control protein fetuin , were immobilized in polystyrene microtitre wells and cell-free culture media of the library clones were allowed to bind. of the totally  <dig> clones tested, the polypeptides in the supernatants of eight clones bound to fn  and six to fg . the polypeptides in the supernatant of clone Δusp interacted with civ similarly as with the control protein fet. the binding properties are shown in the upper panel of figure 3a. the supernatants of the remaining  <dig> clones and of the vector strain showed no binding to the tested target proteins, functioned as internal negative controls, and thus indicated specificity in the binding assays. in figure 3a, clone Δnarg represents an example of clones expressing non-binding polypeptides; d1-d <dig> represents polypeptides expressed by mks <dig>  and was included as a fn-binding positive control  <cit> .

according to our sequence and binding data, three of the ftp clones expressed adhesive polypeptides previously characterized as adhesins of s. aureus, namely the fn-binding repeats d1-d <dig> of the fn-binding protein fnbpa , a fn-binding fragment of the ecm-binding protein ebh  and a fg-binding fragment of staphylocoagulase   <cit> . the coagulase fragment includes the conserved central region and  <dig> residues of the  <dig> amino-acids long repeat  <dig> of coagulase. in group a streptococci, individual repeats of coagulase have been shown to bind fg and we therefore speculate that the short fragment of repeat  <dig> mediates the fg binding we observed  <cit> .

the remaining five ftp clones, which secreted adhesive polypeptides, encoded mainly fn- or fg-binding gene products. according to the sequence data, these ftp-polypeptides were i) an n-terminal fragment of the substrate binding protein of an iron compound abc transporter , ii) an n-terminal fragment of the atpase subunit of phosphoribosyl aminoimidazole carboxylase , iii) an n-terminal fragment of a putative short chain oxidoreductase , iv) a putative universal stress protein , and v) the n-terminal half of 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase  of s. aureus nctc  <dig>  <cit> . the gene product of the non-adhesive control clone turned out to be a central fragment of the α-subunit of nitrate reductase and was named Δnarg  <cit> .

western blot analysis of the cell-free growth medium from ftp clones
to determine the apparent molecular mass of the ftp polypeptides expressed by the ftp library clones and to confirm the presence of the c-terminally flag-tagged peptides in the growth medium, we analyzed whole cells and cell-free growth media of the clones by western blotting using anti-flag antibodies. the results are presented in the lower panel of figure 3a and show that the flag-tagged gene products were detected in whole cell samples  and cell-free supernatants , but in varying amounts in each clone. the apparent molecular mass of the secreted polypeptides was in good agreement with their theoretical molecular mass calculated on the basis of the deduced amino acid sequence . the flag-tagged polypeptide expressed by the clone Δcoa has however a predicted molecular mass of  <dig>  kda whereas the apparent molecular mass was approximately  <dig> kda. the reason for this aberrant migration pattern is unknown, but it is not related to a high content of acidic amino acids causing a slow migration pattern in sds-page as reported with some other staphylococcal adhesins  <cit> .

verification of the adhesive polypeptides
to confirm the results obtained with supernatants of the ftp library clones, the dna sequences identified as encoding the adhesive polypeptides  were expressed in the cytoplasm of e. coli as recombinant polypeptides with six histidine residues at their n-termini by conventional methods. the purified polypeptides  are shown in the lower panel of figure 3b. the concentration of the his-polypeptides was first determined from coomassie-stained sds-page gels by analysis of whole band intensity of the corresponding polypeptide using image analysis with an internal protein standard of known concentration. the polypeptides were then assessed for binding to immobilized target molecules by elisa  and surface plasmon resonance  analysis . his-Δnarg and his-Δfnbpa polypeptides were used as internal negative and positive controls, respectively. since the his-Δscor and his-Δispd polypeptides remained insoluble in the e. coli cytoplasm, these proteins could not be purified in non-denaturing conditions and could unfortunately not be included in the verification.

in the elisa assay, the his-Δcoa and his-Δebh polypeptides interacted with the same immobilized target molecules  as those of the corresponding ftp library clones . the his-Δpurk polypeptide bound to fn but interacted poorly with fg, whereas his-Δusp showed only a low level interaction with fn. similarly as the negative control polypeptide his-Δnarg, the his-Δfnbpa and his-Δpbp polypeptides showed no binding to fn or fg in the elisa.

in the spr analysis, the his-Δpurk, his-Δcoa, and his-Δusp polypeptides bound to immobilized fg whereas the his-Δfnbpa, his-Δpurk, and his-Δebh polypeptides showed affinity to fn similarly as did the cell free growth media of corresponding ftp library clones tested by elisa . in contrast to the elisa results, the his-Δebh polypeptide reacted also with fg in the spr analysis. the his-Δpbp polypeptide and the negative control peptide his-Δnarg showed no binding properties in the spr analysis. however, the spr results mainly confirmed the results obtained with culture supernatants of ftp clones. the affinity constants obtained in the spr analysis are shown in table  <dig> 

* the steady state affinity constants  of the seven analytes tested are shown in molar concentrations; values shown in bold indicate high affinity for the indicated ligand .

† affinity was not measurable since all values were negative

discussion
s. aureus nctc  <dig>  the parental strain of the prophage-cured s. aureus nctc 8325- <dig> used for construction of the extracelluar secretion library, carries  <dig> of the genes encoding the  <dig> surface proteins implicated in adhesion and all the  <dig> genes for the secretable proteins implicated in immune response evasion as recently described by mccarthy and lindsay  <cit> . according to the literature, only eight of these proteins have been reported to bind fn and/or fg and five interact with the ecm. cna, the only collagen-binding protein in the list of adhesins, is not present in s. aureus nctc 8325- <dig>  <cit> . taking into consideration the above data and the fact that we deliberately screened for binding to only a few model targets of s. aureus, the yield from our ftp library was very satisfying. among the  <dig> clones of the ftp library, which was constructed in the study, we identified in the primary screening for fn-, fg- or collagen-binding polypeptides totally eight clones expressing adhesive flag-tagged polypeptides. we found three known fn/fg-binding polypeptides  and in addition five polypeptides of novel adhesive function . the cloned chromosomal fragments frequently encoded polypeptides below the length of intact binding domains of large staphylococcal adhesins, such as the clumping factors  and sd-rich fibrinogen-binding proteins  <cit> . hence, in future applications of the presented technique longer chromosomal fragments should preferentially be cloned. we did however identify several fibronectin-binding polypeptides, which possibly is explained by the fact that short fragments of typical fibronectin-binding mscramms mediate high-affinity binding  <cit> . the observed variation in concentration of flag-tagged polypeptides in the cell-free supernatants of the ftp-library clones, which was due to variable expression of the cloned s. aureus chromosomal fragments in e. coli and may have an effect on the screening results, could be circumvented by quantification of the polypeptides prior to the analysis.

the findings obtained by primary screening of ftp library clones were confirmed by elisa and spr analyses using corresponding purified his-tagged recombinant polypeptides. all the binding results are combined in table  <dig>  and strongly indicate that the fn- and fg-binding polypeptides Δfnbpa, Δpurk, Δcoa, Δusp and Δebh truly have adhesive functions under the tested conditions. the very weak interactions observed with Δpbp  and Δusp  require further verifications and could not be confirmed by elisa or spr using 6xhis polypeptides. some discrepancies were observed with the ebh polypeptides, which may be due to the protein itself or the methods applied for verification of the results. in the elisa assays, Δebh and his-Δebh bound to fn, whereas interaction with fn as well as fg was observed in the spr analysis. fg is not known to be a ligand for ebh in the literature, but ebh is a giant protein,  <dig> amino acid residues in length  <cit> , and may have unknown properties. elisa is an end-point type of analysis, whereas spr is a real-time analysis considered to be very sensitive and optimal for detection of weak interactions  <cit> . thus, the spr technology may in this case have revealed a novel function of ebh, which remains to be further characterized in a coming study. the verification of the interactions of Δscor and Δispd  was hampered since the polypeptides could not be produced as purified his-tagged polypeptides by conventional expression technology.

* binding of polypeptides to immobilized target molecules by enzyme-linked immunoassay

† binding of polypeptides to immobilized target molecules by surface plasmon resonance

‡ c-terminally flag-tagged recombinant polypeptide used as positive control in screening of the ftp library

- indicate no binding; ligand in brackets indicate weak binding

nd, indicate not determined. the scor and ispd polypeptides could not be produced as 6xhis recombinant polypeptides and the d1-d <dig> polypeptide was produced into the cell-free growth medium and did not carry a his tag.

the localization in the s. aureus cell of the polypeptides we identified as possessing adhesive properties may appear somewhat controversial. according to bioinformatics analysis and a recent proteomics analysis of the s. aureus col strain  <cit> , the protein purk, in which we identified an fg- and fn-binding polypeptide, is intracellular and functions as the atpase subunit of phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase. the fn-/fg-binding polypeptides scor , usp  and ispd  are found both in the cytoplasm and on the cell surface of s. aureus  <cit> . finally, the pbp polypeptide  has been indicated as a lipoprotein. there is increasing evidence that various bacterial proteins regarded as cytoplasmic enzymes also can be found in other tasks outside the bacterial cell and presumably have a dual role. several examples of such moonlighting proteins  <cit>  and/or anchorless adhesins  <cit> , for which the secretion mechanism still is unknown, have been reported  <cit> . in addition, screenings for vaccine candidates in s. aureus by ribosome display combined with immunoproteome analysis as well as by proteomics-based techniques have identified also intracellular proteins and anchorless cell wall proteins as immunogenic and/or located on the outside of the bacterial cell  <cit> . this indicates that some bacterial intracellular proteins may play a role or, alternatively, at least be localized extracellularly during the in vivo infection. hence, it is likely that our results are not in vitro artefacts and that the fn- and fg-binding usp and purk polypeptides we identified, if localized extracellularly, could mediate host-microbe interaction. it should however be stressed, that the adhesive polypeptides were expressed in a heterologous host and for the obtained results to be fully reliable and reflect the native activity of s. aureus proteins, the properties demonstrated for these polypeptides should be further verified in a separate study.

a comparison of the presented technique with alternative expression methods applied in analysis of adhesins and/or the immunoproteome of s. aureus reveals benefits and deficiencies in all the technologies. proteomics-based methods rely on proteins expressed by the target organism at the particular condition that may render the expressome incomplete  <cit> , whereas our method in principle facilitates the expression of any gene product independently of the growth requirements of the target bacterium, i.e. s. aureus in our case. the application of other commonly used techniques, such as the proteomics-based expression library screening, ribosome display and surface display techniques, suffer from individual drawbacks exemplified by requirement of cell lysis, removal of cell debris prior to analysis, conformation of the polypeptide to be displayed, disulfide bonds disturbing the surface translocation, or the use of expensive commercial in vitro transcription and translation kits  <cit> . a drawback in biotechnological applications of the recently published complete orfeome library of s. aureus is the requirement to transfer the library plasmids into appropriate expression hosts prior to protein production  <cit> .

the most time-consuming part of the method presented here is the manual construction of the final ftp library. once the library has been generated, it can conveniently in a cost- and time-efficient manner be applied in the analysis of any protein-ligand interaction directly using cell-free supernatants in various binding assays. a clear advantage of our and other extracellular secretion techniques such as type i and type iii secretion-based methods  <cit>  is the cheap and convenient direct use of cell-free growth media, whereas techniques dependent on intracellular proteins or proteins exported to the periplasm by the seca-yeg or tat pathways are more tedious and expensive  <cit> . as apparent from our results with the polypeptides his-Δscor and his-Δispd, proteins difficult to produce by conventional methods may be efficiently produced by this novel and flexible alternative method.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we generated a random chromosomal library of s. aureus in the secretion-competent strain e. coli mks <dig> , selected only the clones that expressed c-terminally flag-tagged gene products, and sequenced the dna fragments of all these  <dig> clones. the fragments were distributed evenly over the s. aureus chromosome and the library covered approximately 32% of the s. aureus proteome. we tested the extracellularly secreted staphylococcal polypeptides for binding to well-known ligands of s. aureus and found previously characterized adhesins, such as the fn-binding d1-d <dig> repeats of fnbpa, a fg-binding fragment of staphylocoagulase and a fn-binding fragment of the ecm-binding protein ebh. furthermore, we found five polypeptides with new adhesive properties, a polypeptide of the universal stress protein usp, and adhesive fragments of the putative short chain oxidoreductase scor, the phosphoribosylaminoimidazole carboxylase atpase subunit purk, 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate cytidylyltransferase ispd, and the substrate binding protein of an iron compound abc transporter, which all bound to fn and fg. currently, we are analyzing the library more comprehensively by screening reactivity of ftp polypeptides immobilized via the flag tag with antibodies from healthy individuals and patients suffering from various staphylococcal infections. this methodologically straight-forward method can in principle be applied on any bacterial species and protein-ligand interaction of interest.

