BACKGROUND
trypanosoma cruzi, the etiologic agent of chagas disease in humans, is a protozoan parasite which assumes four morphological stages during its cycle in insect and mammalian hosts. in the reduviid insect vector, t. cruzi epimastigotes replicate extracellularly in the lumen of the gut. as the parasite stages reach the posterior end of the gut they attach to the wall of the rectum and convert to non-replicative, infective metacyclic trypomastigotes that are released in the feces when the bug takes a blood meal. the metacyclic trypomastigotes enter the mammalian host when they are rubbed into the bite wound or other open skin or mucosal surfaces and invade host cells. the intracytoplasmic parasites convert to the replicative, amastigote stage and undergo many rounds of division before transforming into elongated, motile trypomastigote stages which are released when the host cell ruptures. the trypomastigotes are disseminated in the blood and lymph where they may infect virtually any nucleated cell or be taken up by the insect vector to complete the life cycle. a detailed description of the t. cruzi life-cycle with accompanying diagram can be accessed at the web site for the centers for disease control and prevention http://www.dpd.cdc.gov/dpdx/html/trypanosomiasisamerican.htm.

there are no vaccines for chagas disease, and specific chemotherapy for t. cruzi infection is hindered by adverse side-effects and questionable efficacy. in order to broadly screen for genes with relevant expression patterns, and to learn more about the biology of t. cruzi in general, we and others have conducted transcriptomic and proteomic analyses of t. cruzi life-cycle stages  <cit> . although these analyses have highlighted potential drug and vaccine targets, they have been somewhat limited in scope, largely non-quantitative, and rarely correlated transcript and protein abundances. the latter issue is of particular importance for t. cruzi and other kinetoplastids, due to the generally accepted view that regulation of gene expression in the kinetoplastids is almost entirely post-transcriptional . in fact, only one kinetoplastid rna pol ii promoter has been described despite repeated attempts in many laboratories . other studies have implicated mrna processing  <cit> , translational repression  <cit> , polysome recruitment  <cit> , and codon adaptation  <cit>  in the regulation of gene expression in the kinetoplastids, all processes that would be predicted to mitigate the role of mrna abundance regulation in determining protein expression levels. indeed, previous microarray studies in the kinetoplastids have revealed relatively modest numbers of genes whose transcript abundances are significantly regulated . there is, however, plentiful evidence that transcript levels in these parasites are controlled by mrna decay, involving 3'-utrs and rna-binding proteins  <cit> . to determine the extent of mrna abundance regulation in t. cruzi globally, we performed whole-genome, dna microarray analysis of the four life-cycle stages of t. cruzi. the results of these analyses were compared with existing protein expression data for t. cruzi to determine the correlation, if any, between transcript and protein relative abundances in this human pathogen.

RESULTS
t. cruzi displays significant stage-regulation of relative transcript abundances for thousands of its genes
co-hybridization of cdnas from each t. cruzi life-cycle stage with a reference cdna sample comprised of all four life-cycle stages on oligonucleotide, whole genome microarrays, revealed that over 83% of the oligonucleotides detected transcript above background levels and were consistent between dye-swap replicates in at least three life-cycle stages . significance analysis of microarrays   <cit>  determined that a total of  <dig>  of these transcripts exhibited statistically significant up or down regulation in at least one of the four life-cycle stages with a median false discovery rate  of  <dig> %  and a 90th percentile fdr of  <dig> % . whether one includes or excludes members of large gene families from the analysis, >50% of the genes with detectable signals were significantly regulated during the course of the t. cruzi life-cycle . the significant regulation of thousands of t. cruzi genes is visually apparent in the heat map of significantly regulated genes . note that the significantly regulated genes show consistency between biological replicates, particularly in stages where the extent of up or down regulation is the greatest. the expanded clusters in figure  <dig> are highly enriched in trypomastigote-upregulated trans-sialidases  and mucins.

the oligonucleotide sequences were aligned against the t. cruzi genome by blast analysis  <cit> . oligonucleotides showing 80% or greater identity with more than three t. cruzi gene id's were not counted.

1significantly stage-regulated as determined by sam analysis .

2non-significantly stage-regulated as determined by sam analysis .

3oligonucleotides mapping to members of large gene families .

of the genes upregulated in two stages, 76% , were co-upregulated in stages occurring in the same host , whereas approximately 20%  were co-upregulated in stages with similar biological functions. for example, genes co-upregulated in amastigotes and epimastigotes  were enriched in those involved in dna repair, including proliferative cell nuclear antigen . likewise, genes co-upregulated in trypomastigotes and metacyclic trypomastigotes  included never in mitosis  related kinase and were enriched for trans-sialidases , which are involved in invasion .

the validity of t. cruzi microarray data is supported by qrt-pcr and by comparison to existing proteomic data
the accuracy of the microarray results was confirmed by quantitative reverse-transcriptase pcr  for a subset of the significantly regulated genes.

for  <dig> out of  <dig> genes showing significant up or downregulation by microarray analysis in trypomastigotes, qrt-pcr data agreed in direction of regulation . similar agreement was seen in the case of epimastigotes  and amastigotes  genes .

further validation of the microarray results came from comparison to known protein expression profiles for selected genes. for example, proteomic analyses indicated most ts gene expression occurs in trypomastigotes and significantly fewer ts proteins are detected in amastigotes and metacyclic trypomastigotes   <cit> . a similar pattern of expression was evident in the transcriptome data . gene set enrichment  analysis  <cit>  of genes >2-fold upregulated in trypomastigotes and significantly regulated  also revealed enrichment of trans-sialidases  molecular function term "exo-alpha-sialidase activity"; hypergeometric p-value of  <dig> e-25;  <dig> e- <dig> with benjamini correction for fdr). several ts mrnas were detected in epimastigotes, in agreement with previous est analyses  <cit> . interestingly, of the  <dig> ts genes showing 2-fold or greater transcript upregulation in epimastigotes,  <dig> were also upregulated in metacyclic trypomastigote stages , consistent with the possibility they are translationally repressed in epimastigotes and subsequently translated in metacyclic trypomastigotes.

other gene groups showing concordance between the transcriptome and whole proteome analyses included genes for ribosomal proteins  and genes in the histidine-to-glutamate pathway   <cit>  . we also observed the expected upregulation of mucin genes in trypomastigotes  and the downregulation of flagellum-associated genes in amastigotes  .

the t. cruzi microarray data provide expanded coverage of important functional groups
the concordance between the presently reported transcriptomic data and published proteomic data suggests that the mrna relative abundances observed here will be useful indicators of the protein expression levels of genes for which protein expression data has not been reported, including many genes annotated as 'hypothetical.' current proteomic methods often fail to detect or quantify proteins that are expressed at low levels,  or proteins that have physical properties making them less amenable to proteomic analyses, . for example, this transcriptomic analysis detected  <dig> protein phosphatases and  <dig> protein kinases, which were significantly regulated at the transcript level , and few of which have published protein expression data. likewise, our transcriptome analysis detected  <dig> significantly regulated genes annotated as 'integral-to-membrane' .

members of many t. cruzi paralog clusters exhibit significant stage-regulated divergence in mrna relative abundance patterns
kinetoplastids appear to maintain multiple copies of genes for which high level expression is required  <cit> . hence we expected that genes in paralog clusters would have similar expression patterns and were surprised to find that over 10%  of the t. cruzi paralog groups containing 3– <dig> members had divergent mrna relative abundance patterns . one of these groups was the amastins, a paralog group previously reported to be largely amastigote-specific  <cit>  but herein shown to include members with significant stage-specific upregulation in insect stages. the divergent expression patterns of the t. cruzi amastins were confirmed by qrt-pcr  and are also supported by the detection of amastin in the metacyclic trypomastigote proteome  <cit> .

in addition to increasing transcript abundance, another presumed function of gene duplication is to allow for the development of new protein functions  <cit> . such neofunctionalization may have occurred in the t. cruzi 60s ribosomal l <dig> protein paralog group . tc <dig> . <dig>  which was upregulated in trypomastigotes, has a  <dig> amino acid n-terminal extension not found in any other publicly-available 60s ribosomal l <dig> sequence, suggesting the possibility that this paralog has a novel function in t. cruzi trypomastigotes.

discussion
transcriptomic analyses have not been as aggressively pursued in kinetoplastid organisms as they have been in other protozoan parasites, such as plasmodium. this is likely due to the view that the predominantly post-transcriptional nature of gene expression regulation in kinetoplastids makes microarray studies in these organisms generally less informative than microarray studies in organisms for which transcription initiation plays a larger role in gene expression regulation. in support of this, the ranges of observed mrna ratios between life-cycle stages in kinetoplastid organisms have been relatively narrow compared to the ranges observed in organisms with canonical rna pol ii promoters. for example,  <dig> -fold induction in relative transcript abundance for cd <dig> was observed in a microarray study comparing human t-lymphotropic virus type  <dig>  carrying t-cell lines versus htlv-1-negative t-cell lines  <cit> , whereas in kinetoplastid microarray studies, fold inductions above ~8-fold are rarely observed  <cit> .

further contributing to the debate over the utility of microarray studies in kinetoplastids has been the general observation that relatively few genes have exhibited significant stage regulation of mrna relative abundances in previous microarray studies. for instance, diehl et al., using arrays of  <dig>  pcr-amplified genome shot-gun library inserts from t. brucei to compare relative transcript abundances between in vitro cultured human, long slender forms and procyclic parasites, observed that, although 75% of the array elements detected transcripts, only 2% displayed significant differences between the two life-cycle stages  <cit> . the observation that only 2% of the detected transcripts differed significantly in relative abundance between two very different life-cycle stages supported the concept that transcript abundances in t. brucei are largely constitutive, especially considering the two life-cycle stages were compared directly on the microarrays. this picture of predominantly constitutive genome expression at the level of transcript abundance in kinetoplastids was reinforced manifold by subsequent studies in t. brucei  <cit>  and leishmania spp. .

in light of the findings from t. brucei and leishmania spp. microarray studies as well as findings from our previous, limited microarray study in t. cruzi  <cit> , we sought to determine if transcript levels are globally variable between life-cycle stages of t. cruzi using whole-genome oligonucleotide microarrays. when cdnas from each life-cycle stage were co-hybridized with a reference cdna sample comprised of all four life-cycle stages on oligonucleotide, whole genome microarrays, we observed that the relative transcript abundances for over 50% of the genes detected on the arrays were significantly regulated between the life-cycle stages.

the microarray data for selected genes were validated by qrt-pcr. there was generally good agreement between the two platforms in terms of direction of regulation, however there were some quantitative differences, especially in terms of the extent of up or downregulation estimated by these two techniques. these quantitative differences likely were the result of sequence-specific effects and differences in dynamic range for the two platforms  <cit> . in addition, the rna samples used for qrt-pcr were not the identical samples used for the microarrays.

recent improvements in microarray design, such as the use of oligonucleotide probes designed for more uniform hybridization kinetics and with lower likelihood of cross-hybridization than amplicon-derived probes and the use of microarrays with greater genome coverage could in part account for why our study identified a higher percentage of significantly stage-regulated genes than previous microarray studies in other kinetoplastids  <cit> . however, even a recent study by rochette et al. that used leishmania whole genome oligonucleotide microarrays to directly compare amastigotes and procyclics reported that only 7% of the genes in leishmania infantum and  <dig> % of the genes in l. major were developmentally regulated  <cit> . it is also possible that the use of different statistical methods for analysis of microarray data my yield widely different estimates of the frequency of regulated genes. however, using less rigorous statistical criteria for determining significance, such as fold-change, results in higher false discovery rates  <cit>  and thus would be predicted to overestimate the number of significantly regulated genes. our reanalysis of the papadopoulou data from l. infantum using our statistical methods found  <dig> genes  to be significantly regulated between amastigotes and promastigotes with an fdr of  <dig> % . thus, different statistical analysis methods cannot account for the differential estimates of the frequency of regulated genes in leishmania and t. cruzi.

by incorporating all four life cycle stages of t. cruzi in our analysis, in contrast to the  <dig> stage comparisons done with other kinetoplastids  we have increased the possibility of identifying a greater number of genes regulated in expression in at least one of the  <dig> life cycle stages. however, the contribution of increased number of stages studied to the overall number of significantly regulated genes was greatly mitigated by the fact that we used a reference design in which each life-cycle stage was compared to a mixture of all four life-cycle stages. this design minimized the number of microarrays required to compare the four life-cycle stages , and also simplified the analysis, but had the disadvantage of buffering the ratios observed. by contrast, previous microarray studies in the kinetoplastids involved directly comparing one life-cycle stage with another on the microarrays, an experimental design which should maximize the number of significant ratios. thus our estimate that >50% of genes in t. cruzi have significantly stage-regulated transcript levels is much more likely to be an underestimate than an overestimate.

the number of significantly stage-regulated transcripts reported here for t. cruzi is also likely to be underestimated because > <dig>  of the oligonucleotide probes detected transcripts in two or fewer stages and were removed from further analysis for statistical reasons  was unreliable for genes present in less than three groups). also, almost certainly some of the genes that we reported as non-significantly regulated are significantly regulated in transitional stages of the life-cycle. for instance, saxena et al., using microarrays of ~ <dig> pcr-amplified genome survey sequencing  clone inserts, identified  <dig> protein coding genes significantly regulated during axenic promastigote-to-amastigote differentiation in leishmania donovani  <cit> . of these,  <dig> genes, nearly 40% of the total number of differentially regulated genes identified in the study, displayed transient up or downregulation that would have been missed by only comparing fully differentiated parasites. thus our analysis of only fully differentiated stages likely underestimated the percentage of genes we found significantly regulated at the transcript level during the t. cruzi life cycle, suggesting that time course studies looking at transitional stages in t. cruzi would be fruitful.

the disparity in the degree of transcript abundance regulation between t. cruzi and the other sequenced kinetoplastids suggests there may be differences in the number and kind of rna binding proteins in their genomes, because almost all regulation of mrna abundance in these organisms is at the level of mrna stability. however, the genomes of t. cruzi, t. brucei, and l. major all have remarkably similar complements of rna binding proteins . of the  <dig> proteins with rna recognition motifs  in t. cruzi, t. brucei, and l. major, only two were unique to t. cruzi, rbp <dig>  and drbd <dig> , both of which were upregulated in metacyclic trypomastigotes.

present knowledge of the kinetoplastids does not elicit an obvious biological explanation for why gene expression regulation in t. cruzi might be so different from its closest relatives. perhaps the most striking difference between t. cruzi and t. brucei and l. major is that only t. cruzi has both intracellular and extracellular life-cycle stages in the mammalian host. amastigotes must replicate intracellularly and, although sequestered from the actions of antibodies and complement, are subjected to attack by cd8+ cytotoxic t lymphocytes   <cit>  and to the effects of host cytokines  <cit>  and antimicrobials, including reactive oxygen species and nitric oxide  <cit> . trypomastigotes are extracellular and thus must evade host defenses including complement, antibodies, and phagocytes. an enhanced capacity for regulating transcript abundances may have provided t. cruzi with the agility necessary to rapidly shift between such different environments.

the finding that t. cruzi divergently regulates mrna relative abundances for members of paralog clusters was unexpected, given the post-transcriptional mode of gene expression regulation in this parasite. divergent expression of duplicate genes is believed to occur by the accumulation of mutations in non-coding cis regulatory sequences, such as promoters  <cit> . since kinetoplastids appear to be largely devoid of canonical promoters, it will be interesting to study the 3' untranslated regions of paralogs with divergent expression patterns to identify the sequences responsible for the differential mrna abundances.

the differentially regulated t. cruzi duplicate genes identified here will be useful to study the retention and neofunctionalization of duplicate genes in an ancient eukaryote lacking transcriptional control of gene expression. in such an environment, the contributions of mrna stability control and sub-cellular localization to the evolution of new genes can be studied in isolation from the effects of transcriptional control. gene knockout studies are currently underway to determine if the array-identified, divergently-expressed paralogs, such as the trypomastigote upregulated 60s ribosomal l <dig> protein, have novel functions.

CONCLUSIONS
t. cruzi displays stage-regulated control of mrna abundances for a significant proportion of its genes despite the fact that regulation of gene expression in the kinetoplastids is primarily post-transcriptional and despite the fact that previous genomic studies of the kinetoplastids have found that only a low proportion of their genomes are stage-regulated. moreover, t. cruzi oligonucleotide microarray measurements largely agree with known protein expression data for key functional groups. taken together, t. cruzi oligonucleotide microarray analysis is a useful screening tool to determine stage-regulated gene expression in this human pathogen.

