BACKGROUND
iron is an essential element for all living organisms, being part of many proteins participating in fundamental mechanisms such as dna synthesis, respiration, photosynthesis and metabolism  <cit> . in plants, the main cause of fe deficiency is its low availability in the soil solution due to the scarce solubility of its compounds in well aerated environments. to cope with this problem plants have developed efficient mechanisms to acquire fe from the soil. two main strategies are known: dicots and non-graminaceous monocots operate applying what is known as strategy i, while graminaceous monocots operate with the so-called strategy ii  <cit> . in the last decade a great amount of biochemical and molecular data have been acquired, increasing the knowledge about the mechanisms adopted by strategy i plants, especially when grown in the absence of fe. in particular, three main events seem to assure iron uptake. first, the induction of the reducing activity of a fe3+-chelate reductase  located at the plasma membrane of epidermal root cells. the enzyme was first cloned in arabidopsis   <cit>  and fro <dig> homologues were found in other strategy i plants  <cit> ; second, the induction of a fe2+ transporter belonging to the zip family of proteins  <cit>  and identified as irts in several plants  <cit> ; third, the activation of a p-type h+-atpase  <cit>  necessary to decrease the apoplastic ph, thus favouring, on one hand, the solubilization of external fe compounds and the activity of the fc-r  <cit>  and, on the other hand, to establish an effective driving force for fe uptake  <cit> . since the maintenance of these activities requires the constant production of energetic substrates, changes in metabolism have also been studied under fe deficiency conditions. it has been shown that the rate of glycolysis is increased  <cit> ; the pentose phosphate pathway is increased, as well, to produce both reducing equivalents and carbon skeletons  <cit> . furthermore, the phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase  activity has been shown to increase several times under fe deficiency  <cit> . this enzyme is very important in the economy of the cell, since it can accomplish several tasks: , by consuming pep it increases the rate of glycolysis, releasing the negative allosteric control exerted on phosphofructo kinase- <dig>  and aldolase by this phosphorylated compound  <cit> ; , it contributes to the intracellular ph-stat mechanisms  <cit>  and , it forms organic acids, in particular malate and citrate, that may play an important role in the transport of iron through the xylem to the leaf mesophyll  <cit> . furthermore, pepc activity sustains the anaplerotic production of carbon skeletons for biosynthetic pathways  and along with the accumulation of di-tricarboxylic acid carrier , increases the communication between the cytosolic and mitochondrial pools of organic acids, to help maintaining a higher turnover of reducing equivalents  <cit> . implication of metabolism has been also inferred from the microarray analysis performed on fe-starved arabidopsis plants  <cit> , in which it was shown that the levels of several transcripts encoding enzymes of these metabolic pathways were increased. however, the changes in transcript levels are not a direct proof that the encoded proteins have changed, but that relevant metabolic pathway or biological processes have been affected. to study a global change in the concentration of proteins the new proteomic technologies can be undoubtedly of great help. concerning plant iron nutrition, two recent studies have analysed by 2-de the proteome of wild-type tomato and its fer mutant  <cit>  grown under fe deficiency, to identify to what extent the transcription factor fer influences the accumulation of fe-regulated protein, while another one analysed the changes in proteomic and metabolic profiles occurring in sugar beet root tips in response to fe deficiency and resupply  <cit> .

cucumber  plants develop rapid responses to fe deficiency, and previous works by our and other groups have described very important changes, not only in the classical responses of strategy i plants, i.e. fc-r and h+-atpase activities, but also in the metabolic rearrangement induced by fe starvation  <cit> .

in this work we have carried out a proteomic analysis on proteins isolated from cucumber roots grown in the presence or in the absence of fe for  <dig> and  <dig> d. furthermore, we chose to analyse only the cytosolic soluble protein fraction without contaminations by organelles or membranes.

RESULTS
experimental planning and 2-de analysis
in this study the changes in the protein profile of cucumber roots expressed in response to fe deficiency were analyzed. the choice to collect proteins after  <dig> and  <dig> days of growth was done after a preliminary analysis in which we assessed the increases in transcript abundances related to the strategy i adaptation responses occurring under fe-starvation  and by previous biochemical evidence obtained by our laboratory  <cit> . figure 1b shows the rapid increase occurring for the mrnas encoding for the three typical strategy i proteins. while for csfro <dig> and csirt <dig> their expression increased strongly at early stages, for csha <dig> the increase occurred later after fe deficiency induction. eight-d-old plants showed the highest response for all three transcripts. soluble  proteins were obtained from roots of plants grown in the presence or in the absence of fe, after centrifugation to eliminate any possible contamination by organelles and endomembranes. proteins were successively separated by 2-de. figure  <dig> reports the two-dimensional gel electrophoresis representative maps of soluble proteins isolated from roots of plants grown for  <dig> and  <dig> d in the presence or in the absence of fe.

hierarchical clustering analysis
the comparison between the control and the -fe treatment showed that  <dig> protein spots were expressed differentially. these spots were subjected to two-way hierarchical clustering analysis using the permutmatrix software  <cit> . figure  <dig> represents the results obtained and shows the pairwise comparison of protein levels for the two dates and the two fe treatments chosen. the protein spots were sorted in two main groups: those showing a decreased abundance in the presence of fe and those which accumulate in the presence of the ion. focusing the attention on lower level groupings, it is interesting to note that the protein behavior at the two dates was quite similar but not identical, because although most differences were more marked after  <dig> d, some other ones  were essentially associated to the 5-d stage. these evidences underlined that cucumber root response can be slightly but significantly affected by some peculiar traits depending on the considered stage of fe deficiency.

comparative analysis of the soluble proteins under fe deficiency
the  <dig> spots of interest were analyzed by lc-esi-ms/ms. forty-four out of them were identified and listed in tables  <dig> and  <dig> and indicated by numbers in figure  <dig>  numbers in red in figure  <dig> identified proteins whose amount is increased, while the numbers in green identified proteins whose amount is decreased under fe deficiency. statistical information about lc-esi-ms/ms analysis are reported in additional file  <dig> 

proteins were classified on the basis of data available in the literature. statistical information about lc-esi-ms/ms analysis are reported in additional file  <dig> 

a: experimental molecular weight  or isoelectric point.

b: theoretical molecular weight  or isoelectric point.

c: amino acid coverage .

d: partial sequence.

e: annotation reported by the authors.

some of the proteins were identified in more than one spot in the 2-de gel. the variability in the level of proteins belonging to the same family suggests the presence of different isoforms, which can be subjected to different post-translational modifications.

twenty-one protein spots out of  <dig> showed increased accumulation  in the absence of fe with a further increase between the pairwise comparison after  <dig> d . the increased proteins under fe deficiency were sorted into four different functional classes  on the basis of data available in the literature. all the identified proteins except one  were characterized as enzymes and most of them  belong to the glycolytic/gluconeogenetic pathways, confirming the proteomic  <cit>  and the biochemical data obtained by several groups  <cit>  and the prediction from microarray analysis of fe-deficient arabidopsis  <cit> . we have also considered that the spot number  <dig>  belongs to this group, since under fe deficiency it follows the increasing trend shown by other glycolytic enzymes. in fact, after  <dig> d there is a substantial increase in the level of this protein notwithstanding an initial decrease. this increase is corroborate by the enzymatic assay that show that after  <dig> d of fe deficiency the activity is increased two-fold . a second group of proteins  were classified as belonging to the general carbohydrate metabolism. in this group we have included the spot identified as malate dehydrogenase  and two spots corresponding to alcohol dehydrogenase . among them, one spot  is of particular interest since it appears only after  <dig> d of fe deficiency and was identified as a galactokinase. a third group  belongs to nitrogen metabolism and includes alanine aminotransferase , two spots corresponding to s-adenosyl methionine synthase , glutamine synthase  <dig>  and a spot identified as a c-n hydrolase . the last 14% of the proteins belongs to cellular redox proteins and other. one spot  corresponds to a heat shock protein  <dig>  while the other two spots match with a disulfide isomerase protein , which catalyses the formation, isomerization and reduction/oxidation of disulfide bonds  <cit>  and with an old yellow enzyme-like protein   that was the first enzyme shown to contain flavins as cofactor. proteins from oye family can use either nadph, nadh or both, thus classifying them as nadh oxidoreductase  <cit> .

twenty-three out of  <dig> protein spots identified were decreased in quantity  under fe deficiency. among these  <dig> were characterized as enzymes and  <dig> as structural or stress response proteins. the proteins decreased in quantity were also sorted into five different functional classes according to the literature , with some proteins  involved in the metabolism of sucrose and complex structural carbohydrates, such as invertase ,  <dig> -β-xylosidase  and udp-glucose dehydrogenase . a second group  has been identified as structural proteins  and a third one  as stress-response proteins . the fourth group  comprises proteins containing fe, such as aconitase  and peroxidase . the last group  contains a pdi-like protein , the beta subunit of the mitochondrial atpase , a s-adenosylmethionine synthase  and a wali7-like protein .

proteins were classified on the basis of data available in the literature. statistical information about lc-esi-ms/ms analysis are reported in additional file  <dig> 

a: experimental molecular weight  or isoelectric point.

b: theoretical molecular weight  or isoelectric point.

c: amino acid coverage .

d: annotation reported by the authors.

e: partial sequence.

f: values referred to the mature form of the protein.

change in the protein level under fe deficiency
discussion
in this work we have analyzed the soluble proteins extracted from cucumber roots grown in the presence or in the absence of fe at two different dates,  <dig> d and  <dig> d, by 2-de. recently, some proteomic studies on fe deficiency responses have appeared in the literature  <cit> . the first two papers reported the differential expression of proteins in two tomato lines: the t3238-fer genotype and its fe uptake-inefficient mutant t3238-fer. the former  <cit>  was a study addressed to the identification of a diverse set of differentially accumulated proteins under the control of fer and/or fe supply, while the latter  <cit>  was a study on total root proteins extracted from these two tomato genotypes, with the increase/decrease being evaluated in a single date after one week of treatment. the third paper  <cit>  reports changes in the proteomic profiles of sugar beet root tips in response to fe deficiency and resupply.

in order to correlate the metabolic evidences so far obtained in roots of fe-deficient plants, we have restricted our research to the soluble cytosolic proteins in order to avoid any interference by other cellular systems. furthermore, we have applied another restriction by characterizing only those spots which showed a two-fold increase or decrease. under these experimental conditions,  <dig> proteins that change their level of accumulation were identified. twenty-one out of  <dig> increased their concentration under fe deficiency. among these, the majority  are enzymes belonging to the glycolytic pathway, confirming previous biochemical data suggesting the involvement of metabolism, and in particular of glycolysis, in response to fe deficiency. in fact, previous biochemical evidences had shown that under these growing conditions the activities of hexokinase , atp-dependent phosphofructokinase- <dig> , glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  and pyruvate kinase  were increased  <cit> . surprisingly, none of these enzyme was detected in this proteomic study, but other enzymes of this pathway such as pp-dependent phosphofructokinase , aldolase, phosphoglycerate kinase , phosphoglycerate mutase  and enolase were detected and found to be enhanced by fe deficiency. this discrepancy could be explained by several factors. first of all, it is always risky to strictly link protein levels to their activities: these glycolytic enzymes, in fact, are known to be highly regulated by allosteric mechanisms  <cit> . in our case, it is thus possible that such mechanisms act in concert with slight increases in the amount of proteins, which might be not considered after the statistical analysis for the subsequent ms analysis. the incomplete match between the levels of some glycolytic enzymes and their activities is also supported by gene expression and the microarray analysis conducted on arabidopsis, that revealed that only atp-pfk <dig>  pgk, pgm and enolase transcripts increase in fe-deficient roots after seven days of fe starvation, while for hk, gap-dh and pk a decrease was shown, corroborating in some way our proteomic data  <cit> . finally, the peculiarities of the electrophoretic approach must be taken into account. for instance, it is possible that some glycolytic enzymes were not considered in this analysis because of the pi or the molecular weight ranges employed, comigration phenomena and problems of saturation staining.

the same major discrepancy occurs for the pepc activity whose increase was around  <dig> fold in cucumber roots, but it was not detected in this proteomic study. the same discrepancy was also found in the proteomic study carried out on sugar beet root tips  <cit> . however, the amount of protein as determined by immunochemical identification indicated a consistent increase after  <dig> d of fe starvation, while if we compare the times used in this work the enhancement between the control and -fe conditions was less evident  <cit>  and perhaps below the two fold-increase considered for the successive identification by mass spectrometry. furthermore, the increase in the activity of pepc could be related to the complex regulation of this enzyme exerted by the positive allosteric effector glucose-6-p, whose level has been shown to increase under fe deficiency  <cit> , and by post-translational regulation  <cit> . these data are in agreement with the microarray analysis  <cit>  done in arabidopsis, which shows that the pepc transcript increase occurs only at the 5th d of fe deficiency, while at the 7th d the transcript is undetectable. while our data on the glycolytic enzymes are in good agreement with those obtained by rellán-Álvarez et al  <cit> , they agree only in part with those of li et al  <cit> , since they found that only enolase and triose-p-isomerase increase their level, while, on the contrary, the aldolase activity decrease; from this point of view our data on the involvement of glycolytic enzymes give a much more complete picture. the increase in the glycolytic pathway under fe deficiency has been confirmed by many biochemical data obtained by several groups  <cit>  and by the proteomic data described in this work, and is in agreement with the major request of energy, reducing equivalents and carbon skeletons to sustain the greater energetic effort and the request of substrate for the synthesis of the large amount of mrnas and proteins related to this response  <cit> . another interesting result is the increase of alcohol dehydrogenase  that would confirm the involvement of anaerobic metabolism in response to fe deficiency  <cit> . this increase is also in agreement with the microarray study in arabidopsis  <cit>  in which the transcript for the alcohol dehydrogenase was found to be increased.

the metabolic changes induced by fe deficiency on the protein pattern is not confined only to glycolysis but other pathways seem to be rearranged as a consequence of this stress, as it occurs for instance in the mitochondria  <cit> . in fact, we found that enzymes related to carbohydrate metabolism might be suppressed or increased. in particular, enzymes related to the biosynthesis of cell wall polysaccharides such as invertase,  <dig> -β-xylosidase and udp-glucose dehydrogenase  are decreased . the decrease in the biosynthesis of the cell wall polysaccharides in fe-deficient roots would mean a decrease in carbon flux towards the synthesis of cell wall  favoring instead glycolysis and other biosynthetic pathways. moreover, the cell wall can be considered, in conditions where the photosynthetic apparatus might be damaged or not properly working, as a temporary source of carbohydrates. in order to sustain this change in metabolism we found an increased concentration of galactokinase after  <dig> d of fe deficiency, which would channel carbon skeletons originating from cell wall degradation to fuel glycolysis. this enzyme is involved in the metabolism of d-galactose-containing oligo- and polysaccharides and occurs in various plants. the raffinose family of oligosaccharides  ranks next to sucrose in their abundance in plant kingdom  <cit> . plant cell wall contains numerous polysaccharides which consist of a wide range of different sugar residues. an analysis of arabidopsis identified glucose, rhamnose, galactose, xilose, arabinose and galacturonic and glucuronic acids as the major sugar constituent in the cell wall  <cit> , while a study on the changes of metabolites occurring in sugar beet root tips under fe deficiency showed a large increase in the rfo sugars  <cit> . galactokinase belongs to a sugar-1-p kinase family which account for hydrolysis and recycle of pectic polymers. rfos might therefore be an important source of rapidly metabolisable carbon other than function as antioxidant  <cit> , , then, the increase in rfo could help to alleviate ros damage produced under fe deficiency. the simultaneous decrease in enzymes involved in the cell wall synthesis might bring to the observed stunting growth of roots under fe deficiency. changes in cell wall metabolism has been also observed in fe-deficient tomato roots  <cit>  and the decrease in invertase activity could, as suggested by li et al.  <cit>  decrease the relative level of fructose and explain why a down regulation of fructose metabolism was found in these roots.

another important group of proteins which increase under fe deficiency is related to nitrogen metabolism . s-adenosylmethionine synthase, alanine aminotransferase, glutamine synthase  <dig>  and a c-n hydrolase family protein belong to this group. concerning this group only the s-adenosylmethionine synthase shows a temporal increase, which is limited to the first date of fe deficiency . this enzyme is involved not only in the biosynthesis of nicotianamine and phytosiderophores of the mugineic acid family  <cit> , but also in the biosynthesis of ethylene, which has been reported to influence the response of strategy i plants to fe deficiency  <cit> . the other three proteins increase at both dates considered. among them, the most interesting is the c-n hydrolase family protein. in fact, this family of protein includes several enzymes that are involved in nitrogen metabolism and that cleave nitriles as well as amides. utilization of these nitrogen compounds usually involves several reduction steps. the final step is the assimilation of nh4+ or its transfer to various intermediates such as keto acids  <cit> . it is well known that fe deficiency leads to an increase in the organic acid level which play different roles one of which is linked to the synthesis of amino acids  <cit> . our study also shows a decrease in the cytoskeleton proteins actin and tubulin along with the storage protein globulin . an intriguing hypothesis we can drive from these results is that all these proteins might be recycled under fe deficiency and used as a source of amino acids, carbon skeletons and nitrogen. this could be in agreement with the increase in the c-n hydrolase protein family and, even if with contrasting results, with changes in two spots identified as protein pdis. pdis catalyses the rearrangement of disulfide bridges of proteins  <cit>  and in arabidopsis these family of proteins is encoded by  <dig> genes  <cit> . while spot number  <dig>  increases, the other one, spot number  <dig>  decreases, especially after  <dig> d. contrasting results have been found also for spots identified as heat shock proteins, where in one case  we found an increase while in two cases , on the contrary, a decrease was observed. pdis and hsp <dig> are involved in the mechanism of protein folding as molecular chaperones  and protein folding catalysts  so assuring a proper fold of nascent polypeptides into functional proteins. this variability could be associated with a change in the ratio between biosynthesis an degradation of proteins that could bring to a release of amino acids that might serve both as nitrogen and carbon sources. we are aware that the hypothesis is speculative, but the data obtained in this proteomic study support it. furthermore, other data obtained in our laboratory  show a decrease in the activity of enzymes of the nitrogen assimilatory pathway, since some of them, such as nitrate reductase and nitrite reductase, are fe-dependent.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the data obtained in this proteomic profiling study confirm some metabolic changes occurring as a response to fe deficiency. in particular, our data support the increase in the glycolytic flux and in the anaerobic metabolism to sustain the energetic effort fe-deficient plants must undertake. in fact, fe deficiency leads to an impairment of the mitochondrial respiratory chain, so the cell must overcome this problem by activating alternative pathways to sustain the energetic requirement and the nadh turnover  <cit> . we also found a decrease in the amount of enzymes linked to the biosynthesis of complex carbohydrates of the cell wall, and, on the other hand, an increase in enzymes linked to the turnover of proteins. in a scenario in which the production of new carbon skeletons is strongly impaired by a less efficient photosynthetic apparatus, the plant must face the increased demand of energy and organic compounds. this "cellular effort" seems to be comparable with that occurring in the mammalian muscles in which a strong energetic effort, caused by an enhanced muscular activity, stimulate the anaerobic pathway to produce energy  <cit> . in fe-deficient plants, the effort is much more complex, since the contribution of photosynthesis is poor and the plant must recover carbon skeletons from other sources to sustain metabolism. we are aware that more work is necessary to better understand what is going on under fe deficiency, but the data obtained in the present proteomic work along with those on metabolic activities could cast new light on the responses induced by fe-deficient plants.

