BACKGROUND
β-alanine is the only naturally occurring β-amino acid found in its free state in the brain. it is a component of carnosine  and anserine . carnosine, as well as its related compounds anserine and homocarnosine, were discovered in skeletal muscles and nervous tissues  <cit> . ever since carnosine was discovered, it is thought to be a putative neurotransmitter in the olfactory receptor neurons  <cit> . biochemically, carnosine seems to possess a number of protective functions including anti-oxidant, free-radical scavenger and anti-glycating agent, as well as being able to bind to protein carbonyls and suppress their cross-linking activity  <cit> .

however, the functions of carnosine and anserine in the central nervous system  are still obscure. recently, intracerebroventricular  injection of carnosine dramatically induced hyperactivity such as increasing spontaneous activity and distress vocalizations and increasing plasma corticosterone concentration in chicks  <cit> . part of this function occurred through nitric oxide  production via carnosine administration  <cit> .

β-alanine is synthesized in the liver as the final metabolite of uracil and thymin degradation  <cit> . it was reported that β-alanine decreased the toxic effects of β-amyloid in rat brain endothelial cells  <cit>  or reduced bacterial lipopolysaccharide-induced hepatotoxicity in rats  <cit> . although β-alanine is a non-proteinaceous amino acid, it is especially rich in the brain and the breast muscle of chickens as components of carnosine or anserine, or as a free amino acid  <cit> , therefore it is reasonable to speculate that β-alanine may have other functions. accordingly, we focused on its role as a neurotransmitter and investigated the effect of dipeptides having β-alanine at the amino terminus. in a general way, the discovery of the novel dipeptides has been done through the process of isolation and purification, but we designed and manufactured dipeptides related to carnosine, and screened these dipeptides with special reference to their effects on behavior.

in experiment  <dig>  we investigated effects of β-alanyl-l-leucine , β-alanyl-glycine  and carnosine on behavior and effect of β-ala-l-leu was compared to carnosine. then we studied dipeptides involved in branched chain amino acids  at the carboxyl terminus in experiment  <dig>  namely β-alanyl-l-leucine , β-alanyl-l-isoleucine  and β-alanyl-l-valine .

RESULTS
the effect of i.c.v. injection of β-ala-l-ile, β-ala-l-leu and β-ala-l-val on behavioral categories of chicks during  <dig> min behavior observation is shown in table  <dig>  significant effects were detected in active wakefulness  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ) and standing/sitting motionless with eyes opened  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ). compared with the control, injections of β-ala-l-ile, β-ala-l-leu and β-ala-l-val significantly increased the time for active wakefulness, but the reverse was true for standing/sitting motionless with eyes opened.

discussion
in experiment  <dig>  i.c.v. injection of β-ala-l-leu induced hyperactivity, enhanced distress vocalizations and increased plasma corticosterone concentration, and these effects were similar to those of carnosine. the effect of carnosine was consistent with the previous report  <cit> . although the detailed mechanism is not known, β-ala-l-leu and carnosine may have a similar function in the central nervous system. the effect of other dipeptides  has been investigated, but no effect was detected . bcaas, i.e., l-leucine, l-isoleucine and l-valine have a similar structure. we thought that the effects of β-alanyl dipeptides having bcaas at the carboxyl terminus might have a similar function. thus, we further investigated the effect of β-ala-l-leu, β-ala-l-ile and β-ala-l-val in experiment  <dig> 

the i.c.v. injection of β-ala-l-ile had a similar effect for hyperactivity, distress vocalizations and plasma corticosterone concentration as observed with carnosine  and β-ala-l-leu . on the other hand, the effect of β-ala-l-val was somewhat weaker than that of β-ala-l-leu and β-ala-l-ile. at present, although we could not clarify the difference in efficacies among the three β-alanyl-bcaas, the low molecular weight of l-valine may be associated with its weak activity. the sedative and hypnotic postures such as standing motionless with eyes closed and sleeping posture were rarely observed with the dipeptides applied here . it was concluded that one of the central functions in β-alanyl-bcaas is induction of hyperactivity.

the mechanisms by which β-ala-l-leu and β-ala-l-ile function in the brain were unclear. the possibility that the hyperactivity effect is induced by individual constitutive amino acids is low. although bcaas are able to influence neurotransmitter levels in the brain with effects on behavior and stimulated food intake, especially l-leucine  <cit> , the acute degradation of dipeptides could not occur in the brain. in fact, i.c.v. injection of β-alanine  as a constituent of carnosine decreased active wakefulness and increased sleeping posture  <cit> . the function of β-alanine was the reverse from that of carnosine. for these reasons, we considered the dipeptidyl structure as important for induction of hyperactivity.

in experiments  <dig> and  <dig>  dipeptides increased plasma corticosterone concentration. corticosterone is released from the adrenal glands under the control of the hypothalamic pituitary adrenal  axis, and the activation of the hpa axis by acute stress produces a transient increase in plasma corticosterone levels in birds. feltenstein et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that a positive relationship exists between plasma corticosterone level and the behavioral response. further, the response of layer-type neonatal chicks is more sensitive than meat-type  <cit> . β-alanyl dipeptides applied here are suggested as stimulants for the hpa axis.

thomas  <cit>  suggested that drugs having activity to enhance production of no such as carnosine would have beneficial effects in the treatment of neurodegenerative diseases. it was speculated that central carnosine might regulate brain function and/or behaviors by no generation via cnos in chicks  <cit> . on the other hand, mrowiec et al.  <cit>  showed that i.c.v. injection of l-phenylalanyl-l-arginine dipeptides increased the locomotor activity in mice. this effect was possibly associated with the modulation of the opiate receptor functions in the brain since the effect was evidently diminished by naloxone, and intrathecal injections of this peptide are ineffective in changing locomotor activity. further experiments will be needed to clarify the precise mechanism of hyperactivity in the brain.

CONCLUSIONS
we focused on a role of β-alanine as a neurotransmitter and investigated the effect of dipeptides having β-alanine at the amino terminus. in experiment  <dig> and  <dig>  we investigated the effect of i.c.v. injection of some dipeptides. then, β-alanyl-branched chain amino acids, i.e., β-ala-l-leu, β-ala-l-ile and β-ala-l-val, induced hyperactivity behavior as observed with carnosine. β-ala-l-leu strongly stimulated, and the other two depeptides tended to stimulate, corticosterone release. these results suggests that central β-alanyl-branched chain amino acid, stimulates activity in chicks through the hypothalamus-pituitary-adrenal axis. these peptides may be useful drugs for the excitement, but we did not confirme whther these dipeptides are present in the brain. further studies remain to be done. finally we propose that β-ala-l-leu be named as excitin- <dig>  β-ala-l-ile as excitin- <dig> and β-ala-l-val as excitin- <dig> through their functions in excitements.

