BACKGROUND
a variety of isothermal nucleic acid amplification technologies  are now available as complements or alternatives to the polymerase chain reaction . detection of circularized single-stranded dna  molecules  has been brought to bear on applications as diverse as snp detection  <cit> , mirna detection  <cit> , and molecular diagnostics  <cit> . isothermal ssdna circle amplification has been performed by single-primer initiated rolling circle amplification  and by two-primer amplification methods variously called ramification amplification ; hyperbranched rca  <cit> , cascade rca  <cit> , or exponential rca  <cit> .

in contrast to single primer rca  <cit>  and the pcr, no detailed and predictive model for the ram reaction has yet appeared, although illustrative diagrams of two-primer ssdna circle amplification have been published  <cit> . here, we present a model of the ram reaction that accounts for the size and number of double-stranded dna  product molecules.

RESULTS
ram reaction products and components
electrophoresis of ram reaction products results in a characteristic dsdna ladder . visualization and analysis of the ladder bands shows that the bands' size-increment is equal to the template-circle's circumference . the initial  <dig> to  <dig> bands appear to be of approximately equal fluorescence intensity. equal fluorescence with increasing size suggests a decrease in molecule-number that is proportional to the length of the dna molecule in the band. figure 1c shows a log-linear relation between molecule number and product size; the following model accounts for those observations.

binding and extension of a forward primer on an extended reverse primer creates a double-stranded product whose length depends on the relative positions of the forward and reverse primers on the circular template . we assume here without loss of generality that primer placement produces a first product that is the length of the template circle circumference, referred to here as a unit length.

a ram model derived from a reaction diagram
primer extension and strand displacement produce a linear ssdna primary transcript that is a concatamer of the complement of the circular template sequence. the first ram-specific step is reverse primer binding to the primary transcript.  as primary transcript elongation creates a second reverse-primer binding site, the first-bound reverse primer is extended to the end of the primary transcript .

when the second reverse primer extension product is displaced it is bound twice, successively , by two forward primers. the extended product from the first-bound primer is displaced by the primer-extension product from the second-bound primer .

a concise description of reverse primer 3's products can be made by noting that in figure 3b step  <dig>  an intermediate structure is formed  that is similar in structure to the structure in figure 3b, step  <dig>  except that the positions of the forward and reverse primers are exchanged. reverse primer  <dig> inert products are unit-lengths  <dig>  and  <dig> , plus products identical to reverse primer  <dig> products. the re-creation of functionally identical structures allows us to substitute a single description of a structure for each occurrence of that structure.

initial formalization of the ram reaction model
generalizing, the essential steps of the ram reaction are:

1) rolling circle amplification successively exposes new primer binding sites on the primary template.

2) primer extension on the primary transcript releases secondary templates that are one unit longer than their immediate predecessor secondary transcript.

3) successive primer binding and primer extension on each secondary template recursively produces one-unit-shorter tertiary templates and inert double-stranded dna ram products. the process terminates when the secondary template contains a single primer-binding site.

ram product production is represented more abstractly in figure 3c. inert products are shown with indicators of the primer-polarity of the ram product's first strand, with a summary count of the final reaction products from the first four reverse primers. we generalize from the diagram and the recursive model to propose that the number of molecules of a given unit-length after successive reverse-primer extensions from the primary transcript is

  n={ <dig> r=p2r−r>p;r≥p≥ <dig>  

where n is the number of dsdna ram product molecules of p units at the step at which reverse-primer number r has bound the primary transcript. 

the cumulative sum of products of length p shows that the ram reaction generates a binary series

  Σnp=2;r≥p≥1; 

where ∑ npis the sum of products of size p produced from the initial reverse primer up to reverse primer r. that sum ideally represents the number of length p molecules in the reaction products, and predicts that the number of molecules per reaction product size-class should decrease by half for each step-increase in size.

under the assumptions of the model the number r of reverse primers that have bound to the primary transcript is equal to  the number of rounds of rolling circle amplification; using equation  <dig> the number of replication rounds can be computed:

  log2=r−pr=p+log <dig>  

in words, we can estimate the number of reverse-primer binding sites on the primary transcript  using the number of molecules observed in a given ram product band.

the model predicts that each reaction step adds a larger product and that the number of products of any given length doubles at each step of the reaction; and therefore that product accumulation is exponential with respect to reaction step. we presume these properties to be the basis for the log <dig> dependence on product number shown in figure 1c. this result suggests that if the reaction goes to completion the number of molecules in each dna band  should be half the number of molecules in the preceding band.

however, as an exponential process, the ram reaction is not expected to go to completion; and the effects of reactant-limitation or changed reaction environment on ram product equilibrium yield and size-distribution became a question for empirical investigation. to characterize the ram reaction in light of this model we monitored the ram reaction in real-time, and measured ram-product mass-distribution at various reaction time-points.

real-time analysis of the ram reaction
ram and pcr produce similar fluorescence-signal curves in real-time reactions. however, there are substantive differences between the isothermal ram reaction and the thermocycling that is inherent to pcr. the ram reaction is analyzed as a continuous time-dependent process rather than a discrete cycle-dependent process; the time to reach a threshold fluorescence is designated the response time   <cit>  corresponding to the cycle threshold  of real-time pcr. further, in pcr the template is invariant, whereas the ram reaction generates a dynamic collection of templates  as the reaction progresses.

to see whether template number affected ram signal characteristics we measured the real-time kinetics of reactions initiated at various template levels. because real-time instruments and analytical algorithms were developed for the pcr, we investigated whether mechanistic differences between pcr and ram would affect real-time ram signal analysis.

legend to table  <dig> 

for each input template level  the reaction efficiency  and second derivative maximum  is shown, with the response time  reported  by instrumentation software. cpd <dig> is the second derivative maxima of signal change vs. time; "r2" is the multiple correlation coefficient describing the model's fit to the data.

these observations are consistent with the ram reaction model. at low template number, reaction time differences may result from stochastic forward primer binding time. at very high template numbers it is conceivable that primary transcript elongation may be inhibited by reactant depletion. between those extremes dsdna products result from secondary and tertiary transcript processing and we see no compelling reason for distinct processing modes of these transcripts as a result of input template number. however the ram reaction rate is a complex function of several variables  with no a priori expectation of maximum rate, as in the pcr, and some reaction conditions may lead to template-number-sensitive reactions. however, these data suggest no necessary dependence of real-time ram reaction kinetics on input template number.

detailed comparison of real-time data vs. the sigmoid model via plots of residuals  show that the models' deviation from the data, although small with respect to the overall signal, has a distinct time-dependent pattern. although figure 4a represents ram data collected as for pcr, isothermal reactions can be monitored essentially continuously. model fitting in pcr is required to find the exponential amplification cycles at which the ct is ideally measured, because real-time pcr data frequently have only a few cycles of exponential amplification  <cit> . continuous data collection from isothermal reactions allows simpler non-model based direct detection of exponential amplification  <cit> .

characterization of a ram-reaction time-course
the ram model predicts that if the reaction goes to completion each product peak should have half the number of molecules as its smaller predecessor. initial capillary electrophoresis assessment of ram products did not show the ideal log-linear - <dig> slope of log <dig> vs. product peak number. we compared product ratio slopes from ram reaction time-course samples to determine how reaction dynamics affected deviation from the ideal slope.

an explanation for deviation from the ideal slope but maintaining log-linearity follows from the reaction model and stoichiometric calculation. from ram product yield and equation  <dig> we infer  that at least  <dig> to  <dig> reverse primers have initiated secondary transcripts to yield the products shown in figure 4a. complete resolution of those transcripts, under realistic conditions, would require reactant amounts that would sufficiently reduce the reactant concentration to stop the reaction .

the proposed model predicts that, as secondary transcripts are recursively processed into smaller tertiary transcripts, larger dsdna products are made before smaller dsdna products. however, smaller secondary transcripts may be fully resolved into dsdna ram products before reactants become limiting. our conception of the results shown in figure  <dig> is that the observed ram products are the combination of products from fully resolved smaller secondary transcripts with larger products from partially resolved larger secondary transcripts.

one motive for the time-course experiments described above was to look for evidence that would falsify the model. in the hundreds of ram reactions we have characterized each has had the form of the data shown in figure 5b - a log-linear relation with negative slopes always greater than - <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
this ram model originated with an exhaustive diagram of the initial stages of the reaction, and is based on the rca model and on the properties of a strand-displacing dna polymerase. the utility of the bst polymerase for the ram reaction may lie in the balance of that enzyme's relative rate of primary transcript production and subsequent template processing. the orderly production of incrementally longer secondary transcripts may not occur if the primary transcript is produced faster than secondary transcripts can be initiated.

our purpose is to provide a mechanistic working hypothesis for the ram reaction. here, we make quantitative predictions only for the theoretical reaction model; our description of the reaction products, although based on the model, is qualitative. an obvious extension of the model would be simulation of the relative contributions of completely processed vs. partially processed secondary and tertiary transcripts.

to our knowledge, this ram reaction model is unique in its prediction of a molecular binary-power series and in invocation of a recursive molecular mechanism. these concepts are familiar from computational algorithms, and the ram reaction may prove useful in molecular computation in addition to its current applications.

