BACKGROUND
the way in which stimulus intensity is represented in primary somatosensory  cortex has remained an intriguing question in the study of the cortical correlates of perception. although there have been numerous studies of the si response to changes in stimulus intensity, few have focused on the response at the population level of analysis. thus, a dearth of information about the global si response to changes in stimulus intensity exists – current knowledge of the subject depends almost exclusively on reconstruction of predictions of the si neuronal population response from afferent recordings  <cit>  and single unit cortical recordings  <cit> .

a number of studies have examined the global si response using imaging techniques such as fmri   <cit>  and meg  <cit> . in general, results from these studies indicate that increases in stimulus intensity are accompanied by increases in the intensity of the evoked signal as well as increases in the activated volume of cortex. as a result these studies predicted that amplitude might be coded not only by the average firing rates of individual si neurons, but also by the total aggregate of responding neurons. however, although each of these imaging techniques provide measures which are indirectly related to neuronal activity, their resolution is limited in two important ways. first, it is difficult to determine the nature of the neuronal activity being imaged ; and second, both fmri and meg studies have limited spatial resolution, which is typically on the order of ~ <dig> mm <dig>  <cit> .

recently, chen and colleagues used the optical intrinsic signal  to demonstrate that a proportionally greater  response is evoked in si of squirrel monkeys as the amplitude  of a skin stimulus is increased <cit> . however, the primary focus of their report was that the response to simultaneous stimulation of multiple adjacent sites on the skin produced a smaller, more intense region of si activation than would be normally predicted by summation of the two, and their findings did not detail the effects of amplitude on the dynamics of the response to a flutter stimulus at a single site on the skin. in this report, we extend the aforementioned work by imaging the ois evoked in si cortex of squirrel monkeys by a range of amplitudes of skin flutter stimulation. the results suggest that increasing the amplitude of a skin flutter stimulus evokes a proportionally larger absorbance increase in si that remains confined to the same si territory. in addition, it was found that increasing the amplitude of flutter evokes a large decrease in absorbance in the territory that borders the activated region of si. neurons in the si region that demonstrate decreased absorbance in response to flutter stimulation are proposed to undergo stimulus-evoked inhibition and to contribute importantly to the si processing of high-amplitude skin flutter stimuli.

RESULTS
to identify the boundaries of the regions of increased absorbance spatial histograms were constructed. figure  <dig> illustrates the average results obtained from all experiments  as well as the methodology used to evaluate the spatial extent of the stimulus-evoked activation. in each experiment, the image was segmented along a line  <dig> mm long and roughly centered on the area of increased absorbance, as shown in the top panel. pixels along the line were binned  and absorbance values averaged and plotted as a function of distance along the line. the plots demonstrate that at all amplitudes of stimulation, the spatial extent of the region of above-background absorbance  is similar and at every stimulus amplitude occupies a circular-shaped territory in si between  <dig>  –  <dig>  mm in diameter. the roi  was therefore defined as the region displaying above background levels of absorbance within the activated region of si.

the analysis approach illustrated in figure  <dig> was performed on all experiments  and the resulting absorbance plots were averaged . similar to figure  <dig>  the plots in figure  <dig> demonstrate that absorbance increases with increasing stimulus amplitude. to quantify this relationship a measure of Δabsorbanceevoked was used. Δabsorbanceevoked was defined as the difference between the absorbance measured at  <dig> sec  and  <dig> sec , and is shown in the plot at the bottom of figure  <dig>  the plot of Δabsorbanceevoked vs. amplitude is well described  by the linear function  Δabsorbanceevoked = *d +  <dig> . this type of analysis, however, gives little or no information about the spatial properties of the response.

radial histograms were constructed to better visualize the spatiotemporal relationship of the ois response at different amplitudes. the radial histograms shown in figure  <dig> are representative time-space plots at each amplitude. from the roi center , average absorbance values were determined for the pixels within concentric rings located at progressively larger distances from the center at each frame acquired. absorbance values are color coded  and plotted as a function of time and radial distance from the center of the roi. figure  <dig> demonstrates that the major differences that exist in the si global responses to different amplitudes of stimulation are differences in the magnitude of absorbance and not the spatial properties of the absorbance pattern . as would be expected based on the absorbance curves shown in figures  <dig> & <dig>  higher stimulus amplitudes evoked a more intense and discrete region of increased absorbance than did the lower amplitudes. interestingly, one of the more robust differences between low- and high-amplitude stimulation, is the magnitude of decreasing absorbance detected in the territory that surrounds the region in which absorbance increases. this response is most pronounced under the  <dig> μm condition where it can be seen to occur much sooner after stimulus onset at radial distances as small as  <dig>  mm from the roi center. spatially, the regions of above- and below-background absorbance are nearly the same at each stimulus amplitude, with the above-background portion extending nearly  <dig> mm away in all directions from the center of activity, whereas the below-background portion of the response comprises a ring beginning at a radial distance of  <dig>  mm from the roi center and extending out beyond the area that was analyzed.

using similar techniques to those we used to analyze above-background activity in the roi , regions outside the designated roi were examined to determine whether a similar amplitude-dependency could be established for the time courses of the below-background absorbance observed in the surround. figure  <dig> shows plots constructed from averaging the absorbance values in pixels lying  <dig>  –  <dig> mm away from the center of the roi. data were normalized and then averaged across experiments . it is apparent that the time courses at different amplitudes of stimulation are different with respect to the stimulus timing, . accordingly, a different measure was adopted to quantify this relationship: in this case Δabsorbancemax was defined as the difference between the minimum absorbance and the maximum absorbance value obtained at any point during the recording. interestingly, the relationship between stimulus amplitude and Δabsorbancemax in the surround is not linear . instead, each of the higher stimulus amplitudes employed  evoked a very similar level of below-background absorbance. the sole difference between the different curves  is the time required to reach the peak of the decrease in absorbance. that is, as amplitude is increased from  <dig> to  <dig> μm the point of minimum absorbance was attained earlier in time. this is also apparent in figure  <dig> 

correlation maps were constructed to further characterize the spatial properties of the si response to  <dig> hz flutter. a correlation map compares every pixel in the image with the signal referenced from the roi, and assigns a correlation coefficient  to the location of the pixel being compared. this gives a fairly good approximation of the signal at all locations in the image. since there is no significant difference in the spatial properties between stimuli at intermediate amplitudes  only the  <dig> and  <dig> μm amplitudes will be compared with this technique. figure  <dig> shows correlation maps of the ois responses to stimulus amplitudes of  <dig> and  <dig> μm . the bottom panels of the figure show the input signal  used for correlation of each pixel in the map, and the negative  of the input signal . a coefficient of + <dig>  indicates that a pixel's time course perfectly matches the input signal while a coefficient of - <dig> indicates that pixel's time course perfectly matches the opposite of the input signal . at  <dig> μm the correlation map  shows that the correlation is weak and more dispersed within the roi in area 3b. at the highest amplitude, however, there is a pronounced and well-defined positive correlation within the roi that is more evenly distributed throughout the roi. a large region of negatively correlated activity  surrounds the roi in the high-amplitude map.

to examine the spatial dynamics of the si response in more detail we examined the patterns of activity generated by low- and high-amplitude stimulation in a  <dig> mm <dig>  area centered around the roi. figure  <dig> demonstrates the patterns of activity evoked at three time intervals during the delivery of the stimulus. the 3d surface plots show activity measured within the boxel indicated by the dashed box in the image at the top. in each 3d plot absorbance is plotted in two-dimensional space and is indicated by two measures: height of the peak along the z-axis , and the color . these data make it apparent that after a short period of stimulation  the activity pattern is very similar for the different amplitudes. that is, at this early time interval both patterns are diffuse and occupy much of the roi. however as stimulus duration increases, the pattern of increased absorbance evoked by high-amplitude stimulation tends to become restricted to the center of the roi and within this region becomes homogeneous. standard deviation was used to measure the variability within the roi at low and high amplitudes. at 10s after stimulus onset, standard deviations for low- and high-amplitude surface plots were  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively. average standard deviation across all sets of maps  differs very little from these values . these differences suggest that within the roi evoked absorbance levels are more homogeneous in response to high- vs low-amplitude stimulation. in addition, at  <dig> and 10s after onset of high-amplitude  stimulation the territory surrounding the roi becomes dominated by below-background changes in absorbance.

discussion
this study evaluated the global si response to different amplitudes of flutter stimulation by imaging the optical intrinsic signal . the ois indirectly reflects both cortical neuronal spike discharge activity and the local, subthreshold changes in neuronal membrane potential evoked by sensory stimulation  <cit> . as a result, the observed tendency for absorbance in the same localized region of area 3b to increase with increasing stimulus amplitude  most likely is due to the amplitude-dependence of the average firing rate of neurons in the same region  <cit> . an increase in si absorbance in response to an increase in stimulus intensity has been reported previously by chen et al  <cit> . the observed increase we observed in the stimulus-evoked si ois that accompanies increases in stimulus amplitude is well described by a linear function.

one important distinction between previous work done using the ois and the present study is our use of near-infrared wavelengths for illumination during acquisition of the ois. the ois obtained using infrared light has been shown to be highly correlated with light scattering effects that accompany astrocyte swelling subsequent to the clearance of extracellular k+ and neurotransmitter  <cit>  and local increases in blood volume  <cit> . although the ois at this wavelength may be influenced by changes in hemoglobin concentration and oxygenation, it is likely that contributions from these factors are small when compared with light scattering effects <cit> . additionally, ois imaging using near-infrared illumination not only minimizes the contributions of artifacts introduced by changes in the vasculature   <cit>  but the time course of the ois detected at shorter wavelengths  is markedly different  than the protracted ois observed in this study  <cit> .

previous studies conducted by this laboratory have reported that the si optical response evoked by an extended period  of flutter stimulation not only consists of an increase in absorbance in the region that receives its input from the skin site that was stimulated, but also decreases in absorbance  that occur in the surrounding cortex  <cit> . the present study demonstrates that the below-background component of the si optical response to flutter stimulation is particularly evident at large stimulus amplitudes . however, unlike the increase in absorbance evoked by flutter, the relationship between the magnitude of the stimulus-evoked decrease in absorbance and stimulus amplitude is not satisfactorily described by a linear function. indeed, the results shown in figure  <dig> suggest that this component of the optical response to skin flutter is either absent or extremely small at small stimulus amplitudes, and remains maximal or near-maximal across a wide range of suprathreshold stimulus amplitudes. interestingly, this stimulus-evoked decrease in absorbance  appears later in time than the increases in absorbance  and as amplitude is increased it tends to develop earlier after stimulus onset.

the correlation maps shown in figure  <dig> provide a comprehensive overview of the time course of absorbance at each location in the image. the optical signal at each pixel is cross-correlated with a known input signal. in this case, it is the average absorbance measured within the roi. the assigned coefficient of determination indicates the degree of similarity between a pixel's time course of absorbance and the input signal. therefore pixels with a large positive correlation undergo increases in absorbance very similar to the input signal, while pixels with a large negative correlation undergo a decrease in absorbance which more closely resembles the opposite  of the input signal. figure  <dig> suggests that at high amplitudes of stimulation the roi in si becomes more homogeneously activated with longer stimulus duration. some evidence for this is indicated by the large discrepancy  in the standard deviations measured within the roi. further studies are required to investigate absorbance distribution and patterning within the roi.

examination of spatial histograms  and the maps in figures  <dig> & <dig> also reveal that the size of the si region that undergoes an increase in absorbance does not increase with increasing stimulus amplitude, but rather remains relatively constant. regardless of stimulus amplitude, the activated cortical region appears circular in shape and occupies an area approximately  <dig> mm in diameter . within the roi average absorbance increases progressively with increasing stimulus duration. the dimensions of the si region activated by flutter stimulation observed in this study contrast sharply with results presented in previous studies which demonstrated activation within a  <dig> mm region in diameter  <cit> . one possible explanation for this discrepancy is the level and type of general anesthesia used in the different studies. previous studies have reported that anesthetics  which block nmda receptors or enhance gabaa receptor mediated inhibition , significantly reduce the dimensions of the receptive field of individual si neurons; actions that would reduce the size of the responding si neuronal population  <cit> . chen et al. previously reported similar  sized regions of activation in response to flutter stimulation of the digit tips in squirrel monkey anesthetized with isofluorane, as well as showing in the same report that use of pentothal anesthetic confined the response to a much smaller region   <cit> .

it has been suggested that the amplitude of skin flutter stimulation is coded by both the number of activated si neurons as well as by their level of spike discharge activity  <cit> . this suggestion is based largely in part on the fact that larger-amplitude stimuli, through transduction of the laterally-transmitted mechanical wave produced by sinusoidal skin displacement, recruit larger numbers of ra afferents and therefore lead to a spatially more widely distributed pattern of afferent input to si cortex. combined metabolic tracer and neurophysiological studies have shown that the initial response to a repetitive tactile stimulus occupies an extremely large cortical territory. as the repetitive mechanical stimulation is continued, however, the response is quickly sculpted by cortical inhibitory mechanisms, leading to an activity pattern that becomes confined to a relatively restricted region in si  <cit> . the results obtained in the present study and results previously reported by other researchers, lead us to suggest that stimulus amplitude contributes importantly to the shaping  of the si response to protracted skin flutter.

CONCLUSIONS
this study investigated the si response to flutter stimulation of the skin using the ois. an increase of the amplitude of the flutter stimulus was associated with an increase in absorbance within the region of si cortex that receives its input from the stimulated skin field. the relationship between the maximal change in absorbance and stimulus amplitude is well characterized by a linear function within the range of amplitudes studied. measurement of the spatial extent of the activated si region showed that higher amplitudes of stimulation do not produce a more extensive region of si activation. instead, as amplitude is increased, while average peak absorbance within the same ~ <dig> mm diameter si region increases with amplitude of stimulation, the region of surrounding cortex undergoes a prominent decrease  in absorbance. further studies are required to establish the relationship between the effect of different amplitudes of skin flutter stimulation on si absorbance and si neuroelectrical activity.

