BACKGROUND
species from the tick-transmitted spirochete group borrelia burgdorferi sensu lato  can cause lyme borreliosis, which is a chronic multisystem inflammatory disorder  <cit> . it is still unclear whether clinical symptoms are caused by a chronic infection or whether the onset of the disease is triggered by borrelial antigens leading to the generation of an autoimmune disease. although the exact mechanism of the pathogenesis remains to be elucidated, it is clear that acute borrelial infection has unusual characteristics. in most cases, only a mild local inflammatory response can be observed and occasionally the infection may be asymptomatic which is in striking contrast with many other bacteria causing skin infections . these observations suggest that the interaction between borreliae and the first line defence might be severely altered. therefore, it would be of great interest to be able to visualise the bacteria and to study their interaction with inflammatory cells involved in innate immunity. furthermore, a reliable method would help to track the location of the bacteria during the first days of infection in animal models.

borreliae are found only in their arthropod or mammalian hosts in the nature. they are spirochetal bacteria displaying a unique structure. borreliae are 10– <dig> μm long, exhibit a planar waveform and are highly motile  <cit> . the motility differs from that of other bacteria as they are able to swim in a highly viscous medium, such as the connective tissue  <cit> . the bacteria demand a rich cultivation medium for growth in laboratory  <cit> . changes in shape, loss of motility and death are the results of non-optimal growth conditions.

the shape and the motility of borreliae most likely affect their interactions  with the cells of the immune system. different mechanisms to phagocytose borreliae have been presented depending on different methodological approaches. coiling phagocytosis was reported when imaging non motile borreliae  <cit> , while a study using motile bacteria showed a novel "tube phagocytosis"  <cit> . these results indicate that studies should be performed using live motile borreliae to reveal in detail the mechanism by which inflammatory cells phagocytose the bacteria in vivo.

the dye carboxyfluorescein diacetate, succinimidyl ester  passively diffuses into cells. it is non-fluorescent until the acetate groups are cleaved by intracellular esterases to yield highly fluorescent and membrane non-permeable carboxyfluorescein succinimidyl ester, spontaneously and irreversibly coupling to cellular proteins by reaction with lysine side chains and other available amines  <cit> . the dye has been shown to be non-toxic enough to be widely used in vivo for visualising cells  <cit>  or studying uptake of labelled substrates by the cells  <cit> . the label is inherited by daughter cells after cell division, with subsequent halving of fluorescence  <cit> . also, labelling of bacteria has been performed with cfse  <cit> , and flow cytometric adherence assays with cfse labelled bacteria have been used for the analysis of interactions between bacteria and eukaryotic cells  <cit> .

neutrophils are innate immune cells making up the first line of defence against invading bacteria. studies on the association of borreliae with human neutrophils have mostly been performed using microscopic  <cit>  or radioisotopic techniques  <cit> . fluorescent labelling of borreliae would allow a much better visualisation of bacteria in microscopic studies, and also a means to quantitatively study the association between neutrophils and borreliae using flow cytometry. indeed, a flow cytometric technique, staining b. burgdorferi with fluorescein-isothiocyanate , was described by banfi and others in  <dig>  <cit> . flow cytometry has also been used to assess the uptake of pkh2-gl-labeled b. burgdorferi sensu stricto strain lw <dig> by dendritic cells  <cit> . however, thorough characterisation of the effect of labelling on borrelial viability has not been performed.

in this study, we wanted to develop a reliable, fast and easy quantification method for borrelial association with human neutrophils, with no effect on borrelial viability and motility. cfse was chosen as the label because of its non-toxic and highly fluorescent nature and ability to stay fluorescent for several days. we report here the use of cfse for staining different genospecies of b. burgdorferi and subsequent quantification of stained borreliae associated with neutrophils using flow cytometry and confocal microscopy. the method was found to be useful for comparing neutrophil association of different borrelial genotypes and of borreliae and the pyogenic bacterium streptococcus pyogenes. also, the effect of borrelial virulence was assessed with respect to association with human neutrophils.

RESULTS
cfse staining of bb-hp, ba and bg
first we wanted to characterise the efficacy of cfse to stain borreliae. as shown in fig. 1a–c, a very high percentage of borreliae  were stained with cfse as determined by flow cytometry, while unstained bacteria showed only autofluorescence. these results were supported by confocal microscopy images showing a homogenous staining pattern of the bacteria .

borrelial viability after cfse labelling was assessed using flow cytometric analysis of propidium iodide stained bacteria. no difference in the proportion of live bacteria between cfse labelled and pbs treated borreliae was detected . pi-staining of heat-killed borreliae was included in some experiments to demonstrate the proper functioning of the staining method. thus, we conclude that cfse labelling does not adversely affect borrelial viability.

association of cfse-stained bb-hp with human neutrophils
when neutrophils were incubated with cfse-stained bb-hp, fluorescence could be detected cytometrically using cell setting parameters detecting only fluorescence arising from the labelled bacteria associated with neutrophils. neutrophils were divided into two separate populations, one without cfse fluorescence  and another with detectable cfse fluorescence. the percent of cells in each population was dependent on the incubation time of neutrophils and cfse-stained bb-hp, with more cfse fluorescent neutrophils as a function of incubation time . results with neutrophils incubated with cfse-stained ba or bg were similar to the data obtained with bb-hp .

localisation of cfse-stained bb-hp incubated with human neutrophils
to be able to localise cfse-stained bb-hp associated with neutrophils, some experiments were performed using confocal microscopy of fixed samples. after  <dig> min of incubation, some of the neutrophil-associated cfse-stained bb-hp were bound to the plasma membrane of the cells . after  <dig> min of incubation, when looking at the localisation of fluorescent material at different cross-sections of the neutrophils, most fluorescence appeared to be inside the cells . the fluorescent material inside the cell was appearing in a "spotted" fashion, and intact bb-hp could not be detected, suggesting localization of fluorescence in phagosomes. after pre-treatment of neutrophils with cytochalasin b, inhibiting phagocytosis, a dramatic inhibition of intracellular localisation could be detected . similar data were obtained with neutrophils incubated with cfse-stained ba or bg .

kinetics of association of cfse-stained bb-hp, ba and bg with human neutrophils
the kinetics of association of all three tested genospecies of b. burgdorferi with human neutrophils was the same . it was biphasic with a faster first phase lasting for about  <dig> min, followed by a much slower second phase almost reaching plateau levels at  <dig> min and lasting for at least  <dig> min. the results were supported by those performed in parallel using live imaging of cells by confocal microscopy. at  <dig> min of incubation about 20–60% of neutrophils were associated with fluorescent borreliae, and the maximal amount of neutrophils associated with fluorescent borreliae was about 60–80%. a somewhat higher percentage of neutrophils seemed to be consistently associated with bg compared to the other two strains, but because of variation in the phagocytic activity of neutrophils from different donors, no significant difference occurred between the tested genospecies.

the estimation of number of bacteria associated with a single neutrophil was based on mfi values as described in the methods section. the amount of fluorescent material associated with a single neutrophil was biphasic, with a faster first phase lasting for about  <dig> min, followed by a plateau level with no further increase in associated fluorescent material . the kinetic profile was the same for the three tested borrelial strains. the kinetics of the bacteria/pmn curves  paralleled those reflecting the amount of neutrophils involved .

effect of virulence on association of b <dig> with human neutrophils
to investigate the role of borrelial virulence in association of borreliae with human neutrophils, we compared the high and low passage strains of b. burgdorferi ss b <dig> . bb-hp strain lacks several plasmids including the linear virulence plasmid  <dig>  as determined by pcr , and is unable to cause infection in borrelia-sensitive c3h/he mice . bb-lp is a low passage strain  containing lp <dig> and tested to be virulent in c3h/he mice . as a result, we found that the association of bb-hp with human neutrophils was significantly higher than the association of bb-lp at all tested time points .

association of neutrophils with streptococcus pyogenes
when incubating neutrophils with s. pyogenes a biphasic association was registered with respect to percentage of neutrophils involved . this association curve closely resembled that of neutrophils and borreliae . the biphasic shape of the curve was not so prominent as with borreliae, and a plateau level was reached almost immediately in the amount of fluorescent s. pyogenes associated per neutrophil .

discussion
different methods are available for quantifying phagocytosis of bacteria by human neutrophils  <cit> . one advantage with using labelled bacteria is the simplicity of the assay. flow cytometry is rapid, which allows testing of many time-points or different experimental settings in one experiment. furthermore, flow cytometry is sensitive and requires small sample volumes. a much larger amount of cells can be quantitated compared to microscopy. flow cytometry is not as prone to errors because of individual interpretation by the operator as microscopy. on the other hand, microscopic techniques have the advantage that they allow direct visual assessment of the interaction between bacteria and cells.

cfse has been reported non-toxic enough to be used in vivo. the atoxic nature of the dye is supported by the findings of this study. cfse did neither adversely affect borrelial growth  nor motility. the fluorescence of cfse is detectable up to ten cycles of cell division both in vivo and in vitro  <cit> . in vitro, the fluorescence of cfse labelled borreliae in cultivation lasted for six days , which may allow tracing of cfse-labelled borreliae in eukaryotic cells in vivo. the uptake of cfse-labelled borreliae by different cell types can be followed up on a day to day basis to get information about location of borreliae in early infection. these findings show that cfse offers marked advantages compared to other labels previously used to stain b. burgdorferi  <cit> . we also performed cfse-staining experiments in the presence of  <dig> % bsa, which is in many laboratories added to pbs-buffer to protect the outer membrane of borreliae, but under these conditions the bacteria were not labelled at all .

one major concern in phagocytosis assays is to distinguish actually internalised bacteria from those only attached to the cell. in this study, microscopic data showed that some fluorescent bacteria were attached to the cell membrane at early time points and attachment could not be distinguished from phagocytosis. thus, the results should be interpreted as association of the bacteria and the cells, including both attachment and uptake. several methods have been used to differentiate attachment from uptake  <cit> . one approach is based on the quenching effect of trypan blue on extracellular fluorescence. however, the quenching effect differs significantly depending on the methodological approach  <cit> . ethidium bromide , previously used to change the emission spectrum of fitc from green to red  <cit> , also affected the autofluorescence of non-labelled particles by causing red unspecific background fluorescence . as modulation of extracellular fluorescence might affect fluorescence coming from inside the cells, we did not use any quencher. further studies are needed to distinguish attachment and phagocytosis in this setup.

to our knowledge, comparative studies of phagocytosis of b. burgdorferi, b. afzelii and b. garinii by human blood leukocytes have not been done. in one study, no significant differences in uptake of radio-labelled b. burgdorferi irs, b. garinii pbi and b. afzelii vs <dig> by hepatic macrophages were observed when perfusing rat livers  <cit> . our results are in accordance with this finding indicating similar association of the different genospecies with human neutrophils.

passaging of borreliae may lead to plasmid losses and subsequent changes in the structure and infectivity of borreliae  <cit> . b. burgdorferi organisms lacking lp <dig> are completely non-infectious  <cit> . our results suggest that plasmid content and infectivity of borreliae significantly affect the rate of association of the bacteria with human neutrophils, as association of non-virulent bb-hp with human neutrophils was significantly higher at all tested time points. previously, contradictory results have been presented regarding the infectivity of b. burgdorferi versus resistance to phagocytosis by leukocytes. georgilis et al.  <cit>  stated, based on microscopic evaluation, that highly infective, low-passage strains of b. burgdorferi  resist phagocytosis by human blood phagocytes much better than high-passage variants of the same strains with low infectivity. on the other hand, al-robaiy and others have shown that passaging and infectivity do not significantly affect internalization rates of two strains of b. burgdorferi  by neutrophils based on flow cytometric studies  <cit> . in their studies, whole blood was used instead of isolated neutrophils. our premilinary results show that the bb-hp mutant also lacks other plasmids than the virulence plasmid lp <dig>  thus, it is possible that the difference in interaction of this strain with neutrophils is affected by a plasmid or plasmids other than lp <dig>  which will be tested in the future.

we also wanted to use the method for comparing the phagocytosis and kinetics of association of borreliae and a pyogenic bacterium to human neutrophils in vitro. s. pyogenes causes skin infections ranging from superficial impetigo to life-threatening nectrotizing fasciitis of soft tissues characterised by a large number of infiltrating neutrophils  <cit> . in contrast, infiltrates of erythema migrans skin lesions caused by b. burgdorferi have been reported to contain only very few neutrophils  <cit> . unexpectedly, no difference in the percentage of neutrophils involved in the interaction with borreliae or s. pyogenes, or in the kinetics of the association could be registered. it seems that neutrophils in vitro respond to borreliae more efficiently than in vivo. factors in tick saliva inhibiting the functions of neutrophils  <cit> , or different expression of borrelial proteins in vivo and in vitro affecting the interaction between borreliae and immune cells  <cit>  might offer an explanation.

by dividing the mean fluorescence intensity  value associated with neutrophils  with the mfi for bb-hp, ba, bg or s. pyogenes  in each experiment, we got an estimation about the amount of fluorescent material associated with one neutrophil at each time point tested. these values cannot, however, be directly interpreted as the number of bacteria associated per neutrophil. the mfi values of the three genospecies of borreliae and of s. pyogenes varied between the different experiments. this was, at least partly, due to some variation in the length of the spirochetes, as assessed by phase-contrast microscopy , but also to the fact that clusters of borreliae could appear. especially, b. garinii showed extensive clustering, which may explain the great variation in the amount of bacterial material associated with neutrophils in experiments with this genospecies. however, kinetic data could be obtained showing that more fluorescent material was associated with neutrophils in the first  <dig> min, regardless of the exact number of bacteria involved. no difference in kinetics was observed between the three borrelial genospecies, while studies with s. pyogenes suggest that neutrophils became saturated with this bacterium more rapidly than with borreliae. the kinetic data is supported by microscopic findings showing that each neutrophil could bind several borreliae, and that the number of borreliae per cell increased during the first  <dig> minutes.

CONCLUSIONS
this study shows that cfse efficiently labels the three genospecies of borreliae without affecting viability of the bacteria. cfse labelling of borreliae can be used for quantitative analysis of borrelial association with human neutrophils using flow cytometry. the method offers a fast way to analyse a large number of cells in different settings in one experiment and provides kinetic data on association of borreliae and neutrophils. also, the method allows the comparison of different borrelial strains, and the impact on phagocytosis of borrelial qualities such as infectivity can be assessed.

