BACKGROUND
many organisms accumulate carbon and energy as polyglucans. glycogen is the main storage polysaccharide found in bacteria, fungi, and mammals. similarly, green algae and plants accumulate starch, which is composed of two different molecules: amylose and amylopectin  <cit> . the biosynthesis of these polyglucans occurs by the usage of “activated” glucose molecules: udp-glucose serves as glycosyl donor for the synthesis of glycogen in fungi and mammals, while adp-glucose  is the initial substrate for the synthesis of glycogen in bacteria and starch in green algae and plants  <cit> .

adp-glc pyrophosphorylase  catalyzes the synthesis of adp-glc from atp and glucose-1-phosphate , in presence of a divalent cation   <cit> . the enzyme from cyanobacteria is a tetramer composed of four identical subunits, whereas the enzyme from unicellular algae and plants is a heterotetramer composed of two small  and two large  subunits  <cit> . the homotetrameric enzyme from cyanobacteria shares a higher identity with plant s subunits than with other heterotrophic bacteria. in eukaryotes, the l subunit appeared later in evolution, most likely through gene duplication. even though both subunits seem to have evolved from the same ancestor, the higher homology among the s subunits suggests stronger evolutionary constraints for them than for the l subunits  <cit> .

the s and l subunits have undergone a subfunctionalization process; i.e. each subunit retained and/or lost particular properties that were already present in the common ancestor  <cit> . the s subunit from the potato tuber adp-glc ppase has catalytic activity and a low affinity  for the allosteric activator , whereas the l subunit is non-catalytic but its co-expression with the s subunit increases the affinity  for the activator of the resulting heterotetramer  <cit> . similarly, co-expression of the s subunit  with different l subunit isoforms  of the arabidopsis thaliana adp-glc ppase rendered heterotetrameric enzymes with distinctive kinetic and regulatory properties  <cit> . it was later demonstrated that the apl <dig> and apl <dig> subunits from the a. thaliana enzyme are also catalytic  <cit> , which confers a higher degree of complexity to the synthesis of adp-glc in plants.

in most organisms, the activity of adp-glc ppase is modulated by key metabolites of the main carbon assimilatory pathway. adp-glc ppases characterized to date are usually activated by molecules that represent a “high energy status”, such as 3-pga, fructose- <dig> -bisphosphate , fructose-6-phosphate , and pyruvate. conversely, these enzymes are typically inhibited by metabolites that indicate a “low energy status”, like inorganic orthophosphate , amp, and adp  <cit> . in addition, the reaction catalyzed by adp-glc ppase uses atp as a substrate. thus, it is widely accepted that accumulation of glycogen and starch will occur under conditions where carbon and energy are available, whereas their synthesis will be restricted in the opposite situations  <cit> .

adp-glc ppases have been classified into nine different groups based in their quaternary structure and main allosteric effectors  <cit> . group i contains enzymes from enteric bacteria  utilizing the embden-meyerhof  pathway, which are activated by fbp and inhibited by amp. group iv is composed by adp-glc ppases from heterotrophic bacteria  utilizing the entner-doudoroff pathway, which are activated by fru6p and pyruvate, and inhibited by amp and adp  <cit> . there is great diversity of activators among different bacterial adp-glc ppases, and secondary activators exist within some of the classes  <cit> . recently, we have found that the enzyme from streptomyces coelicor has a very different specificity for activators and may fall into a new class. it is activated mainly by glucose-6-phosphate  and can also be activated by mannose-6-phosphate, phosphoenolpyruvate, and fru6p  <cit> . the enzyme from nitrosomonas europaea can be activated mainly by pyruvate, but also by oxaloacetate and phosphoenolpyruvate  <cit> . the rationale for this diversity of regulatory molecules in different bacteria is that synthesis of adp-glc is strictly regulated by the main metabolic pathways operating in the respective organism  <cit> .

group viii includes enzymes from cyanobacteria, green algae, and plants, which are activated by 3-pga and inhibited by inorganic orthophosphate . the activator plays a key role in enzyme regulation, but it is the 3-pga/pi ratio that controls the activity of adp-glc ppase  <cit> . group ix is composed of adp-glc ppases from plant non-photosynthetic tissues , which are inhibited by pi, adp, and fbp. this inhibitory effect can be reversed by 3-pga and fru6p  <cit> . it is well documented that 3-pga is the main activator of adp-glc ppases from oxygenic photosynthetic organisms and that these two classes have been the most specific ones within the family. there have been some hints in the literature, however, that indicate that under certain circumstances some of the enzymes activated by 3-pga could use other metabolites, but inefficiently. the enzymes from synechocystis pcc  <dig> and anabaena pcc  <dig>   <cit> , the green alga chlamydomonas reinhardtii <cit> , spinach  <cit>  and wheat  <cit>  leaves, and maize endosperm  <cit>  showed enhanced activities at high concentrations of other metabolites, including fbp, fru6p, and glc6p. this apparent omnipresent promiscuity in divergent organisms suggests that this behavior has a very distant common ancestry. nevertheless, a thorough analysis in photosynthetic organism has not been performed. in this work, we analyzed the activation specificity of the enzymes from anabaena pcc  <dig>  ostreococcus tauri, and potato tuber. our data support the idea that adp-glc ppases evolved to accommodate the regulatory properties for particular metabolic scenarios operating in different organisms.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis and activator promiscuity of adp-glc ppases
the sequence similarity between bacterial and the s and l subunits of eukaryotic adp-glc ppases suggests a common origin. it is believed that the ancestral enzyme may have been a bacterial subunit with both catalytic and regulatory functions  <cit> . based on the roles of different s and l subunits from plants, it seems that after gene duplication adp-glc ppase has undergone a subfunctionalization process in which each copy adopted complementary roles  <cit> . the interaction between the product of these gene copies is now necessary to maintain the same overall set of functions of the common ancestor  <cit> . this duplication and divergence increased the sequence landscape and enabled adp-glc ppase to evolve towards more complex regulation. for instance, several isoforms of the l subunit are differentially expressed based on the type of tissue in the plant. this provides a variety of allosteric properties and seems to be the underlying mechanism for how starch synthesis is regulated  <cit> .

to follow function throughout sequence divergence, we aligned adp-glc ppase sequences  and constructed a neighbor-joining phylogenetic tree  using  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> adp-glc ppase sequences from cyanobacteria, green algae, and plants , respectively. figure  <dig> shows that the tree contains three major branches: cyanobacteria, small subunits, and large subunits from green algae and plants. the small subunits are grouped in five branches: green algae , s. moellendorffii , dicots, and monocots . large subunits are grouped in six branches: green algae , s. moellendorffii , and four groups  from dicots and monocots . the shape of the tree is similar to those previously obtained by ballicora et al.  <cit>  and georgelis et al.  <cit> .


although adp-glc ppases from cyanobacteria, green algae, and plants are grouped in different branches of the phylogenetic tree , they share the same main heterotropic activator . in addition, all of them are activated by other metabolites. to study the evolution and promiscuity of the allosteric regulation in adp-glc ppases from divergent oxygenic photosynthetic organisms, we expressed and purified evolutionarily distant enzyme representatives from anabaena, o. tauri, and potato tuber. highly purified enzymes were used to determine the vmax in the presence and the absence of activator  and the respective a <dig>  values for the activation kinetics by 3-pga, fbp, fru6p, or glc6p of each enzyme . with these values, we calculated the “specificity constant” as the ratio between the respective net activation fold over a <dig> . this parameter is analogous to the catalytic efficiency, which is the parameter of choice to compare the substrate specificity of enzymes with simple hyperbolic kinetics  <cit> .


activity of the purified enzymes was assayed in the adp-glc synthesis direction. kinetic parameters were calculated as described under “methods”. for each enzyme and each activator the vmax can be calculated as v <dig> times the activation fold. stus and stul are the s and l subunits of potato tuber, and otas and otal the s and l subunits of o. tauri, respectively.

the tested effectors activated all enzymes to different extents ; however, the specificity constants clearly show that 3-pga is the most efficient activator for all three wild type enzymes. to analyze and compare this promiscuous behavior toward different effectors, we plotted the specificity constant for each activator of all enzymes. for the sake of clarity, we calculated the log <dig> of the specificity constants and constructed radial plots . plots in figures 2a-c show that the activation promiscuity profile is similar for the enzymes from anabaena, o. tauri, and potato tuber .


interestingly, when we analyzed the homotetrameric o. tauri adp-glc ppase  we found that the specificity constant for 3-pga and fbp were similar . this is a markedly different behavior compared to that observed for the native heterotetrameric form  and the ones from anabaena and potato tuber . as previously reported  <cit> , both otas and otal are catalytic but no activity was detected when otal was expressed in the absence of the s subunit. to better understand the contribution of otas and otal to the activation promiscuity of the heterotetrameric enzyme, we co-expressed the non-catalytic mutants otasd148a and otald171a with the wild type counterparts, as previously described  <cit> .

contrary to what we observed in the homotetrameric otas enzyme, the mutant otasd148a/otal had a specificity constant for 3-pga three orders of magnitude higher than for fbp  . it is worth noting that in this mutant the second activator was fru6p, with a specificity constant of  <dig>  mm- <dig>  a different trend compared to otas/otal and otas where the second activator was fbp . a similar result was observed for the mutant otas/otald171a, which had a specificity constant for 3-pga that was higher than that for fbp  . results obtained with this mutant resemble those for otas/otal, where fbp is a more efficient activator than fru6p . the effect of the addition of otald171a to otas on the specificity for activators is particularly striking at lower concentrations . between  <dig> - <dig>  mm otas/otald171a is almost fully activated by 3-pga but only slightly by fbp. on the other hand, otas is poorly activated by both.


otal is an activator specifier
we analyzed the activation specificity constants for 3-pga, fbp, fru6p, and glc6p in very divergent adp-glc ppases from oxygenic photosynthetic organisms. as expected, the highest values were observed for 3-pga. however, the otas homotetramer has similar specificity constants for 3-pga and fbp, indicating a loss of specificity. we determined that the specificity constants for 3-pga in the heterotetrameric mutants otasd148a/otal and otas/otald171a are higher than for fbp, a trend similar to that observed for the wild type enzyme . our results suggest that after gene duplication otas lost specificity for 3-pga . this was physiologically possible because the co-expression with otal restored the specificity for 3-pga of the resulting heterotetrameric enzyme. we could consider the otal subunit as a “specifier”, because its presence in the heterotetramer  only increases the specificity for 3-pga. this scenario is similar to that observed for β- <dig> -galactosyltransferase, which changes its substrate specificity when it interacts with the protein α-lactalbumin. the enzyme transfers galactose from udp-galactose to n-acetylglucosamine, which constitutes its normal galactosyltransferase activity. in the presence of α-lactalbumin, it transfers galactose to glucose, which is its lactose synthase activity  <cit> . in this particular case the preference for substrate is being changed, while in the otas/otal enzyme the change is at the allosteric activator level. in plants, adp-glc ppase is expressed in both autotrophic  and heterotrophic  tissues  <cit> ; thus, it is exposed to diverse metabolic scenarios. in certain situations, it could be an evolutionary advantage to have some degree of promiscuity for metabolites that are typically found in heterotrophic environments .

subfunctionalization as an evolutionary process in adp-glc ppases
the subfunctionalization of genetic processes has been described in detail  <cit> ; however, biochemical examples of such process are limited  <cit> . we recently described that the evolution of adp-glc ppase subunits may have undergone a subfunctionalization process  <cit> , and that their divergent functional paths could have been different within eukaryotes  <cit> . subfunctions in different subunits  co-evolved in heterotetramers to maintain physiologically functional enzymes. we postulated that the gene duplication that generated these two types of subunits caused a likely evolutionarily unstable overlap of roles. this resulted in a defective catalysis in the l subunits, a defective regulation in the s subunit, and in some cases, insolubility of l subunits  <cit> . previously, we proposed that organisms with adp-glc ppases that lie on different branches of the phylogenetic tree might not retain identical catalytic properties of the enzyme. this hypothesis could also be extended to include the divergence of specificity for activators, which has been presented in this study. we observed that the specificity for the activator of one of the subunits is defective , but the overall specific role of the heterotetramer is conserved because of the presence of the other subunit.

CONCLUSIONS
we observed a widespread promiscuity for activators of adp-glc ppase of oxygenic photosynthetic organisms that seems to be ancestral and intrinsic to the enzyme family. in addition, we found that the otas homotetramer has lost specificity for 3-pga, probably after gene duplication in eukaryotes. however, the specificity is maintained in the heterotetramer because of the l subunit. for this reason, we could consider the otal subunit as a “specifier” for activators. to the best of our knowledge, this is the first time this type of mechanism has been observed. the described promiscuity and the functional complementation of subunits would be very effective to accommodate the regulatory properties of adp-glc ppases to a variety of metabolic scenarios operating in different organisms and tissues.

