BACKGROUND
mitogenomics, or the analysis of complete mitochondrial genomic data sets, is a powerful tool used in a wide range of organisms to improve phylogenetic estimations, reconstruct robust phylogenies and resolve long-standing phylogenetic uncertainties . scleractinian mitochondrial genomes are estimated to be evolving 10– <dig> times slower than vertebrate ones, and five times slower than scleractinian nuclear genomes  <cit> , suggesting their limited application for species-level phylogenetics and population genetics  <cit> . nevertheless, they were reported as a useful tool for detecting population variability and structure  <cit> . furthermore, mitochondrial genome rearrangements occur relatively rarely and have been useful in resolving evolutionary relationships of closely related species, particularly in scleractinia .

desmophyllum dianthus  and lophelia pertusa  are azooxanthellate scleractinian corals living in cold waters worldwide, with the exception of the polar seas . both species belong to the polyphyletic family caryophylliidae that is represented by several molecular clusters within robusta  <cit> , one of three major molecular clades of scleractinian corals  <cit> . according to recent studies the family caryophylliidae includes, besides desmophyllum and lophelia, numerous  modern species of nominal genera as caryophyllia, crispatotrochus tenison-woods,  <dig>  dasmosmilia pourtales,  <dig>  pourtalosmilia duncan,  <dig>  and stenocyathus pourtalès,  <dig> .

while d. dianthus is one out of three existing species  of the genus desmophyllum ehrenberg,  <dig>  l. pertusa is monotypic for the genus lophelia milne edwards & haime,  <dig> 

desmophyllum dianthus is a solitary but gregarious scleractinian species that actively contributes to the accretion of cold-water coral build-ups. planulae of this species preferentially settle on parental skeleton, producing "branching" structures that, in some cases, can be mistaken as irregular colonies . the skeleton of this species is extremely variable, from very thin-walled to massive and from subcylindrical to trochoid and greatly flared . lophelia pertusa is a colonial species, forming bush-like colonies that can exceed one metre in diameter. it is the most common azooxanthellate frame-building scleractinian and the main component of the densest and most extensive cold-water coral bioconstructions known thus far . although less irregular than d. dianthus, the skeleton of l. pertusa is quite variable both in colonial pattern and calicular size and shape . both species typically occur in deep-water environments where they often share the same habitat, as documented in modern and pleistocene settings in the atlantic ocean and mediterranean sea . however, one of the two species can dominate a distinct ecological niche within the same area  or in different areas of the same basin . occasionally, only one of the two species is present in some environments: e.g., d. dianthus forms the dense shallow-water bioconstructions in the chilean fjords  <cit> , whereas l. pertusa dominates the norwegian "cold-water coral  reefs"  <cit> .fig.  <dig> colony and corallites of lophelia pertusa and coralla of desmophyllum dianthus. a. branches of a live colony  of l. pertusa . white arrows indicate examples of interconnected single polyps/corallites. b. detail of the inner wall of a corallite of l. pertusa; note the holes that internally connect the soft tissues of two corallites of the same colony; these holes are missing in the wall of aggregated coralla of d. dianthus. c. live aggregation of several solitary coralla of d. dianthus . the skeletons of the coralla are secondarily fused, there is no connection between polyps ; each polyp/corallum  results from a distinct larva settled on the parental skeleton. d-e. calicular views of two corallites of lophelia; at comparable sizes septa show different distribution pattern and size. f-g. calicular views of two coralla of desmophyllum dianthus showing high intraspecific morphological variability; d. unimib-sgc <dig>  south gulf of cadiz; e. unimib-sml <dig>  ionian sea, mediterranean; f. unimib-sml <dig>  ionian sea, mediterranean; g. usnm  <dig>  sagami bay, japan. scale bars: a,c,g. 2 cm, b. 2 mm, d-f. 1 cm



though identified as two distinct genera, morphological and genetic similarities have been previously reported between desmophyllum and lophelia  <cit>  and references therein  <cit> , suggesting an ambiguous taxonomic status that requires confirmation. the main objective of this study is to establish a genetic fingerprint and clarify the phylogenetic relationship between d. dianthus and l. pertusa. new data consisting of complete mitochondrial genomes and other molecular markers, including previously analysed protein-coding and non-coding genes, were used to provide a robust molecular framework for reaching clear interpretations. we also provide further ontogenetic, microstructural, macro- and micromorphological evidence of the high degree of skeletal similarity between l. pertusa and d. dianthus.

RESULTS
genetic analysis
the mitochondrial genome of d. dianthus, with a length of between  <dig>  and  <dig>  base pairs , had a nucleotide composition with a gc content of 35 %, similar to other corals  <cit> . the mitochondrial genome rearrangement of d. dianthus was the same as described for l. pertusa  <cit> : the mitogenome contained  <dig> protein-coding genes,  <dig> transfer rna genes,  <dig> ribosomal rna genes, and a group i intron, which interrupted the nd <dig> gene. this group consisted of one ribosomal  and seven protein-coding genes . nearly all protein-coding genes had methionine  as the translation initiation codon , and taa or tag as the stop codon. the two largest non-coding regions were between the nad <dig> and cob genes, consisting of the putative control region  <cit> , and the nad <dig> and trnw genes. the putative control region was responsible for the mitogenome length variation observed at both inter- and intraspecific levels: small insertions and deletions  ranging from 72 bp to 150 bp in length were detected in l. pertusa , and the italian  and chilean  specimens of d. dianthus .fig.  <dig> mitochondrial sequences, gene arrangement and comparison between two desmophyllum dianthus  and three lophelia pertusa  specimens. the mitochondrial genomes of d. dianthus and l. pertusa show  <dig>  % of genetic similarity. nucleotide substitutions obtained in this study are indicated at the intra- and interspecific levels . intraspecific variability of the mitochondrial genome of l. pertusa  is attributed to the study of flot et al.   <cit> . non-synonymous substitutions found at interspecific  and intraspecific levels  are represented for each gene from which they were obtained



comparison of the two d. dianthus and three l. pertusa mitogenomes  showed that genomic variability was represented by  <dig> nucleotide substitutions, of which  <dig> were non-synonymous . intraspecific variability between d. dianthus individuals from the mediterranean sea and chilean fjord was based on  <dig> non-synonymous substitutions of  <dig> mutations, with  <dig>  % genetic similarity. except for the indels in the putative control region, astonishing genetic similarity was found between l. pertusa and d. dianthus: only  <dig> substitutions out of  <dig> were observed over  <dig> coding genes; the remaining  <dig>  % nucleotides were identical.table  <dig> pairwise species non-synonymous substitutions with nucleotide  and amino acid  location

dd432-lpkc875348
dd432-lpkc875349
dd432-lpfr821799
dd432dd636dd432dd636
dd636lpkc875348dd636lpkc875348
dd636lpkc875348dd636lpkc875348
dd636lpfr821799dd636lpfr821799
nad5
nad5
nad5
nad1
nad1
cox3
cox3
cox3
cox2
nad5
cob
cob
nad2
nad2
nad2
nad6
nad6
nad6
cox1
cox1
cox1
cox1

dd desmoplyllum dianthus, lp lophelia pertusa



the dn/ds values obtained from pairwise comparisons between the mitochondrial protein-coding regions from individuals of both species ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . higher substitution ratios, due to mathematical artefacts , were found between specimens of l. pertusa .table  <dig> computation of non-synonymous  and synonymous  substitutions between mitochondrial protein-coding genes of d. dianthus  and l. pertusa  using one approximate method  and tree maximum-likelihood methods    <cit> 


dd432-dd636

dd432-lpkc875348

dd432-lpfr821799

dd432-lpkc875349

dd636-lpfr <dig> 

dd636-lpkc875348

dd636-lpkc875349

lpkc875348-lpfr821799

lpkc875348-lpkc875349

lpkc875349-lpfr821799


based on the estimation of uncorrected p-distances among different scleractinian families and genera, genetic divergence ranged from  <dig> to 8 % between genera and  <dig>  to 1 % between species . the genetic distance between lophelia and desmophyllum genera was estimated to be  <dig>  %, the same value obtained when the two d. dianthus individuals were compared.

estimations for the putative control region were performed separately. within this region, pairwise comparisons between  <dig> d. dianthus and 5 l. pertusa individuals showed overlapping genetic distance ranges, from  <dig> to 14 % between genera and  <dig>  to 14 % at the intraspecific level .table  <dig> genetic divergence between d. dianthus  and l. pertusa  individuals using only putative control region sequences



microsatellite sequence analysis showed that  <dig> microsatellite markers, developed for d. dianthus  <cit> , successfully genotyped l. pertusa with clear peak profiles. in addition, l. pertusa individuals from the mediterranean sea and north atlantic ocean presented the same allele size range as d. dianthus . moreover, average microsatellite sequence identities between l. pertusa and d. dianthus were about 97 % similar, based on multiple blast alignments for  <dig> separate pairwise comparisons.

skeletal analysis
the morphological analysis carried out in this study confirmed the extreme variability of the coralla of d. dianthus , higher than the variability of l. pertusa’s corallites , consistent with the findings of previous studies of modern and pleistocene samples . the initial growth stages of the two taxa were hardly distinguishable, as it has been observed with other closely related caryophylliids . coralla of larger juvenile d. dianthus  were still very similar to l. pertusa corallites; however, at equal gcds, the number of septa was higher in d. dianthus  as confirmed by the student’s two-tailed t-test .

the main distinctive characters of the adult stages of l. pertusa and d. dianthus were a size maximum  and growth form, colonial in the former species and solitary in the latter. although some mass occurrences of d. dianthus looked like colonies , they were always formed by aggregation of coralla and not by budding as in l. pertusa. indeed, individual polyps of aggregated d. dianthus were never internally connected, whereas the polyps of l. pertusa were always connected both externally and internally , at least during the early growth stage. through growth, l. pertusa polyps can seal the connecting skeletal holes and, in some cases, occupy only the distal-most portion of the corallites, thus behaving as independent solitary scleractinians .table  <dig> comparison of morphological characters observed in d. dianthus and l. pertusa 


characters
d. dianthus

l. pertusa


corallum/corallite length 
l: up to 20 cm
l: exceptionally longer than 4 cm

calicular diameter 
gcd: up to 9 cm
gcd: up to 2 cm

septa cycles
up to  <dig> 
up to  <dig> 

tabulae
rare
common

theca thickness : gcd
variable;  <dig> – <dig>  
variable;  <dig> – <dig>  
diagnostic characters clearly differentiating d. dianthus from l. pertusa  are indicated in bold


abbreviations: l length, gcd greater calicular diameter, lcd lower calicular diameter, f
w width calicular fossa, f
d fossa depth



other macroscopic skeletal features were extremely variable between specimens of the same taxon and even changed within the same specimen . therefore, they could not be considered diagnostic taxonomic characters. also, the skeletal microarchitecture of the two taxa was highly variable. the size and shape of both septal and outer thecal granulations tended to change with ontogenetic development and specimen size. in both d. dianthus and l. pertusa, granules were typically denser and larger  in the proximal portions and more dispersed and smaller  in distal portions . this was particularly evident in large-sized specimens of d. dianthus in which portions of the distal corallum were often very smooth. however, the ratio of height basal diameter of the septal granules was highly variable, resulting in a wide spectrum of shapes ranging from hemispherical to subcylindrical and spinose.fig.  <dig> micromorphology  and microstructure of desmophyllum
ddsml  <dig>  a–e and lophelia medcor  <dig>  f–i. thecal granulations in both taxa are very similar: granules are typically denser and more rounded  in proximal portions of specimens  whereas more dispersed and spinose in distal portions . microstructural organization of septa of both taxa as viewed in transverse thin sections  and polished and etched sections : the so called "mid-septal zone" consists of densely packed rapid accretion deposits, rads  with thickening deposits, td  radiating outward from the rads. td in the illustrated desmophyllum form well organized, large bundles of fibers, whereas in lophelia, few zones separated by clear crystal boundaries are recognizable. yellow arrows  mark complete light extinction of the fiber bundles in polarized light, indicating similar arrangement of axes of individual crystallographic domains



at the microstructural level, l. pertusa and d. dianthus skeletons showed very similar organization. in both taxa, the septa and wall consisted of two distinct microstructural zones: the so-called "mid-septal zone"  composed of densely packed rapid accretion deposits   and thickening deposits  composed of bundles of fibers that radiate outwards from the rads. the spatial relationship between septal and wall microstructural units transformed similarly during ontogeny starting as marginotheca, evolving into trabeculotheca and eventually forming septotheca . during the earliest ontogenetic stages, thecal rads remained connected to rads of the adjacent septa. in transverse sections of coralla, this was recognized as a continuation of the "dark line" between septa and wall. this microstructural pattern corresponded to the stage when the rims  of the wall and septa were formed at the same level. the theca, which was relatively thin during the initial phase , was covered from the outside by successive thickening deposits , resulting in very thick bases in adults. the next main ontogenetic phase started with the formation of the trabeculotheca. in transverse sections, this phase was recognized due to the interruption of the primary marginotheca by radial elements and the formation of trabeculothecal segments . this microstructural pattern corresponded to the phase when the rims of  primary septa expanded above and outside of the wall rim, which consequently formed only as "bridges" between septa. the last ontogenetic phase of wall development started when trabeculothecal segments were no longer in interseptal zones, and the only existing wall was one formed of thickened portions of septa, i.e. septotheca. the septothecate stage, characterized by the increase in septal thickness, often occurred earlier in l. pertusa than in d. dianthus .

discussion
mitochondrial gene order rearrangement and its phylogenetic implications have recently been reported for several genera of scleractinia . however, none of these studies described two morphologically distinct genera sharing an extremely high level of genetic similarity. the analysis of dn/ds ratios between the mitochondrial genomes of l. pertusa and d. dianthus indicates that sites are neutrally evolving. of the approximately  <dig>  bp per genome, more than 99 % were identical between these two taxa. with only 25 % of all differences identified as non-synonymous changes, any inferences on positive selection  would not be supported. evidence of positive selection was detected for l. pertusa individuals from the norwegian fjords and mediterranean sea, but without any evolutionary relevance  <cit> . indeed, the positive selection found in this study  was not statistically supported based on fisher’s exact test due to the low number of substitutions in protein-coding regions. as remarked also by flot et al.  <cit>  more sensitive statistical procedures, such as the z test, require at least  <dig> synonymous and  <dig> non-synonymous mutations for assumptions to be met  <cit> . in the case of l. pertusa individuals from the norwegian fjords and mediterranean sea, adaptive evolution was inferred because only one  substitution was detected in more than  <dig>  bp. given the absence of synonymous substitutions, the resulting dn/ds ratio was greater than  <dig>  indicating positive selection. therefore, the values obtained in this study could be an artefact resulting from the analysis.

even if lophelia and desmophyllum are considered as well established distinct genera, the genetic similarity and a very close phylogenetic relationship between l. pertusa and d. dianthus have been previously suggested  <cit> . in these studies, several molecular markers were used, including mitochondrial and nuclear genes, non-coding and protein-coding genes  and markers with distinct variation levels . independent of the type of molecular marker used in this study, resulting genetic distances between these two genera were always less than 1 %, and in many cases, were equal to zero. in contrast, genetic divergence between desmophyllum and other caryophylliid genera  ranged from  <dig> to 7 % in both non-coding and protein-coding genes , showing a gene-dependent variation that correlates with the polymorphism level and mutation rate characterizing each marker. to date, a genetic threshold for clearly distinguishing species or genera has not been established, nor a consensus has been reached for defining a gene for universal dna barcoding. the use of a genetic threshold or dna barcoding is even more ambiguous if applied to scleractinia, a taxonomic order characterized by slowing evolving mitogenomes and extensive interspecific hybridization  <cit> . more than  <dig> species of corals show a wide range of morphological variability and associated genetic incongruences at different phylogenetic levels . furthermore, half of the scleractinian species live in the deep-sea, a more ‘stable’ habitat than tropical shallow waters, and therefore, are likely experiencing a different evolutionary rate.

the hypothesis that lophelia and desmophyllum have extremely slow evolution rates due to their preferential location in deep-water environments was tested using hypervariable genetic markers  <cit> . given the high mutation rates and level of polymorphisms, microsatellite markers are known to be powerful genetic tools for studying population structure. microsatellites are usually designed to be species-specific markers; however, successful cross-species amplifications in related taxa are possible if the flanking regions of sequence repeats are conserved. indeed, the evolutionary conservation of flanking regions of monomorphic microsatellite loci has been used as a source of data for resolving species-level phylogenies in several groups, including plants, fishes, and birds . therefore, two closely related species can be differentiated by the polymorphism of sequence repeats, exhibiting variance in nucleotide sequence or allele size . as previously demonstrated  <cit> ,  <dig> microsatellites markers, initially developed for d. dianthus, were successfully used, with clear peak profiles, to genotype l. pertusa specimens. indeed, individuals of l. pertusa from the mediterranean sea and north atlantic ocean showed the same allele size range as d. dianthus .

nevertheless, similar microsatellite electromorphs can arise from independent mutational events, and such alleles can be not identical by descent  <cit> . given this phenomenon, termed size homoplasy, additional comparative analyses using microsatellite sequences were performed. a total of  <dig> loci, previously characterized for l. pertusa  <cit>  and published in genbank, were used to perform multiple blast searches using trufa  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> , against d. dianthus genomic dna libraries that were previously obtained by illumina  and  <dig>  <cit>  sequencing. this analysis of microsatellite sequences showed that average sequence identities for  <dig> separate pair-wise comparisons between l. pertusa and d. dianthus were about 97 % similar.

moreover, our data suggest that the putative mitochondrial control region may be a potential marker for investigating the phylogeography of the genera lophelia  <cit>  and desmophyllum, though its usefulness in investigating species boundaries is uncertain. interestingly, d. dianthus shows wide genetic divergence at the intraspecific level comparable to what is observed at the inter-generic level between desmophyllum and lophelia . indeed, individuals that traditionally belong to the genera lophelia and desmophyllum are genetically more similar to each other than to individuals of the same genus  living in different regions .

if  <dig> –1 % genetic divergence in mitochondrial genomes, combined with morphological differences, is a valid range at the interspecific level for genera within scleractinia , the results of our study suggest that chilean desmophyllum "dianthus", with its apparently morphological variation, and mediterranean and atlantic l. pertusa and d. "dianthus" may be considered three different species within the same genus. however, no clear morphological differences have been found between mediterranean/atlantic and chilean desmophyllum  <cit> ; therefore the specific distinction should be only based on genetic information.

on the other hand, although statistical significance has been found between d. dianthus from l. pertusa for the number of septa , the only unequivocal feature that allows us to distinguish the two taxa is asexual reproduction by budding in l. pertusa. occasionally distinct d. dianthus polyps touch each other and fuse, producing a common skeleton, though no evidence of budding  has been reported for this species thus far. therefore, the two growth forms, colonial  and solitary , can be morphologically distinguished when the first polyp reproduces asexually. the calice of d. dianthus can also reach much larger sizes than the one of l. pertusa  and, at equal gcd, almost always has a higher number of septa . moreover, though these two growth forms are commonly sympatric, in some cases, their relative dominance can be indicative of different environmental conditions, such as different habitats within the same area . a clear distinction between the two growth forms is even easily detected in well-preserved fossil specimens recorded since the early miocene in peri-mediterranean on-land outcrops  <cit> .

the striking genetic similarity between l. pertusa and d. dianthus calls into question their assignment to two distinct genera, which was primarily based on growth form and secondarily on very few skeletal features. in order to preserve  ecological information but, at the same time, update the scleractinian classification following new molecular results   <cit> ), d. dianthus and l. pertusa should be ascribed at least to the same genus.

the genus desmophyllum ehrenberg,  <dig> was described before the genus lophelia . thus, following the principle of priority of the international code of zoological nomenclature   we propose that the solitary and the colonial species are ascribed herein to the genus desmophyllum and are named desmophyllum dianthus  and desmophyllum pertusum , respectively. below we modify the diagnosis of the genus desmophyllum based on the information acquired in this study. we also provide a short description of the most important skeletal features of the species desmophyllum pertusum . a comprehensive revision of the genus desmophyllum, including fossil species, is currently in progress.

order: scleractinia



family: caryophylliidae dana, 1846

genus: desmophyllum ehrenberg, 1834

diagnosis: corallum solitary or colonial. corallum of solitary species greatly variable in shape, trochoid with subcylindrical pedicel or cylindrical, ceratoid, scolecoid. colonial corallum bushy in shape, often with anastomosing branches. up to 6 cycles of septa non-hexamerally arranged. pali absent. columella poorly developed, visible only in early developmental stages. septothecal wall in ontogenetically adult corallites commonly covered by thickening deposits.

type species: madrepora dianthus esper,  <dig>  pl.  <dig>  figures  <dig>   <dig>  3; subsequent designation cairns,  <dig>  p. 76

recent species included: desmophyllum striatum cairns, 1979—for description see cairns , desmophyllum quinarium tenison-woods, 1879—for description see tenison-woods , desmophyllum dianthus —for description see cairns , desmophyllum pertusum 

desmophyllum pertusum  comb. nov.

madrepora pertusa linnaeus, 1758:  <dig>  pl.  <dig>  figures  <dig>   <dig> 

lophelia pertusa zibrowius, 1980:  <dig>  pl.  <dig> a-l .—cairns, 2000: 100– <dig> .

lophelia prolifera cairns, 1979: 125– <dig>  pl.  <dig>  figures one, two, three, four, five .

diagnosis: corallum forming large bushy colonies. corallite skeleton connected to the parental one at least in the early growth stage . corallites only exceptionally longer than 4 cm and up to 2 cm in maximum calicular diameter. septa irregularly arranged in 4 cycles, only exceptionally in  <dig> incomplete ones. common tabulae.

remarks: the species has been widely described, as belonging to the genus lophelia . the diagnosis reported herein includes only the skeletal characters that, at this stage of knowledge, lead us to distinguish d. pertusum from d. dianthus.

insufficient information about d. dianthus and d. pertusum ecology and biology lead to be “conservative” in the taxonomic rearrangement. the difference in the geographical distribution, growth form , might be weak characters from a taxonomic point of view to maintain d. dianthus and d. pertusum as sympatric species. detailed studies on the systematics of the genus desmophyllum, currently on-going, might lead to synonymise these two species. further research on biogeography and reproduction of the genus are needed to support  this taxonomic distinction. if differences of environmental features and ontogenetic mechanism would not be statistically significant to support species differentiation, the comparison of molecular data performed in this study  would demonstrate that d. dianthus and d. pertusum are the same species. in such a case, following the rule of priority by date of publication of the international code of zoological nomenclature  , since the species d. dianthus  was described after d. pertusum , both species would be named as d. pertusum.

our findings pose questions about the molecular and developmental basis of colony formation in scleractinian corals and the taxonomic value of this character. many lines of evidence show that in cnidaria asexual budding and colony formation are controlled by differentially expressed genes. for example, notch—a classical developmental signalling pathway, among other functions—is involved in asexual budding in hydra , nematostella , and acropora  . taking into account the overwhelming genetic similarity between lophelia and desmophyllum, one may hypothesize that the same developmental mechanisms  regulate the solitary vs colonial growth forms of these taxa. there are several other examples of closely related scleractinians  that display a variety of growth forms. for example,  anomocora carinata includes both colonies sensu stricto  and “quasicolonial” forms in which “the daughter corallites  free of the parent before a third generation bud appears”  <cit> ,  rhizosmilia maculata and dendrophyllia cornigera show both colonies s.s. and "loosely integrated" colonies in which partial colonial mortality may yield solitary daughter polyps  <cit> , and  balanopsammia wirtzi is represented by both solitary and partly to fully integrated colonies  <cit> . all these examples call into question the robustness of this widely used genus-level criterion, i.e. the occurrence of solitary vs colonial growth forms . further studies that recognize links between molecular and morphological characters  and that focus on developmental  mechanisms may help elucidate the basis of morphological and developmental mechanism variability and provide a robust taxonomic framework of scleractinia.

CONCLUSIONS
molecularly and morphologically, solitary desmophyllum dianthus and dendroid lophelia pertusa appear to be significantly more similar to each other than other unambiguous coral genera analysed to date. thus, following the iczn, we propose to ascribe these two species to the genus desmophyllum and to name them as d. dianthus and d. pertusum. findings of this study may have broader implications that should lead to re-consider the taxonomic value of growth forms , traditionally used to distinguish scleractinian genera. further integrative studies combining molecular, developmental biology and ecological environmental studies are required to test the potential conspecificity of d. dianthus and d. pertusum and provide more insights into the evolution of scleractinia.

