BACKGROUND
the enigmatic cambrian vetulicolians have been allied to various protostome and deuterostome animal lineages over the decades since their discovery. they were initially described as bivalved arthropods because their bipartite body was interpreted as an anterior carapace with a segmented abdomen extending beyond the carapace margins  <cit> . no segmental appendages have been found in any vetulicolian, and closest affinities to deuterostomes were instead proposed because of the presence of gill slits, a purported mesodermal skeleton and a possible endostyle  <cit> . in this context, vetulicolians were suggested to be either stem-group chordates  <cit>  or crown-group chordates most closely allied to tunicates  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses coding for characters in all known vetulicolians using both protostome and deuterostome taxa  <cit>  did not resolve the systematic position of the group, but suggested kinorhynchs and tunicates to be likely relatives under either a protostome or a deuterostome model, respectively.

the presence of pharyngeal gill slits, pouches, plus possible circular and longitudinal body-wall musculature ally vetulicolians with deuterostomes  <cit> , but their systematic position relative to the crown-group phyla has remained uncertain. the monophyly of vetulicolia has been regarded as an open question  <cit> , and most debate discusses whether they are either stem-group deuterostomes  <cit>  or stem-group chordates  <cit> . vetulicolia is now known from  <dig> species classified as nine genera, four families and two orders . most species have been described from cambrian series  <dig>  stages  <dig> and  <dig> in south china , supplemented by taxa from sirius passet  in greenland and the burgess shale  in western canada.

abundant, well-preserved material of a new vetulicolian from the early cambrian of australia extends the group’s distribution to east gondwana, and a new phylogenetic analysis provides evidence that vetulicolia are crown-group chordates, most closely related to tunicates.

RESULTS
systematics
this published work and the nomenclatural acts it contains have been registered in zoobank: http://zoobank.org/urn:lsid:zoobank.org:pub:d9915a7d-dd12-4031-aa36-d1879a96b6d <dig> 

class vetulicolida chen & zhou,  <dig> 

nesonektris aldridgei gen. et sp. nov.

lsid
urn:lsid:zoobank.org:act:31858511-031a-4098-9852-18b42757c <dig> 

etymology
nesos , greek for island; nektris , for swimmer. specific epithet in memory of dick aldridge, who led a pioneering effort to resolve vetulicolian affinities.

holotype
sam p45212a,b .figure  <dig> 
the early cambrian vetulicolian
nesonektris aldridgei
. a–c, holotype sam p45212a,b, specimen with distal end of posterior body region  folded over itself, anterior towards left; a, part, anterior rim exposed by preparation ; b, counterpart, with severed notochord ; c, camera lucida drawing, grey indicates sediment infill; d, sam p49084a, nearly complete specimen, only lacking one side of anterior region body; e, sam p48073a, nearly complete specimen; f, sam p48015a, nearly complete but folded specimen; showing fold on anterior region  and continuous connection between anterior and posterior body regions along the dorsal margin ; g, reconstruction; abbreviations: dk = dorsal keel; eb = epibionts; ism = intersegmental membrane; lg = lateral groove; nc = notochord; om = oral margin; vk = ventral keel; s1–s <dig> = posterior body region segment number; scale bars,  <dig> mm.
details of axial rod  of
nesonektris aldridgei
. a, sam p46336a, detail of four offset notochord fragments overlapping each other; b, holotype sam p <dig> , detail of displaced notochord at posterior end of body; c, sam p <dig>  detail of notochord with detached terminal block; d, sam p <dig>  posterior end of specimen with notochord displaced in s4; e, sam p43655a, detail of displaced notochord, with small offsets at regular intervals  corresponding to discs and larger displacement into blocks of discs ; f, partially decayed hagfish notochord, showing displacement of discs, image courtesy of robert sansom; scale bars,  <dig> mm  and  <dig> mm .



referred material
fifteen figured paratypes and c.  <dig> additional unfigured specimens .

locality and horizon
buck quarry, the wave-cut platform and coastal cliffs, big gully, kangaroo island, south australia; emu bay shale, pararaia janeae zone .

diagnosis
large vetulicolian with anterior and posterior body regions subequal in length. anterior region subquadrate, with vertical oral margin connected to dorsal and ventral keels. narrow lateral groove present, but no evidence of gill pouches. anterior and posterior regions connected mid-dorsally at an angle. elongate posterior region of seven segments, tapering after the fourth; terminal segment longer than others, ending in two lobes connected by a flat notch. internal rod-like structure extends along axis of posterior body region.

description
anterior and posterior body regions are often found disarticulated, with the most complete specimen 125 mm in length. extrapolation from incomplete specimens, however, suggests maximum sizes of over 170 mm in length. the anterior region is up to 70 mm long and 42 mm high, subquadrate anteriorly and slightly dorso-ventrally asymmetrical, tapering backwards. an oral marginal zone is of constant width, extending dorsally and ventrally into marginal keels that widen posteriorly, especially the ventral one, which reaches the axial posterior region. the anterior region is generally smooth, with some specimens showing a dimpled surface, and occasional wrinkles due to burial and compaction of the cuticularized body-wall . a thin lateral groove  extends longitudinally from the oral marginal zone to the posterior portion of the anterior body, but no openings  can be recognized in association. the internal cavity is occasionally filled by sediment , and several specimens  preserve a ventral food gutter . the posterior region  is up to 90 mm long and 40 mm high, and displaced towards the dorsal part of the animal , but not as much as in vetulicola . it is divided into  <dig> segments, connected by intersegmental membranes that become shorter and narrower distally . the anterior and posterior boundaries of the first segment  are at an approximate angle of 10–15° to one another, so s <dig> is narrower ventrally . length and width slightly increase caudally up to s <dig> and taper after s <dig>  s <dig> is consistently the shortest, while s <dig> is the longest but narrowest dorso-ventrally, tapering considerably and presenting a distal notch. dorsal flanges are present in all tail segments.figure  <dig> 
anterior and posterior body regions of the early cambrian vetulicolian
nesonektris aldridgei
. a, sam p49080a, showing the joint between the anterior region and the first segment of the posterior region , in its ventral area; notice the angle of the joint ; b, sam p49662a, specimen with intersegmental membranes imprinted on partially mineralized axial rod due to compaction during burial; c, sam p47152a, showing remains of food boluses  in ventral food gutter ; d, sam p47168b, with ventral food gutter; e, sam p49076a, anterior region partially infilled with sediment; f, sam p48105a, with ventral food gutter; additional abbreviations: vfg = ventral food gutter; figs d and f are mirror images of the original to aid with comparison with main figures in text ; scale bars,  <dig> mm.
posterior body regions of the early cambrian vetulicolian
nesonektris aldridgei
. a, sam p48093a,b part and counterpart, composite image; b, sam p48013a,b part and counterpart composite image; c, sam p49147a; mirror images have been used for a and b to aid with comparison with main figures in text ; additional abbreviations: α = angle of s <dig> segmental boundaries; abr, anterior body region; solid lines indicate limits of part and counterpart in composite images, while dashed lines indicate s <dig> segmental boundaries; scale bars,  <dig> mm.



a three-dimensional axial rod-like structure is restricted to the posterior region of nesonektris. it has a relatively constant width of about 20% the width of the whole tail – including the dorsal and ventral flanges – but fills a high proportion of the tail cavity. it reaches the distal end of the posteriormost segment, terminating in the caudal notch. it occasionally shows partition into sections that are offset or separated and frequently decoupled from the posterior segmentation of the body .

discussion
interpretation of the rod-like structure: notochord, gut or coelomic cavity?
we are doubtful about an identity of this axial rod as a gut, a structure that has been identified in several other vetulicolians  <cit> . a gut was shown, for example, by caron  <cit>  in some specimens of banffia , by hou  <cit>  in didazoon , and by aldridge et al.  <cit>  in vetulicola  and pomatrum . the gut in these taxa is represented by a typically narrow tube with continuous margins that originates in the anterior body region ; this tube can bulge and constrict along its length  and is often coiled , with its contents occasionally extending into the matrix beyond the terminal anus . in contrast, the larger, rod-like structure in nesonektris has a more constant width, is only present in the posterior body region and never extends beyond the distal end of that region. most notably, its partitioning into sections that are block-like and offset  is inconsistent with a gut in general or the known gut of vetulicolians in particular. it is situated medio-dorsally in the tail rather than ventrally . this structure is never found to be continuous with food boluses in the anterior body region ; in a specimen where they appear aligned they are in fact on different levels . a specimen of vetulicola from chengjiang also shows a rod that closely resembles this axial structure and was interpreted as a possible notochord . the posterior body region of other specimens of vetulicola  shows a coiled gut superimposed on an axial structure similar to that of nesonektris, indicating that they are two distinct structures and not taphonomic variants of the same feature. this superposition can be easily explained in the better preserved specimen illustrated by chen and zhou  in that the posterior region is preserved in dorso-ventral aspect, judging from the laterally disposed intersegmental membranes. the variable preservational aspects and three-dimensionality of this rod-like structure indicate that it is not an external cuticular feature. in the holotype, the part presents the cuticle wall from one side with the impression of the rod , while the counterpart has the rod  and the other cuticle wall under it . its consistent three-dimensional shape is possibly the result of early diagenetic mineralization, as opposed to the more unlikely explanation of passive sediment-infilling of a narrow, hollow structure  <cit> . the latter scenario would require sediment to have entered through the mouth, filled the anterior body cavity and overflowed into the tail cavity, resulting in a more irregular width and relief of the rod-like structure in the posterior body region, but this has not been observed in the available specimens of nesonektris; moreover, sediment infill would have a similar colour to the surrounding matrix, which is at odds with the differential colour of the rod-like structure. the complete mineralization of the rod may have occurred a considerable time after burial, as some specimens show intersegmental membranes impressed into the rod as a result of sediment compaction .

the frequent ‘disarticulation’ of the axial structure in the posterior region of nesonektris into a series of short discrete units is inconsistent with the architecture and structural integrity of the gut of vetulicolians, but shows striking similarities to the anatomy and initial decay of the notochord in chordates. in cephalochordates, larval urochordates and some larval vertebrates , the notochord comprises thin, stacked disc-shaped units enclosed in a sheath  <cit> . the observed notochord blocks  would correspond to sets with numerous discs; and smaller sets making up each sub-segmental block , with no individual discs being recognized with certainty. taphonomic experiments on chordates  <cit>  have shown that the notochord is highly decay-resistant, considerably more than the gut , with the contained tissue initially condensing and breaking up, often into blocks at regular intervals . this style of decay could explain the separated and offset sections of the axial structure in several specimens of nesonektris , possibly as a result of body contortion  and subsequent compaction during burial. this is supported by the fact that distorted, yet complete specimens of nesonektris are commonly preserved in siltstones – often associated with bent, fully articulated trilobite exoskeletons – that have been rapidly deposited by sediment gravity flows  <cit> . the blocks that are considerably displaced  can only be explained in the context of a notochord if the sheath had partially decayed and/or ruptured.

the interpretation of the axial structure as a notochord fits the putative functional morphology of the posterior region in vetulicolians. in modern chordates, the notochord is a major structural support and plays a role in locomotion by stiffening the body and assisting the antagonistic action of the muscles to generate lateral propulsive movements. in pelagic tunicates , the notochord, which plays a role in their undulatory swimming, is restricted to, and occupies a large area of the tail region  <cit> , proportionately similar to nesonektris and in the same dorso-ventral location of the tail. the large relative size of the rod of nesonektris did not affect the physical ability to bend smoothly during swimming, because the folded tail in specimens like the one in figure 1a-c indicates that flexibility was not compromised. the volume of the rod provided ample room for muscles, gut and other internal organs. recent evidence  <cit>  favours the flanges in the posterior region of vetulicolians being vertical and the tail flexing laterally . the intersegmental membranes – also present in nesonektris  – are bilaterally disposed and narrow towards the dorsal and ventral midline, and there is a dorso-ventral asymmetry in the most proximal segments of the tail due to the forward-slanted articulation with the antero-dorsal region .

counterarguments can be raised to the interpretation of the rod-like structure as a notochord, some based on inconsistencies in structure or inferred function, some based on correspondences to a gut or body cavity, and others taphonomic. these include the following:the rod-like structure of nesonektris has a considerable diameter, being larger than the notochord in modern adult chordates. this could raise questions about its physical properties, e.g. whether it was too bulky to bend and recoil efficiently during swimming. nevertheless, the rod-like structure also seems to be disproportionately large to be a gut, as it is wider than the ventral food gutter and considerably more so than the gut in other vetulicolians ;

guts are common in the cambrian fossil record, in part because they are prone to early diagenetic mineralization, whereas well-corroborated notochords have a depauperate cambrian record. although originally recognized in yunnanozoans as a thin anterior notochord, considerably thickening backwards , later studies question this interpretation  <cit> . pikaia was originally described as having a thick dorsal notochord, but this is now regarded as a ‘dorsal organ’, while the notochord is proposed to be very thin and in an axial position deep inside the body . the latest study on metaspriggina  identifies a thin , elongate strand lying on the midline, opposite the zone of myotomal closure as a notochord. in the early fish myllokunmingia, shu et al.  <cit>  describe a thin but fairly prominent strand  as the probable incomplete remains of the notochord. thus, most of the latest descriptions of cambrian chordates only refer to thin notochords, similar in position but different in width to the axial rod of nesonektris;

the rod-like structure ends terminally  at a depression , whereas notochords are usually more dorsally located and extend out into a post-anal tail  that tapers at the end.



another interpretation for the rod  is a coelomic cavity, as has been interpreted for a similarly positioned rod-like structure in yunnanozoon  <cit> . deuterostome affinities would imply a coelomic cavity that included the gut and other internal organs, such as gonads, and the considerable width of the rod-like structure is consistent with this. we are sceptical about it being a coelomic cavity because it is not feasible that a coelom would fragment into blocks or discs. rather, it would be expected that a thin bounding membrane  would instead have ruptured, leaving ragged edges, and spilled its content . however, the ‘dorsal organ’ of pikaia appears irregularly ruptured in a few specimens  beds, which is consistent with them being active swimmers in the water column and getting caught in the sediment gravity flows. despite the lack of gill pouches in the nesonektris specimens, which is regarded as preservational, there is evidence of food gutters with mineralized boluses . these food gutters fit the interpretation of ou et al.  <cit>  that vetulicolians were filter feeders. in this setting, the cavity in the anterior region may show sediment infill from the sediment flows , but this would not have been actively passed to the gut in the posterior region .

phylogenetic analysis
in our phylogenetic analysis based on maximum parsimony , taxon sampling, characters and coding largely follow those of mallatt and holland  <cit> . yunnanozoon has been subject to extreme differences in interpretation of its morphological structures depending on whether it is thought to be allied to vertebrates  <cit>  or to non-deuterostome bilaterians  <cit> . repeating the analysis with yunnanozoon excluded did not affect tree topology, and clade support also remained similar. the analysis was carried out with paup*  <cit>  on the new matrix  with a molecular scaffold constraining relationships between living taxa to preserve monophyly of ambulacraria  and of olfactores , which are robustly supported by phylogenomic data  <cit> . our results show that vetulicolians form a monophyletic group , rejecting the alternative hypothesis that they are a paraphyletic assemblage at the base of some other deuterostome group  <cit> . vetulicolia is resolved as sister group to the tunicates based on the shared presence of a distinctly bipartite body, a stiff cuticle, terminal  mouth, and a notochord restricted to the posterior region. this hypothesis of a vetulicolian-tunicate clade would be consistent with the cuticle of vetulicolians being homologous with a tunic . also supporting this hypothesis is the observed vestigial gut in the tail of larval tunicates and the dorsal segmentation in the early cambrian stem-tunicate shankouclava  <cit> . more broadly, vetulicolians are united with all other chordates based on the presence of a notochord, segmental muscles  <cit> , and a fusiform body in at least some part of their life cycle. as such, vetulicolians belong to both crown-group chordata  <cit>  and crown-group olfactores  . inclusion of nesonektris in the matrix  is not critical for resolution of vetulicolians as chordates: the same topology is retrieved without nesonektris. however, inclusion of this new taxon and coding the presence of a notochord increases support for most clades, e.g. bootstrap support increases by 13%, 5% and 6% for vetulicolia + urochordata, olfactores, and chordata, respectively, and bremer support for these nodes increases by  <dig> or  <dig>  although tunicate affinities for vetulicolians have previously been considered  <cit>  or endorsed  <cit> , we stress that this is not an inevitable result of coding vetulicolians as deuterostomes because several other suggested placements within deuterostomes could have been retrieved .figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic position of vetulicolians within deuterostomia. maximum parsimony analysis strict consensus of  <dig> cladograms , based on character matrix in additional file  <dig>  blue box encapsulates phylum chordata; daggers and red branches represent extinct taxa known only from fossils. parsimony-bootstrap values  and bremer support  are shown for analyses including/excluding the non-vetulicolian fossil taxa.
strict consensus of  <dig> cladograms, including all vetulicolian taxa. parsimony-bootstrap values  and bremer support  are shown for analyses as x/y/z: x = including non-vetulicolian fossil taxa; y = excluding the latter taxa; z = coding the notochord as ‘?’ in nesonektris . all trees  <dig> steps long.



unfortunately, the tree shows no resolution inside the vetulicolians . however, some characters may be homologous amongst some taxa and thus suggest particular clades within vetulicolians. most specimens of nesonektris are found flat on their sides , while figure 1f shows a specimen that is partially rotated along the axis. a partial “twist” has been described in the body of heteromorphus  and a well-developed torsion is found in banffia  <cit> , whose posterior region also ends in a notch , but has numerous  segments. banffia’s cylindrical, anterior region has two “narrow, oblique grooves”, which we consider homologous to the lateral grooves in other vetulicolians, and it also lacks evidence for lateral pouches. a subset of the shortest cladograms positions nesonektris as an intermediate form between vetulicola-type  and banffia-type morphologies.

in the above analysis, nesonektris was scored with the notochord characters; other vetulicolians were conservatively treated as unknown for these notochord traits. repeating the analysis with nesonektris  scored as unknown for notochord characters  yields the same tree topology, albeit with a slight drop in support values for the two relevant nodes . thus, the interpretation of vetulicolians as tunicate relatives  does not hinge on the assumption that they possess a notochord. rather, this interpretation is supported independently by the derived characters they share with urochordates, and the high position of urochordates within chordates revealed by phylogenomic data. characters that optimise as apomorphic for a tunicate-vetulicolian clade  are: distinct anterior and posterior body regions ; a thick cuticle ; a non-fusiform body, at least in larval stages ; terminal position of the mouth ; absence of pharyngeal bars ; and a notochord restricted to the posterior region of the body .

CONCLUSIONS
the phylogenetic affinity between vetulicolians and tunicates has significant implications for the ancestral morphology of the urochordata , which has been a continuing conundrum in chordate phylogeny  <cit> . the olfactores concept suggests that successive living sister taxa to tunicates are vertebrates and cephalochordates  <cit> , thus indicating that tunicates are derived from a free-swimming, segmented, amphioxus-like animal with a notochord, neural crest cells , neural tube, striated heart muscle and segmented lateral muscles, but lacking an atrium  <cit> . the dorsal segmentation of the tail in the cambrian shankouclava  <cit>  points to actively-moving, ascidian-like early tunicates. the common ancestor to the vetulicolian + tunicate clade is inferred to have been a pelagic animal with a thick cuticle for protection, a large filter-feeding pharynx in the anterior body region, and a segmented, propelling posterior region with a notochord and a terminal anus. if the free-swimming appendicularians are considered basal to all other tunicates  <cit> , the most parsimonious scenario implies that the common ancestor of tunicates also retained all these traits; the benthic sessile adult morphology in many tunicates  optimises as a derived specialisation  <cit> .

the vetulicolians could have filled the ecological niche of medium-large suspension feeders in the cambrian, supporting the idea that chordates arose as a clade of suspension feeders , rather than as predators. they would have been blind and slow moving, but relying on their size and tough cuticle for protection. the interpretation of vetulicolian morphology has been fraught with problems  <cit> , but mounting evidence, notably the presence of pharyngeal gill slits  <cit> , indicates that they belong to the deuterostome total group  <cit> . evidence for a possible notochord in vetulicolians provides new support for placing this abundant and diverse cambrian group more crownward and, as a consequence, substantially increases the diversity, disparity and abundance of cambrian chordates  <cit> .

