BACKGROUND
oxidative stress  is an important factor in brain aging and some neurodegenerative diseases  <cit> . under normal conditions, the processes of generating and scavenging reactive oxygen  and nitrogen species  are in equilibrium. excessive production of ros or rns leads to oxidative modification and altered functional states of proteins, nucleic acids, and lipids. during aging and in certain diseased states, this equilibrium is disrupted and selectively affects neuronal survival in specific brain regions. the selective effects of os on neurons are manifested as cell death in restricted populations of neurons while many other neurons appear to cope with the stress induced by excess ros or rns production  <cit> . selective neuronal vulnerability , such as that seen following os, has also been observed following other brain insults, for example, glutamate excitotoxicity, ischemia, or β-amyloid-induced neurotoxicity  <cit> . in order to shed more light on snv in general, transcriptomic analyses of neurons that exhibit differential vulnerability to various insults or to the damage brought about by neurological diseases have been performed in human and rodent hippocampus and human midbrain dopaminergic neurons  <cit> . however, none of these studies except for the one on dopaminergic neurons focused on a specific form of stress, or on genes or bio-functions that might contribute to the etiology of snv.

it is important to note that a common pathway to neuronal injury resulting from the various forms of brain insult mentioned above is believed to be that of induction of intracellular os. yet, there is currently little information on the mechanisms for snv to os. since os-sensitive neurons might be the ones that degenerate early during the aging process or in certain neurodegenerative diseases  <cit> , study of the molecular mechanisms of snv to os may offer insights into both aging-associated and disease-initiated neurodegeneration, as well as provide leads to the protection of vulnerable neurons. to study the relationship between snv and os, we thought it necessary to determine differences in the redox status and os-handling capacity of both os-sensitive and os-resistant neurons. in a previous study, we found molecular indications of an intrinsically high level of oxidative activity under baseline conditions in os-vulnerable ca <dig> when compared with os-resistant ca <dig> neurons in organotypic cultures maintained in vitro  <cit> . in a subsequent study, we examined how neurons in ca <dig> and ca <dig> responded differentially to os increases in terms of the neuronal gene expression patterns and we identified genes whose expression distinguished the responses of ca <dig> from those of ca <dig> neurons  <cit> . since our previous studies were performed on neurons maintained in vitro in organotypic cultures, the patterns of gene expression might not have been identical to those of neurons in the intact brain in vivo. furthermore, in order to advance our understanding of mechanisms of snv to os, it was considered important to probe for differences between vulnerable and resistant neurons extracted from several brain regions besides the hippocampus pyramidal neuron layers, and to do so with neurons in their native states.

the identification and inclusion of more than two neuronal populations that are either susceptible or resistant to os should help in revealing more generalized patterns of gene expression associated with snv. this was thought to be the case as some of the results obtained from comparative analyses of only ca <dig> vs. ca <dig> may simply reflect regional or ontogenetic differences between these two neuronal populations rather than selective vulnerabilities to stressors like os. in initial studies described in this paper, we found that cerebellar granule  cells were a group of cells that were quite vulnerable to os, whereas neurons from the cerebral cortex were relatively resistant. based on these observations, we included both cortical and cbg neurons to our genomic and biochemical investigations of snv. in order to identify endogenous predisposing factors that may lead to the selective vulnerability of ca <dig> and cbg neurons to os, we employed laser capture microdissection  to collect these target neurons from freshly prepared brain sections under basal conditions , and compared their transcriptomic profile with that of the ca <dig> and cortex neurons. following the findings obtained from the functional genomics study, targeted biochemical analyses on key antioxidant enzymes and atp generation were carried out.

RESULTS
cbg as well as ca <dig> neurons exhibit vulnerability to os
we first attempted to determine if primary neuronal cultures of cbg and cerebral cortical cells were differentially sensitive to os. despite the caveat that studies performed with neurons grown in vitro may not reflect exactly the responses of neurons in vivo, primary neuronal cultures were used in these studies because they are composed of approximately 90–95% neurons. thus, differential responses to os could be directly attributed to specific characteristics of neurons from these two brain regions. oxidative stress was induced by exposing the neuronal cultures to various concentrations of paraquat . paraquat induces os by generating superoxide in neurons through the process of one-electron reduction by the flavoenzyme nadph-cytochrome p <dig> reductase  <cit> . increases in paraquat concentration led to a dose-dependent increase in cell death in both types of neurons, but the effect of paraquat on neuronal survival was greater for cbg than cerebral cortical neurons. for example, treatment with the highest concentration of paraquat  caused approximately 80% neuronal death in cbg but 40% in cerebral cortical neurons . two-way anova indicated that the effect of paraquat treatment on survival in the two types of cells was statistically significant . the viability of cbg neurons was significantly lower than that of cortical neurons across all paraquat concentrations .

since oxygen  tension in the ambient air surrounding the medium of primary neuronal cultures is ~20% , i.e., higher than that in the body, an important difference between neurons in culture as compared with those in the intact brain may be the fact that primary neurons in culture are continuously exposed to high o <dig> concentrations and, possibly, some level of os. thus, the effects of paraquat on cell viability of primary neurons might have been a combined effect of exposure of these neurons to increased o <dig> tension and to paraquat. in order to determine whether different levels of o <dig> tension, in the absence of an ros-generating chemical agent, were associated with differential neuronal viability, we compared neuronal survival over  <dig> days in vitro  for neurons in cultures maintained under either reduced  or high o <dig>  atmosphere. while high o <dig> tension had no significant effect on the survival of cerebral cortical neurons grown in culture for  <dig> and  <dig> div when compared with survival in low o <dig> tension, the survival of cortical neurons grown for  <dig> days under reduced o <dig> tension  exhibited significantly higher survival than neurons grown for  <dig> div under high o <dig>  tension . the effect of high o <dig> tension on the survival of cbg neurons was greater than that on cerebral cortical neurons. cbg neurons grown for either  <dig> or  <dig> div under 5% o <dig> tension had significantly higher survival than those grown under 20% o <dig> tension . two-way anova testing the effects of neuronal type and o <dig> tension on cell viability showed that, overall, cortical neurons had significantly higher viability than cbg neurons . three-way anova testing time of exposure, o <dig> tension, and cell type showed significant interactions . post-hoc analyses using the holm-sidak method indicated significant effects of time of exposure , o <dig> tension , and cell type  on cell viability. these data demonstrated that, even in the absence of agents that generate intracellular ros, cbg neurons were more sensitive to changes in environmental o <dig> tension than cortical neurons.

the conditions of primary cultures of cerebral cortical neurons differed from those used in primary cultures of cbg neurons and may thus have affected the overall response of these two types of neurons to paraquat-induced os. in order to determine the effects of os under uniform conditions of cell growth and maintenance in vitro, we also examined the effects of paraquat on neuronal viability in organotypic slice cultures of cerebral cortex and cerebellum. the conditions of growth of slice cultures were the same for both cortical and cerebellar cultures. organotypic slice cultures would also allow us to determine if the differential vulnerability of cbg and cortical neurons observed in primary neuronal cultures would be observed in brain sections that contain both neurons and glia. organotypic slice cultures maintain a relatively normal brain cyto-architecture while cells are growing in culture. such cultures were previously used by us and others to document the differential vulnerability to os of hippocampus neurons of the ca <dig> and ca <dig> regions  <cit> . in these previous studies, the superoxide-generating agent employed was duroquinone. but, in the present studies, the investigations were expanded to include a different agent whose metabolism leads to superoxide formation, paraquat, and thus assess whether the cell death produced was related to the common property of these two chemical agents, i.e., superoxide generation in cells.

in the present study, we employed organotypic slice cultures of cerebral cortex, cerebellar cortex, and hippocampus, including the ca <dig> and ca <dig> regions, all grown and exposed to either paraquat or vehicle under identical conditions. but, since the intent was to obtain neurons from freshly prepared brain slices for the purpose of transcriptomic analyses, i.e., fresh tissue at near in vivo conditions, we also examined the effects of paraquat on neuronal viability in hippocampus, cerebral and cerebellar cortex in acute brain slice preparations. the acute slice preparations were obtained from adult rats whereas those maintained in vitro for prolonged periods were obtained from 6– <dig> day-old pups. in the slice cultures maintained under prolonged incubation conditions in vitro, paraquat  was applied to the brain slices after they were in culture for one week and the effects on neuronal survival assessed  <dig> h after exposure to paraquat or vehicle. in the case of acutely prepared slices, the slices were incubated in culture medium for only a period of two hours before the same paraquat treatment. although the cell survival rate was lower, in general, in cultures established from adult animals in comparison to those from young pups, greater neuronal death following paraquat exposure was observed in the ca <dig> and cbg regions as compared with the ca <dig> and cerebral cortex, and that was the case in both prolonged organotypic slice cultures and acute slice preparations . thus, in terms of sensitivity to os, cbg neurons were similar to ca <dig> hippocampus neurons, whereas cortical neurons were similar to ca <dig> neurons. the presence of glial cells in slice cultures did not seem to alter the relative vulnerability of cbg and cortical neurons to os.

comparative biochemical analyses of cbg and cerebral cortical neurons
the observed differential sensitivity of cbg and cortical neurons to paraquat and superoxide-induced os, regardless of the culture type, culture conditions, or the relative chronicity of in vitro incubation of the cultures, afforded a good opportunity to conduct preliminary studies to determine whether differences in either the metabolism of paraquat or in the handling of superoxide by neurons might account for the differential vulnerabilities between these two neuronal populations. as mentioned above, paraquat generates superoxide anions through one-electron transfer reactions catalyzed by nadph-cytochrome p <dig> reductase. therefore, we first focused on potential differences in the levels of nadph-cytochrome p <dig> reductase between cbg and cortical neurons. the protein levels of this enzyme were higher in cerebral cortical than cbg neurons . based on these observations, it might have been expected that cortical neurons would be more susceptible to superoxide generation than cbg neurons. however, this was not the case. thus, enhanced superoxide formation by cytochrome p <dig> reductase could not account for the greater sensitivity of cbg neurons to os.

we next considered the possibility that the vulnerable neurons expressed lower levels of key anti-oxidant enzymes. cu/zn-sod , mn-sod  and glutathione peroxidase , were selected as oxidoreductases whose differential levels of expression might determine differential vulnerabilities to os. the levels of sod <dig> and gpx <dig> did not differ significantly between cerebral cortical and cbg neurons . however, the protein levels of sod <dig> were  <dig>  times higher in cbg than cortical neurons . thus, based on endogenous sod <dig> levels, it might have been predicted that cbg neurons would be more resistant than cortical neurons, which was not the case. it is possible that because these studies were performed using primary cultures maintained at 20% oxygen atmosphere, the elevated sod <dig> levels in cbg neurons might have reflected an enhanced response of these neurons to os induced that might have been induced by the high o <dig> tension present under the culture conditions used.

to determine if exposure of cerebral cortical and cbg neurons to os that was produced through increased superoxide generation could affect the expression of the three oxidoreductases, the levels of sod <dig>  sod <dig>  and gpx <dig> were measured in neurons treated with paraquat . statistical analyses showed that the levels of sod <dig> were not significantly altered following treatment of either cbg or cortical neurons with paraquat. however, the levels of both sod <dig> and gpx <dig> were significantly increased in cbg but not cortical neurons following exposure to paraquat. results of two-way anova indicated that sod <dig> content was in general significantly higher in cbg vs. cerebral cortical neurons . therefore, the higher levels of sod <dig> in cbg as compared with cortical neurons grown in primary cultures could reflect an adaptive response to exposure to elevated levels of o <dig> tension and the resulting os.

overall, these results indicated that the os-vulnerable cbg neurons had the capacity to respond to increases in os through the expression of higher sod <dig> levels as compared with cortical neurons. furthermore, cbg neurons showed much greater up-regulation of gpx <dig> than did cerebral cortical neurons following exposure to paraquat. this would suggest that cbg neurons would be equally or more protected from os-induced cell death than cortical neurons. in conclusion, cbg neurons neither had reduced capacity to generate superoxide from paraquat nor reduced levels of anti-oxidant enzymes that protect neurons from os. these relatively straightforward explanations of possible mechanisms of differential vulnerabilities of neurons to os failed to reveal a pathway that might account for these differential properties of neurons. for this reason, the subsequent studies were focused on a more global approach to characterization of differentiating molecular pathways among the neurons derived from each of the four regions of rat brain that exhibited differential susceptibility to os.

comparative transcriptome analyses of os-vulnerable and os-resistant neurons under basal conditions
in order to obtain a global view of molecular processes that might predispose ca <dig> and cbg neurons to greater sensitivity to os compared with ca <dig> and cerebral cortical neurons, we performed transcriptomic analyses of neurons from these four brain regions. these studies were performed under basal conditions, i.e., no paraquat-induced exogenous os. in order to minimize non-target noise that might result from variations in sample collection and preparation, we employed lcm for the collection of highly homogeneous neuronal populations  <cit> . the homogeneity in the neuronal populations collected from the four designated brain regions is shown in the representative sections in fig 4a. the cryosections used for lcm were prepared from rat brains frozen immediately after sacrifice, thus preserving, as much as possible, their native state in the brain and allowing us to assess the molecular differences among neurons under conditions that are likely to exist in vivo. the conditions for lcm dissection and recovery of neurons from the four brain regions were similar to those employed in the preparation of the acute adult brain slices that were used to detect the differential responses of neurons to paraquat-induced os. thus, uncovering differences under basal, near in vivo conditions, in the transcriptomic patterns between neurons that were vulnerable and those that were resistant to os, might be indicative of the molecular pathways that are involved in determining the differential sensitivities to os. because the transcriptomic analyses planned were focused on differences detected under basal conditions, the rats used in the microarray studies were not subjected to any treatment that would induce os.

excellent reproducibility among replicate samples in genechip analysis was achieved. non-target, systematic noise was very low. the mean correlation coefficient between replicate chips was  <dig>  . condition tree and principal components analysis  further supported the high reproducibility and low noise achieved in these studies . these analyses were based on genome-wide gene expression profiles and showed that samples from each brain region formed a cluster distinguishable from those from the other regions, regardless of the experimental animal from which the neurons were derived. this pattern indicated that each homogeneous neuronal population, e.g., the ca <dig> region neuronal population, had its own distinct transcriptome profile.

for the planned comparative transcriptome analyses, however, we were interested not in the distinguishing characteristics between one neuronal population and another, as such studies have been performed previously  <cit> , but in those characteristics that defined vulnerability vs. resistance to os. therefore, we classified the neuronal samples into two groups, i.e., neurons vulnerable to os  and those resistant . this approach was expected to focus the analyses of differential gene expression on the common characteristics that might determine sensitivity to os. based on the volcano plot analysis shown in fig  <dig>  there were  <dig> genes that were differentially expressed in os-vulnerable as compared with os-resistant neurons . after adjusting for multiple testing, the benjamini and hochberg false discovery rate was  <dig> . of the  <dig> genes,  <dig> were expressed at significantly higher levels in the os-resistant neurons , while  <dig> genes were expressed more highly in os-vulnerable neurons . additional file  <dig>  lists the subpopulation of genes in the volcano plot whose expression was ≥  <dig> -fold in vulnerable as compared with resistant neurons, or the reverse. uncharacterized genes were not included in additional file  <dig> 

in an effort to confirm that the identified genes were a core set of genes whose expression under basal conditions could differentiate between neurons vulnerable and those resistant to os, an alternative target-gene identification approach was performed. in this alternative approach, we compared gene expression profiles between ca <dig> and ca <dig> and identified differentially expressed genes between them. likewise, gene expression data generated from cbg and cerebral cortical neurons were also compared and differential gene expression patterns between them were identified. a comparison of convergent genes from the two independent comparisons and the target genes identified using the group-based approach described above  revealed the following: a) 91% of the  <dig> resistant-neuron-higher genes  were convergent genes that were expressed at higher levels in ca <dig> and cortex in the two independent comparisons; and b) 94% of the  <dig> vulnerable-neuron-higher genes  were convergent genes that were expressed at higher levels in ca <dig> and cbg neurons in the two independent comparisons. these findings suggested that the target genes identified from our group-based approach can be used to differentiate neurons vulnerable to os from those that are resistant with a high degree of accuracy.

in order to evaluate the potential functional differences between os-resistant and os-vulnerable neurons, we performed a comparative analysis on key biological functions associated with the two lists of genes that were expressed more highly either in os-vulnerable or os-resistant neurons. the core comparison analysis module in the ingenuity pathways analysis  package allowed us to gain an overview of key differences between the two types of neurons in terms of their respective gene transcriptomes . overall, neurons in the vulnerable group showed higher transcriptional activity for genes related to gene expression, nucleic acid damage repair, rna trafficking and post-transcriptional modification, and immune response, while those in the resistant group had higher activities in cell signaling, cell function and maintenance, lipid metabolism, and energy production.

we subsequently conducted a series of in-depth bioinformatic analyses of the genes that were differentially expressed in the two populations of neurons. the first of these was the gene ontology  characterization, i.e., the determination of biological processes, molecular functions, and cellular components linked to groups of genes with differential expression patterns  <cit> . in this study, we used a statistical model based on the hypergeometric distribution implemented in mappfinder  <cit> . go terms enriched with genes which were differentially expressed in vulnerable and resistant neurons are shown in table  <dig>  a close examination of the results from this analysis and a comparison with those of the ipa analysis showed that there were many common biological functions or processes identified by the two types of analyses. the major functional groups identified by the go analyses among genes expressed more highly in vulnerable as compared with resistant neurons were: 1) dna repair and response to dna damage; 2) regulation of transcription; and 3) intramolecular oxidoreductase activity. the go category of regulation of transcription included a transcription factor that functions as a sensor of hypoxia, hypoxia-inducible factor  <dig> , a glucocorticoid receptor, nuclear receptor subfamily 3/group c/member  <dig> , that controls inflammatory responses in cells, and a transcriptional co-activator of steroid receptors, rnpc <dig>  in addition, one of the transcription factors that transactivates nr3c <dig>  the pou family homeodomain transcription factor pou2f <dig>  <cit> , was also expressed at higher levels in vulnerable compared with resistant neurons, possibly indicating the importance of inflammatory responses and glucocorticoid receptor signaling in os-vulnerable neurons. one transcription factor shown in table  <dig>  chromobox  <dig> , and another listed in additional file  <dig> as more highly expressed in os-vulnerable neurons, mad homolog  <dig> , are involved in maintaining cells in a transcriptionally repressed state and repressing cyclin-dependent cell cycling  <cit> . elevated expression of genes involved in suppression of cell cycling might be a cell defense against neuronal de-differentiation and cell death  <cit> . in the last go category enriched with genes more highly expressed in vulnerable than resistant neurons, there were only two genes, protein disulfide-isomerase a <dig> precursor  and emopamil binding protein . both pdia <dig> and ebp are isomerases, both may control ca2+ homeostasis in cells, and both are located in the endoplasmic reticulum   <cit> . ebp is 3-β-hydroxysteroid-Δ7-Δ8-isomerase that binds drugs that have anti-ischemic properties, such as emopamil and ifenprodil  <cit> . based on the differential expression of the genes described above, the general go category of stress-defense-response genes was identified by go analysis as being more highly expressed in os-vulnerable compared with os-resistant neurons. this go category is populated by genes in categories of "dna repair", "response to dna damage stimulus", and "intramolecular oxidoreductase activity". this is in agreement with the results from the ipa comparative analysis which identified "dna damage and repair" and "immune system development and function" among the key functions more prevalent in neurons vulnerable to os.

* bp – biological process; cc – cellular component; mf – molecular function

the go categories that contained genes with higher expression in os-resistant vs. os-sensitive neurons were those of energy generation and carbohydrate metabolism, as well as action potential, neurotransmission, calcium signaling, and regulation of signal transduction. related go terms such as "calcium- and calmodulin-dependent protein kinase activity", "regulation of signal transduction", "neurotransmitter transport", "synaptic vesicle", "regulation of neurotransmitter secretion", and "regulation of action potential" were enriched with genes expressed at higher levels in os-resistant than os-vulnerable neurons. the go terms "energy derivation by oxidation of organic compounds" and "main pathways of carbohydrate metabolism" were also enriched with genes that were expressed at higher levels in resistant as compared with vulnerable neurons. these results matched some of the key categories identified through the use of the ipa analysis, in particular, the two major categories of genes expressed more highly in os-resistant than os-vulnerable neurons, "cell-to cell signaling and interaction" and "energy production".

in the present studies, os-resistant neurons had significantly lower transcription levels of genes that fell in the go categories of "defense response"  and "immune response"  compared with os-vulnerable neurons. these results are not shown in table  <dig> as only go terms with positive z scores are included in that table. the negative z scores associated with the go terms "defense response" and "immune response" might indicate that either the genes in these two categories were down-regulated in resistant neurons or they were more highly expressed in vulnerable neurons.

to explore further the biological significance of differences in gene expression between os-vulnerable and os-resistant neurons, the patterns of differential gene expression were analyzed to determine the role of such genes in defined biological pathways. using a statistical model similar to the go analysis, biological pathway analysis assembles genes  into categories of functions that fit certain biological tasks or processes. our analysis covered nearly all the currently known biological pathways deposited in various databases, including the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes   <cit> , biocarta  <cit>  and genmapp  <cit> . although this approach is different from that of the ipa and go analyses, the results of pathway analysis  showed substantial agreement with those of ipa and go analyses.

the pyrimidine metabolism pathway, enriched with genes expressed more highly in os-vulnerable compared with os-resistant neurons, and the citrate  cycle biological pathway, enriched with genes more highly expressed in os-resistant than os-vulnerable neurons corresponded, to some extent, to the theme of dna damage/repair and energy derivation/carbohydrate metabolism shown in fig  <dig> and table  <dig>  the biological pathway analyses, however, revealed some new pathways, such as the alanine/aspartate metabolism pathway that was enriched with genes more highly expressed in os-vulnerable vs. os-resistant neurons, and the signal transduction, prostaglandin synthesis, and actin cytoskeleton regulation pathways that were enriched with genes expressed more highly in os-resistant vs. os-vulnerable neurons . the signal transduction pathways included the mapk cascade, wnt signaling, insulin signaling, and g-protein signaling pathways. some of the genes in the biological pathways listed in table  <dig> may also be involved in cell signaling and may have a neuroprotective function, for example, the annexin iv , annexin v , and annexin vi  genes  <cit> .

pathway analysis identified four genes belonging to the protein ubiquitination pathway as expressed more highly in os-vulnerable than os-resistant neurons. this pathway did not reach statistical significance due to the large number of genes involved. nevertheless, the four genes whose expression was high in os-sensitive neurons, usp <dig> , usp <dig> , usp <dig>  and ube2e <dig> , may be indicators of high stress in vulnerable neurons.

the biological function of energy generation was populated by genes expressed more highly in os-resistant than os-vulnerable neurons. we performed gene networking analyses on genes related to cell energy generation using information from currently available literature data . this in silico network construct identified several of the energy-generating genes in the network that were expressed more highly in neurons from regions resistant to os. these genes included eno <dig>  idh <dig>  idh3a, ldha, me <dig>  and pfkp. genes that interact with eno <dig>  idh <dig>  idh3a, ldha, me <dig>  and pfkp were identified by gene networking analyses and included cap <dig>  egf, grem <dig> and tgfb <dig>  the function of these five genes is related to cell development, including differentiation and proliferation, and cell-to-cell signaling and interaction. the gene network analysis suggested a link between energy production and the high energy demand for cell signaling in os-resistant neurons. direct experimental evidence on differential levels of energy reserves, i.e., atp levels, in os-vulnerable and os-resistant neurons is presented below.

comparison of gene expression vs. protein levels of sod <dig>  sod <dig> and gpx1
the expression of genes for cellular oxidoreductases known to protect neurons and other cells from os, i.e., those for sod <dig>  sod <dig>  or gpx <dig>  was examined for possible differential patterns of transcriptional regulation of these enzymes. the microarray data on sod <dig>  gpx <dig>  and sod <dig> indicated no significant differences in expression between cbg and cerebral cortical neurons. the lack of differential expression of the genes for sod <dig> and gpx <dig> was anticipated based on the lack of any differences in sod <dig> and gpx <dig> protein levels between cbg and cerebral cortical neurons in culture in the absence of added os stimuli. but, whereas the protein levels of sod <dig> were  <dig>  times higher in cbg compared with cerebral cortical neurons in cultures without the added stimulus of paraquat-induced os, the sod <dig> gene levels were only marginally higher in os-vulnerable compared with os-resistant neurons captured from fresh brain sections by lcm . thus, the higher protein expression levels of sod <dig> in cbg neurons in culture might have been the result of exposure of primary neurons to the increased o <dig> tension in culture.

confirmation of genechip data with real-time quantitative pcr
the results of the microarray analyses were validated by real-time quantitative pcr  measurements of the expression of select genes. these genes were: nefl, neurofilament, light polypeptide; tf, transferrin; mt1a, metallothionein 1a; and nfe2l <dig> , nuclear factor, erythroid derived  <dig>  like  <dig>  the selection of these genes was based on two criteria: 1) their expression profiles were representative of most genes on the array in terms of the range of transcript abundance levels and expression ratios between vul and res neurons; and 2) the genes were considered important in terms of differential vulnerability of cells to os  <cit> . for all selected genes, the qpcr data confirmed the relative expression ratios in vul vs. res neurons . among the four genes, three  showed similar ratios of expression as determined by microarray and qpcr. for nefl, the array analysis showed a ratio of  <dig>   whereas the ratio estimated by qpcr indicated only slightly lower expression in vul as compared with res neurons . this difference might have been due to the fact that the targeted gene regions for detection by the two approaches were different. the genechip probe set targeted the last exon  of nefl, while the qpcr analysis, because of constraints in primer design, targeted exons 1– <dig>  despite this difference, the patterns of expression of the four genes estimated by qpcr were consistent with those estimated by microarray analyses.

comparative levels of atp generation in cbg and cortical neurons in primary cultures
the results of genomic analyses indicated that neurons vulnerable to os had a lower expression of genes involved in energy generation. to determine if this would be true in neurons maintained in culture, we measured the levels of atp in primary cbg and cerebral cortical neurons, both before and after os induction. the atp levels of cbg neurons under basal conditions were approximately 25% lower than those of cerebral cortical neurons, but this difference was not statistically significant. however, when exposed to os, atp levels in both cell types dropped, but they did so more precipitously and significantly in cbg than cortical neurons . two-way anova on the combined data of all paraquat concentrations showed that, overall, cbg neurons had significantly lower atp levels than cortical neurons . in addition, the anova results demonstrated that paraquat had a significant effect on atp levels . to explore further the relationship between os and atp levels in these two populations of neurons, we measured changes in the levels of atp in cbg and cortical neurons under two different levels of o <dig> tension . while the atp levels in cerebral cortical neurons were not significantly altered by growing them for  <dig> and  <dig> div under 20% o <dig> tension, the levels dropped to significantly lower values  in neurons maintained for  <dig> div under high o <dig> tension when compared with those maintained under 5% o <dig> . cbg neurons were more sensitive to the different levels of oxygen and showed significant decreases in atp levels at both  <dig> and  <dig> div for cells exposed to 20% o <dig> tension compared with those maintained at 5% o <dig> . two-way anova on combined data of cerebral cortical and cbg neurons demonstrated, once again, that cerebral cortical neurons had significantly more atp than cbg neurons .

discussion
differential sensitivity of neurons to os was shown in the present study to be a property of four different neuronal populations, hippocampal pyramidal neurons from two adjacent regions, ca <dig> and ca <dig>  and neurons from two distant regions of the brain, cbg and cerebral cortex neurons. selective neuronal vulnerability has been observed in many previous studies in association with neurodegenerative diseases, such as alzheimer's disease that affects primarily neurons in the cerebral cortex, hippocampus and amygdala  <cit> , parkinson's disease that is associated with the death of dopaminergic neurons of the substantia nigra  <cit> , and amyotrophic lateral sclerosis that is related to degeneration of cortical, brain stem and, especially, spinal motor neurons  <cit> . in addition, within a single brain region, such as the human or rodent hippocampus, selective vulnerability of ca <dig> vs. ca <dig> neurons has been observed following episodes of global cerebral ischemia  <cit> , early phases of alzheimer's disease  <cit> , chronic epileptic seizures  <cit> , and os  <cit> . os is a common denominator among these various adverse conditions. for this reason, in the present study, as well as in our previous studies, we focused on the selective vulnerability of neurons to os.

there are only a few studies that have compared the sensitivity of cbg to cerebral cortical neurons. oxygen and glucose deprivation followed by re-oxygenation revealed a much greater susceptibility of cbg than cerebral cortical primary neurons to these stressful conditions, and the same is true for the toxicity induced by methyl-mercury treatment of primary neurons  <cit> . oxygen and glucose deprivation also caused greater suppression of atp levels in cbg than cortical cells. the effects of these manipulations were attributed to a higher sensitivity of cbg neurons to os as compared with cerebral cortical cells. for example, methyl mercury exposure leads to the generation of higher levels of intracellular ros in cbg than in cortical neurons  <cit>  and ischemia/re-oxygenation is known to produce os. based on the observations made in the present study with primary neuronal and organotypic slice cultures, as well as those in the studies cited above, there appears to be marked differential susceptibility of cbg and cerebral cortical neurons to os. in the present study, we found that cbg neurons exhibited significantly lower viability in primary cultures than cerebral cortical neurons, even prior to os treatment. the difference in neuronal viability between the two populations of neurons might have been related to an intrinsically high stress response of cbg neurons. nevertheless, the lower survival rate of cbg neurons even in the absence of os was not viewed as an invalidation of the findings that cbg neurons were more vulnerable to os than cortical neurons. the differential vulnerability of cbg neurons to os induced by paraquat when compared with that of cortical neurons was demonstrated by the fact that the rate of cell loss was greater in cbg than cerebral cortical neurons at every paraquat concentration to which the neurons were exposed .

the differences in responses to os between cbg and cerebral cortical neurons were observed under strong conditions of os, such as exposure to paraquat , treatment with methyl mercury  <cit> , or exposure to oxygen-glucose deprivation and re-oxygenation  <cit> , as well as under milder stimuli of os, i.e., growth of neurons under 20% o <dig> tension. all previous studies comparing relative cbg and cortical neuron susceptibility to os were performed with neuronal cultures maintained under ambient atmospheric, i.e., 20% o <dig> tension  <cit> . but, as we showed in the present study, exposure of cbg neurons, in particular, to this level of o <dig> tension produces cellular os that leads to reduced survival of neurons in culture. future studies examining differences in responses to os and the molecular processes that determine differential sensitivities to os, should be performed with neurons that were grown under low o <dig> tension.

since os plays an important role in the aging process, the study of the fate of cbg neurons during the aging process might be viewed as a model of possible selective vulnerability of these neurons to os. there is evidence that the cerebellum granule cell layer undergoes both a loss of cbg neurons as well as degenerative changes in their structure as a result of aging. stereological studies of human cerebellum have shown that the number of cbg neurons is significantly decreased  in aged individuals  <cit> . moreover, there is a notable diminution of cell volume, axons and synapses in the remaining neurons  <cit> . a similar trend has been observed in other mammalian brains as well  <cit>  and such cell losses and structural changes may be related to the poor motor coordination, impaired motor learning, and loss of muscular tone that occur with advancing age.

our initial studies of protein expression levels in cbg and cerebral cortical neurons in culture failed to identify a causal relationship between enzyme levels for cellular oxidoreductases and cbg neuron susceptibility to os. specifically, cbg neurons expressed higher levels of sod <dig> and gpx <dig> than cerebral cortical neurons did in response to increases in os, yet cbg cells were not better protected from os. whatever molecular differences exist between these two types of neurons to account for their differential vulnerability to os, the differences could not be overcome by the greater increases in os-induced sod <dig> and gpx <dig> levels in cbg neurons. these results indicate that it is the expression of genes and gene products other than general oxidoreductases that impart either enhanced susceptibility of cbg cells or increased resistance of cortical neurons to os. if this interpretation is valid, then other populations of os-vulnerable and os-resistant neurons, such as the ca <dig> and ca <dig> neurons of the hippocampus, might exhibit some patterns of gene expression that are similar to those of cbg and cortical neurons.

the transcriptomic analyses performed on cbg, ca <dig>  ca <dig> and cerebral cortical neurons that were captured from brain sections under basal conditions, revealed that each neuronal population expressed distinguishable clusters of genes. nevertheless, by combining the gene expression patterns of neurons that were shown to be vulnerable to os and comparing these patterns to those of neurons that were resistant to os, we were able to identify key biological functions, go categories and pathways that characterized vulnerable vs. resistant neurons. importantly, these differential patterns of gene expression represented endogenous neuronal differences, not differences brought about by exposure of these populations of neurons to any form of os. the key differences could be summarized as follows. neurons that are os-vulnerable expressed higher levels than did neurons resistant to os of genes involved in cell stress defense, suppression of transcriptional activity, repair of dna damage, control of cell cycling, steroid receptor signaling, and maintenance of intra-endoplasmic reticulum reducing conditions and ca2+ levels. on the other hand, os-resistant neurons expressed more highly than os-vulnerable neurons genes related to neurotransmission, action potential conduction, signal transduction, and energy generation.

in our previous study of differential responses of ca <dig> and ca <dig> neurons to os, we observed that during the course of exposure of neurons to os, ca <dig> neurons had consistently higher expression than ca <dig> neurons of genes in the categories of stress/inflammatory response, transition metal transport, ferroxidase, and presynaptic signaling activity  <cit> . on the other hand, ca <dig> neurons had higher expression than ca <dig> neurons of genes in the categories of gaba signaling, postsynaptic signaling, and calcium and potassium channel activity  <cit> . the main goal of the present study was to probe for intrinsic, rather than os-induced, biochemical and transcriptional differences between vulnerable  and resistant  neurons from four brain regions. unlike the previous study of transcriptomic analysis of ca <dig> and ca <dig> neurons, there was no os applied to the neurons sampled for the transcriptomic analyses, the analyses were extended to neurons from other regions with differential sensitivities to os, and the neurons were captured from brain sections as proximal to the in vivo condition as possible. nevertheless, despite the differences between the conduct of the two studies, some of the findings from the current study were in accordance with the results from the previous study. in the go analysis, sensitive neurons had higher transcriptional activity than resistant neurons of stress response genes; resistant neurons had relatively higher expression of genes related to signal transduction and neurotransmission than vulnerable neurons. this consistency indicated that these key transcriptional differences are potentially good markers in differentiating neurons that are vulnerable to os from those that are resistant. at the level of differences in expression of single genes, of the  <dig> genes that were more highly expressed in ca <dig> than ca <dig> during induction of os,  <dig> were genes that were also expressed at significantly higher levels in the os-resistant vs. os-vulnerable neurons in the present study . included among these genes were : nefl, neurofilament light polypeptide; gabra <dig>  γ-aminobutyric acid receptor  <dig> α; rab <dig>  member of ras oncogene family; opcml, opioid binding protein/cell adhesion molecule-like; pllp, plasma membrane proteolipid; cadps, ca2+-dependent secretion activator; ncald, neurocalcin δ; and cacna2d <dig>  calcium channel  α2/δ <dig> subunit.

a,b – calculations based on data from this study. since the previous study  <cit>  was a time-course study, no corresponding data were available.

some of the pronounced findings  generated from the present study of functional genomics, were directly supported by traditional biochemical data. in our previous reports, we demonstrated the existence of higher intrinsic stress and inflammatory response in the vulnerable ca <dig> neurons  <cit> . the in vitro measurement of basal superoxide generation in the hippocampal ca <dig> and ca <dig> regions showed that the vulnerable ca <dig> neurons generated more superoxide than the resistant ca <dig> neurons. in the present report, the in vitro measurements of atp levels in cbg and cerebral cortical neurons in culture confirmed the differential levels of energy generation in these two cell populations.

furthermore, these studies confirmed previous observations that the depletion of atp stores in cbg neurons is much greater than that in cerebral cortical neurons upon exposure to os  <cit> . to survive stressful conditions, neurons would need readily available sources of energy, mostly in the form of atp. atp is needed for repair or replenishment of damaged cellular components, such as dna and proteins, and for re-establishing ionic gradients. studies on the selectively vulnerable dopamine neurons of the substantia nigra indicate that lower atp production and higher os may be consequences of mitochondrial dysfunction  <cit> . mitochondrial complex i activity in neurons of the substantia nigra obtained from patients suffering from the sporadic form of parkinson's disease is decreased  <cit> . mitochondrial complex i defects may contribute to decreases in atp synthesis and to excesses in the production of ros in nigra neurons. further support for the idea that os-vulnerable neurons may be subjected to increases in ros formation throughout their lifespan comes from observations that mitochondria isolated from ca <dig> neurons of the hippocampus release more ros than those from neurons of the ca <dig> region  <cit> .

it is important to point out that four major gene expression patterns characteristic of neurons vulnerable to os, i.e., high stress and immune responses, decreased energy generation, increased dna repair, and reduced signal transduction, are similar to gene expression profiles that have been observed in cells from aging brain  <cit> . the increases in expression of some of these genes, for example, those related to dna repair, have been linked to increases in os in neurons, to aging-associated neuronal gene expression, and to dna damage in genomic dna of cells in the brains of aged individuals as a result of nucleotide base oxidation  <cit> . in addition to the increases in the gene categories described above, there are decreases in aging brain of genes related to neurotransmission and signal transduction  <cit> . the similarities in transcriptome patterns between neurons that are vulnerable to os and those that have gone through the aging process in brain may indicate that aging-related events enrich the gene expression patterns that are seen in neurons that are vulnerable to os. such enrichment of gene expression may have important adaptive functions for the aging brain, such as defense against age-associated increases in os-induced damage.

CONCLUSIONS
oxidative stress plays an important role in brain aging and neurodegenerative diseases but not all brain neurons are equally sensitive to os. those that are sensitive to os are the first ones to suffer functional decline during aging or cell death in neurodegenerative diseases. to protect these vulnerable neurons from age- or disease-associated injury, the first step to be accomplished is to understand the molecular mechanisms that underlie the high sensitivity of certain neurons to os. however, the molecular determinants of differential neuronal sensitivity to os remain unknown. in this study, the integration of high-precision target neuron collection by lcm, high-throughput functional genomics, and more targeted biochemical analyses were employed to improve our understanding of snv to os. the study of more than one population of sensitive and resistant neurons was deliberately introduced in order to increase the confidence in the results obtained. the data provided evidence that high stress levels and low energy reserves were important predisposing factors of snv to os. thus, potentially, vulnerable neurons even under normal conditions are under elevated levels of stress. the increases in os resulting from the aging process or from the onset of a neurodegenerative disease may shift the balance between stress and cell defense mechanisms and cause these neurons to die more readily than resistant neurons. the lack of energy reserves would directly compromise the defensive responses of neurons vulnerable to os and increase the probabilities of neuronal injury under conditions of os. therefore, potentially useful approaches to protecting vulnerable neurons during aging or in disease states, such as alzheimer's disease, would be those that are focused on decreasing endogenous levels of os, increasing energy metabolism, or enhancing some of the cell defense processes that we found to be up-regulated in vulnerable neurons.

