BACKGROUND
there are several commercially available one-cycle labeling kits that generate targets for use with affymetrix genechip technology. commercial labeling kits are valuable because they eliminate the need for individual laboratories to optimize methods, saving both time and resources. they also allow better cross-comparison of results generated from different laboratories. however, this assumes that all approaches produce comparable labeled targets. given the widespread use of several labeling kits with the affymetrix technology, we evaluated crna target synthesis, labeling and hybridization results using  <dig> different one-cycle linear amplification labeling kits. these were the one-cycle target labeling assay from affymetrix , the bioarray™ rna amplification and labeling system from enzo life sciences , and the superscript™ rna amplification system from invitrogen life technologies . several steps for synthesizing labeled target are identical for each kit. for example, each kit uses reverse transcriptase with an anchored oligo primer containing a t <dig> promoter to synthesize first-strand cdna. then, following second strand synthesis, the cdna templates are amplified via the eberwine isothermal protocol  <cit> . some of the differences include the biotinylated nucleotides in the in vitro transcription  reaction. the bioarray kit uses two biotinylated nucleotides; one-cycle, a biotinylated pseudo-nucleotide and the superscript kit a single biotinylated nucleotide. differences are also noted in the second strand cdna synthesis. the one-cycle and superscript kits use nick translation, whereas the bioarray kit uses a homopolymeric tailing and an extension reaction. in our study peripheral blood mononuclear cell  rna from  <dig> donors was used in each of the three labeling kits. several parameters of these one-cycle labeling kits were compared to determine factors that could affect gene expression results.

RESULTS
each kit was used to label  <dig>  μg total rna extracted from pbmc from two donors . the labeling reactions were repeated for donor a, resulting in  <dig> genechip arrays for each kit.

the length of the synthesized crna targets was estimated by overlaying the bioanalyzer profiles onto the standard size markers . determinations were made at a y-axis  value of  <dig> . the sizes ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides for the one-cycle kit;  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides for the superscript kit, and  <dig> to  <dig> nucleotides for bioarray kit . on correction for different loading volumes similar results were obtained. the crna yields were quite different. the superscript kit synthesized the highest labeled amounts and the bioarray kit the lowest . importantly, the bioarray methodology needed to be repeated several times in order to obtain the required yield from the ivt reaction. approximately 50% of these reactions failed to give an appropriate yield  and we do not believe this was user error.

the fragmentation of the crna target to  <dig> to  <dig> bases is important for hybridization efficiency and assay sensitivity  <cit> . the fragmentation protocol recommended by affymetrix was used in all cases. approximately  <dig> ng of the fragmented target  was assessed using the agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer to determine population size relative to known markers . the one-cycle and superscript kits produced crna fragments with an average size of around  <dig> bases. the bioarray kit produced a slightly larger average size fragment of  <dig> bases. even though the starting concentration for each fragmentation reaction was the same, the one-cycle kit routinely gave almost double the yield of fragmented crna than either the bioarray or superscript kits .

hybridization performance with standard array quality metrics
to verify the efficiency of the hybridization step we examined the results of the hybridization spike-in controls provided for the affymetrix genechip . these controls are a mixture of biotin-labeled crna transcripts of biob, bioc, biod, and cre, prepared in staggered concentrations . these are added into the hybridization cocktail, independent of rna sample preparation, and are used to evaluate hybridization efficiency. not surprisingly the hybridization performed equally well for the  <dig> kits as all control targets were called present in all arrays and there was a linear increase in signal with increasing concentrations of each control crna transcript.

the background, rawq and scaling factor quality metrics were examined to determine if differences in labeling affected the hybridization results. the average background values, derived from the intensity values of the lowest 2% of cells on the chip, were within the recommended 20– <dig> range for all  <dig> approaches. the superscript kit consistently gave higher readings with larger variation . the rawq  value, derived from the standard deviation of the background intensity measurement was below  <dig> for each kit, as recommended by affymetrix. the scaling factor is inversely related to the overall brightness of the chip and provides a measure of the overall expression level of the array and was again, comparable for all  <dig> labeling approaches .

the percent present/absent calls were used to globally assess the sensitivity of each labeling kit. the majority of genes were consistently classified in the same category for each labeling pair . there was  <dig> % call agreement across the  <dig> methods . interestingly, even though one-cycle kit had the higher percent present calls of all the kits, all had similar average signal intensities . signal intensities for the probe sets are comparable, but the superscript kit has the highest variation . a comparison of coefficients of variation on normalized signal intensities shows an average 11% cv for the one-cycle kit compared to  <dig> % and  <dig> % for bioarray and superscript kits respectively . when we examine the correlation of differential fold change calculations  using all  <dig> probesets across the labeling kits we find a  <dig> % agreement between the one-cycle and bioarray kits,  compared to the total number of probesets). a  <dig> % concordance is seen between the one-cycle and superscript kits and 63% between the bioarray and superscript kits. this same analysis applied to data filtered for present calls across all  <dig> arrays  showed an increase in concordance between the one-cycle and bioarray kits  with a linear regression fit of r <dig> =  <dig> . for the two other combinations the percentage decreased to 51% for the one-cycle/superscript combination  and remained the same for the bioarray/superscript comparison .

reproducibility of gene expression signal intensities
a compilation of the ma plots comparing the magnitudes of change  to the mean log expression level for the same sample labeled by each kit is given in figure  <dig> 

intra- and inter-assay comparisons were determined using the overall signal correlation. pair-wise pearson correlation coefficients of the raw signal intensities were calculated using all transcripts. the intra-method reproducibility for replicate samples had correlation coefficients > <dig>  for one-cycle and bioarray kits and  <dig>  for the superscript kit. the one-cycle and bioarray methods had the highest inter-method correlation coefficient  whereas the superscript kit was less correlated . the inter-assay correlation range was  <dig>  –  <dig> . when we examine the non-parametric spearman rank correlation coefficients generated for the normalized probesets within the replicate samples one-cycle has the highest correlation , followed by bioarray  and then superscript . as the spearman correlation ranks the probesets by their intensity values, this reflects the reproducibility of the labeling technologies.

linearity and sensitivity of kits as quantified using spike-in bacterial poly-a control targets
the ability of any amplification and labeling method to accurately detect differences in expression levels is highly dependent on linearity, dynamic range of amplification and sensitivity. we evaluated these parameters by analyzing the spike-in poly-a control transcripts  added to each total rna sample at staggered concentrations. they act as a convenient way to monitor the entire labeling process, independent of the quality of the starting material. all  <dig> spike-in controls were called present in all instances, indicating similar sensitivities. the averaged signal intensities for the poly-a controls were plotted  for each of the probesets, . each followed the same order of increasing poly-a control rna concentration as expected.

discussion
total rna is ideal for gene expression profiling from clinical specimens, small amounts can be used because the methodology preserves the relative abundance of the different mrnas in the original sample  <cit> . in evaluating a new protocol or comparing existing protocols, measures such as the yield of crna or the fraction of probe sets detected can be useful, but the key measure is the extent to which differences  in gene expression can be detected. several studies have compared linear amplification protocols, similar to those used here, with pcr-based techniques  <cit> , or one-cycle labeling kits to those that use two or three cycles for sample of  <dig> ng or less total rna  <cit> . ma et al.   <cit>  compared ivt labeling reactions from purified double-stranded cdna using the ge healthcare codelink expression system and the 3'-amplification reagents from affymetrix, showing similar results to those obtained here. however, a literature search revealed no publications comparing one-cycle labeling kits directly. to examine the differences introduced by different labeling kits, we compared  <dig> one-cycle labeling kits commonly used with the affymetrix genechip platform. each labeling method showed a high degree of intra-method correlations in replicate experiments, but lower inter-method correlation. exploring the fold changes between donor a and donor b across kits  and the ma plots  showed the one-cycle and bioarray kits, gave the best correlation. the poorest concordance was evidenced between the two eberwine-based protocols, one-cycle and superscript.

the use of the oligo primer in the first strand synthesis in all the kits is to selectively amplify polyadenylated transcripts. therefore the ribosomal rna probesets  act as a negative control. as expected for these probesets, the one-cycle kit gave a signal just above background, however, for both the bioarray and superscript kits a strong positive signal was detected for the 18s rrna probesets . this is of concern, as any signal detected comes from either cross-hybridization or non-specific priming. we believe these results can be explained by the rapid cooling of the primer annealing reaction in the one-cycle methodology which reduces some of the non-specific binding that may arise with the slower cooling used in the superscript or bioarray protocols.

β-actin and gapdh internal control probesets are commonly used to assess rna sample and assay quality  <cit> . the other probesets classified as internal controls are rarely referred to in the literature, probably because the two rrna probesets , are known to have very high coefficients of variation  <cit>  and the isgf <dig> probesets cover  <dig> nucleotides of the mrna, a particularly long transcript for affymetrix genechips.

other possible causes for the differences in results between the labeling kits are the use of different reverse transcriptase enzymes, t7oligo dt primers  and concentration of nucleotides. bioarray uses a very different strategy to generate the second strand in the cdna synthesis – a homopolymeric tail to the cdna, followed by an extension reaction. the other kits use a nick-translation reaction. the ivt reaction for amplification and labeling of the target is similar in most aspects, except the bioarray method uses two nucleotide labels , the superscript kit a single biotin-utp labeling and the one-cycle, a ψ-utp biotinylated nucleotide . samples labeled by the bioarray method had higher, unnormalized fluorescence intensity values than the other methods , possibly due to incorporation of the two labeled nucleotides. the higher number of present calls on the one-cycle kit array indicates a higher labeling efficiency, but this did not appear to be because of greater label incorporation, as signal intensities were no higher in the one-cycle kit arrays compared to the other two.

the methodological differences elucidated above, will each make a contribution towards the differences in crna profiles that were noted when an aliquot of each was run on the bioanalyzer . these differences were not a result of loading different quantities of crna on the bioanalyzer chips, as similar results were obtained when equivalent amounts of crna were run. the differences included length of product, yield and reproducibility of the methodology. a crna profile with a greater proportion of fragments above  <dig> nt is usually considered as a good preparation, therefore despite the differences, each of the kits provides target crna that passes the suggested parameters established by affymetrix and our results support this. once the biotinylated target crna has been synthesized, it is then fragmented by metal-induced hydrolysis. considering that a set amount of crna goes into each reaction  and the same protocol was used for all the fragmentations, we were surprised to note the differences in the fragmentation profiles for each kit. the bioarray and superscript protocols give far smaller yields when compared to the one-cycle kit crna. the  <dig> kits each use spin-cartridges with differing reagents to clean-up the crna, and the product is eluted in rnase-free water in each case. the bioarray and superscript kits require that the target be concentrated in a vacuum concentrator for fragmentation. we cannot be sure what the carry-over  is from these steps, and it is possible that this could affect the fragmentation reaction, possibly causing complete hydrolysis and loss of product.

probably the largest draw back that we experienced with any of the kits was the number of times that the bioarray kit failed to produce sufficient product for fragmentation . this is probably due to losses incurred from the two additional purification steps  in this methodology. this is not an acceptable situation when processing limited clinical samples. enzo life sciences has recently released a new labeling kit based on the eberwine protocol, which they currently recommend for use with affymetrix genechips. other considerations we used in evaluating the kits were ease of use, measured by the number of steps involved in the protocol and cost of each labeling reaction .

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study show that different one cycle labeling kits from different manufacturers generate products that vary in size distribution and yield. the one-cycle target labeling assay from affymetrix and the superscript™ rna amplification system from invitrogen life technologies each use the nick translation methodology for generation of second-strand cdna and were the most similar in terms of product generated. whereas the bioarray™ rna amplification and labeling system from enzo life sciences uses an extension reaction after homopolymeric tails are added, and this kit produces a quite different product profile. the results of hybridizing each of the labeling kit products to affymetrix genechip arrays showed much less variation in terms of gene expression results than expected from the product profiles. the one-cycle and bioarray kits produced the most concordant data. since the results generated from the different labeling kits are fairly comparable, factors such as kit cost, time and difficulty should be considered when selecting a one-cycle labeling approach for use with affymetrix genechips. these results emphasize that data generated from different labeling methodologies cannot be directly compared.

