BACKGROUND
the western honey bee, apis mellifera, is a highly social insect that has emerged as one of the model organisms for using genomics to study the mechanisms and evolution of social behavior  <cit> . honey bees are known for several striking social behaviors  <cit> . for example, adult worker honey bees display a complex pattern of behavioral maturation that involves working in the hive when young and foraging when older; this gives rise to an age-related division of labor in honey bee colonies that is thought to be one of the factors contributing to the spectacular ecological success of social insects  <cit> . honey bees also are known for their symbolic dance language, by which successful foragers communicate the location of attractive food sources to their nestmates  <cit> . behavioral maturation in adult honey bees is associated with coordinated changes in expression of thousands of genes in the brain  <cit> , and a few genes have been identified that have causal effects  <cit> . molecular or neural components of honey bee dance language have not yet been identified.

our understanding of honey bees is mostly based on studies of a. mellifera, even though there are as many as 9– <dig> other members of genus apis  <cit> . apis is an ancient lineage of bees that evolved in tropical eurasia ca. 8– <dig> million years ago  <cit>  some migrated north and west, reaching europe by the end of the pleistocene epoch,  <dig>  yr ago  <cit> . phylogenetic analyses partition the genus into three groups. the cavity nesters form a monophyletic group and consequently a. mellifera and a. cerana are more closely related to one another than to dorsata and florea  <cit> . a. dorsata and a. florea, two open-nesting species, are in separate lineages, with florea part of the most basal lineage in the genus  <cit> .

other apis species display a rich combination of similarities and differences in behavior and ecology relative to a. mellifera  <cit> . studies are limited, but there is some evidence that workers in other apis species also show patterns of behavioral maturation similar to a. mellifera  <cit> ; in all species studied, young workers perform nest work and older workers forage  <cit> . conversely, comparative studies of key members of the genus, a. mellifera, a. cerana, a. florea and a. dorsata, have revealed marked differences in dance language, habitat, nesting habit, body size and worker "tempo" .

to facilitate future comparative studies of honey bee behavior at the genomic and molecular level, we performed a microarray analysis comparing brain gene expression of foragers with that of newly eclosed one-day-old adult bees  for a. mellifera, a. cerana, a. florea and a. dorsata. a previous study demonstrates that of the different age groups studied for a. mellifera, one-day-olds form perhaps the most discrete and cohesive group in terms of brain gene expression profiles  <cit> . in addition, a significant amount of brain maturation occurs between pupation and  <dig> weeks  as evidenced by neuropil expansion and lengthening and branching of dendrites of kenyon cells of mushroom bodies  <cit> . also among adult groups compared, the most consistent differences in all parameters of brain maturation were seen between one-day-olds and foragers.

genomic resources are currently very limited to a tiny fraction of the animal species available for study. only one species of honey bee, a. mellifera, has a custom-designed microarray, made from an a. mellifera brain est library  <cit>  and representing ~  <dig> genes or ~ 50% of the currently annotated genes in the a. mellifera genome  <cit> . we show that this a. mellifera cdna microarray can be used effectively for cross-species comparison of behavioral maturation within the genus. brain gene expression profiles between foragers and one-day-olds showed differences that are consistent with a previous study on a. mellifera  <cit>  and were comparable across species. species differences in brain expression profiles for functionally related groups of genes provide clues to the basis of behavioral variation in the genus.

RESULTS
species differences in hybridization efficiency
a total of  <dig> genes that represented 63% of the genes present in the array passed through our stringent analysis filters. this suggested the suitability of the array for interspecies comparisons. only those spots which hybridized above the mean threshold intensity for all species were used . the number of cdna spots  hybridizing above threshold fluorescence intensity was less for the three asian species compared to a. mellifera . performances of the four species on the microarrays were comparable and in keeping with known differences and estimated approximate evolutionary distance. thus a. cerana, sharing a monophyletic origin with a. mellifera  <cit> , apparently displayed higher hybridization efficiency compared to the more distantly related a. florea and a. dorsata.

similarities in age-dependent differences in brain gene expression
we compared brain gene expression between foragers and one-day-olds of each colony, within each species. that is, the two samples hybridized on each array always belonged to the same species. this was done to avoid "false positives" that could arise due to interspecific differences in hybridization efficiency to the microarray  <cit> . we calculated gene expression ratios of forager to one-day-old brain expression levels for every gene and each replicate pair of arrays . any difference detected between species using this ratio cannot be attributed specifically to either foragers or one-day-olds.

to measure replicability across experiments, we compared our data with a previous study  <cit> . of the genes found to be significantly regulated between foragers and one-day-olds in each of the species in the current study,  <dig> – 75% also had been found to be significantly regulated between foragers and one-day-olds in reference  <dig> . the higher number of genes significantly regulated between foragers and one-day-olds in reference  <dig> compared to the current study probably reflects a higher statistical power due to increased replication in the former study  <cit> . nevertheless, all four species performed comparably on the a. mellifera cdna microarrays and maintained consistent patterns of brain gene expression differences. this demonstrates the utility of the array for carrying out comparisons between apis species.


                              a. mellifera

                              a. cerana

                              a. dorsata

                              a. florea
data belonging to each species were analyzed separately to obtain genes significantly regulated between foragers and one-day-olds by an f test , numbers in parentheses. the comparison set was obtained from whitfield et al  <dig>  <cit>  and consisted of genes significantly regulated between foragers and one-day-olds . only those genes that were present in the gene list of at least one species in the current study were included in the comparison set. intersects of pair-wise comparisons between the two datasets are given along with results of chi-square tests.

species differences in brain gene expression
 <dig> genes showed significant differences in brain gene expression between foragers and one-day-olds  in any species. however, only  <dig> genes showed significant difference in forager/one-day-old ratios of brain gene expression  between at least  <dig> species . at this p value level the number expected by chance alone would be  <dig> 

a pair-wise comparison between species showed that the comparison between a. florea and a. mellifera resulted in the greatest number of genes  showing f/do differences between any pair of species . this is perhaps a reflection of the fact that of the  <dig> species compared, a. florea and a. mellifera show the most extreme differences in behavior and ecology . a. florea and a. mellifera also are among the most distantly related pairs of species in apis  <cit> . however, the comparison between a. cerana and a. dorsata resulted in the fewest  number of genes showing f/do differences between any pair of species  and these two species also differ extensively in behavior and ecology. however, both cerana and dorsata are asian species while mellifera is native to africa and europe  <cit> .

                              a. mellifera
                              a. cerana
                              a. florea
                              a. dorsata

                              a. mellifera

                              a. cerana

                              a. florea

                              a. dorsata
rows above diagonal indicate number of genes with significantly different expression profiles .  <dig> genes showed significant differences in expression between at least two species.

a principal component analysis on the brain expression profiles of all  <dig> genes that showed species differences at p <  <dig>  revealed that there were clear patterns of gene expression that differentiated the  <dig> species from each other . principal component  <dig> , which accounts for  <dig> % of the variance, describes the predominant brain expression pattern as follows: genes that were upregulated or downregulated in forager brains compared to one-day-olds in one species were also likely to be upregulated or downregulated in forager brains compared to one-day-olds in other species . the major inference that can be drawn from this result is that the molecular processes underlying the maturation of a one-day-old bee to a forager are largely conserved between species. this is consistent with observations suggesting that workers in other apis species show the same basic pattern of behavioral maturation that a. mellifera does  <cit> .

pcs  <dig> and  <dig>  which together accounted for  <dig> % of the variance, revealed species differences in brain gene expression that were strong enough to distinguish all the species . however, these differences do not overlap with known ecological or physiological differences. for example, the differences do not reflect the fact that two of the species  are open nesting while the other two are cavity nesting; or that all four species differ in size with dorsata almost  <dig>  fold larger than florea  <cit> .

pc  <dig>  reflected a pattern in the data that indicates that a component of the variance in brain gene expression is attributable solely to differences between a. dorsata and the other species. there are indeed distinctive features of dorsata biology relative to the other three species, including migratory habits, defensive behavior, and its much larger size  <cit> , but it is not known whether the differences we detected are related to these aspects.

functional classification of differentially expressed genes
to derive inferences  related to functional differences between the species that could guide future studies, we analyzed the  <dig> genes for overrepresentation in functional gene ontology  <cit>  categories . available drosophila orthologs for  <dig> of the  <dig> genes were subjected to an enrichment analysis  <cit>  .

statistical over-representation of go categories was tested through a hypergeometric test followed by the benjamini hochberg fdr correction using the microarray analysis tool gotoolbox. see table  <dig> for honey bee gene ids

the most significant enrichment among the categories tested was genes implicated in "response to biotic stimulus" and "defense response" . this finding is intriguing because these categories encompass responses by a cell or an organism  as a result of a stimulus caused or produced by another living organism. behavioral maturation from one-day-old to forager involves changes in endocrine activity, metabolism, circadian clock activity, brain chemistry and brain structure  <cit> . in addition, honey bees are highly social organisms and thus highly responsive to their nestmates and conspecifics. one way that honey bees respond to changes in their colony condition is by altering their rate of behavioral maturation  <cit> ; this has only been studied in a. mellifera. apis species differ among many other things, including colony size, predator pressure, prevalence of brood diseases and reproductive colony fission  <cit> . therefore these groups of highly regulated genes might reflect differences in behavioral maturation processes brought about by differences in social cohesiveness and colony integration. along these lines, we note that two genes from these two categories, honey bee orthologs of drosophila pebiii and tctp, which have previously been shown to be lower in foragers compared to one-day-olds in a. mellifera,  <cit>  showed a reversed and significantly higher f/do expression ratio in a. florea  compared to the other three species .

a couple of other interesting groups of genes were those involved in metabolic processes, e.g., carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism. similarly, most of the molecular functional categories that emerged as significantly enriched are also groups of genes that participate in metabolic processes, e.g., exo- and metallopeptidases, hydrolases, and genes coding for o-methyltransferases, and carrier proteins . this is interesting because one of the most striking differences between the four species relates to differences in worker "tempo." measurements of colony attributes led dyer and seeley  <cit>  to conclude that open-nesting species  have a lower overall level of activity than do the cavity-nesting species . it is reasonable to speculate that differences in colony activity levels are related to molecular processes associated with worker metabolism. our results provide potential molecular correlates for these behavioral and ecological observations, and suggest that further analyses of genes in these categories would be particularly fruitful for understanding the ecology of genus apis.

another category of genes were those implicated in circadian processes. finding that genes related to circadian rhythms are overrepresented  on the list of genes showing significant species differences in brain expression is notable from the perspective of honey bee dance language. brockmann and robinson  <cit>  discussed possible functional connections between the circadian system and the sun-compass system that is used by honey bees to communicate directional information during dance. the possibility of species differences in these systems is suggested by the fact that a. mellifera, cerana and dorsata dance on vertical combs and transpose sun-compass based information to gravity-based information, whereas a. florea dances on horizontal comb and does not make this transposition.

a more detailed view of the molecular machinery that might underlie species differences in apis was obtained by clustering the  <dig> orthologous genes that showed significant species differences in brain expression according to their shared functional go annotation  <cit> . several coherent groups of genes emerged from this analysis , in addition to clusters expected due to the enrichment analysis described above . notable among them were the categories of cell communication and development. genes involved in these processes likely play important roles in brain maturation and sensory development and therefore might contribute to behavioral differences among the species. for example, the honey bee ortholog of innexin  <dig> , a gene whose protein product is important for cell-cell communication  <cit> , is known to be upregulated in young bees when they are treated with the juvenile hormone analog methoprene  <cit> . such treatment also induces young bees to become foragers  <cit> . our brain transcriptome-wide expression analysis of the four key species of honey bees have provided us with several candidate genes that can be used for much needed comparative studies to uncover the molecular basis of interspecies differences in the genus.

clustering was carried out in gotoolbox using the wpgma algorithm with a bonferroni correction for multiple testing. a minimum cluster size of  <dig> genes was applied. see table  <dig> for honey bee gene ids.

see table  <dig> legend for details

CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first cross-species comparative study of brain gene expression in honey bees. we used four species of honey bees, three asian and one european/western that are known to differ markedly in their nesting habit, behavior and some physiological characters. we compared brain mrna of foragers and one-day-old bees of each species on each microarray in a replicated loop design.

performance results for the four species on the microarrays were comparable and in keeping with our current understanding of apis phylogeny  <cit> . a significant fraction of genes in all four species followed expression patterns consistent with a previous study comparing foragers and one-day-olds in a. mellifera from europe  <cit> .

 <dig> genes were found to be expressed significantly differentially between at least two species. principal component analysis revealed strong patterns in the data that grouped the expression data into the four constituent species. two main inferences could be drawn from the pca results. first, there appears to be a widespread conservation of the molecular processes in the brain underlying adult honey bee behavioral maturation. second, the overall pattern of differences did not reflect in an obvious way known differences in behavior and ecology between the four species  <cit> . however, an enrichment analysis for gene ontology defined functional categories of genes responsive to biotic stimulus, involved in defense response, metabolism and circadian rhythms–that could plausibly be involved in these ecological differences, as well as in behavioral differences related to dance language.

