BACKGROUND
any group of organisms has a single true pedigree that extends back through time as an unbroken chain of parent-offspring genetic transmission but not all genes trickle through this pedigree in identical fashion  <cit> . phylogenetic relationships within and between animal species often depend on the markers studied, as different genes might have different modes of transmission and different histories  <cit> . in addition, hybridization can result in discordant phylogenies between markers. increasing evidence points to a contribution of reticulate evolution to the speciation process  <cit> . in this context, information on the phylogenies of different markers for closely related species and subspecies is important to the study of the processes underlying speciation  <cit> .

the chamois  provides an excellent model for exploring the effect of historical and evolutionary events on diversification. it is distributed over most of the medium to high altitude mountain ranges of southern eurasia . the quaternary glacial ages probably had a major effect on the phylogeography and evolution of the genus rupicapra, as it did on other animals in eurasia  <cit> . there are diverse opinions concerning the phylogenetic relationships between fossil and living forms of rupicaprini. the rupicaprini seem to have originated in asia during the miocene period  <cit> ; the fossil genus procamptoceras appeared in europe in the villafranchian period  and together with rupicapra is believed to belong to a phyletic lineage that had already separated from the ancestral rupicaprini  <cit> . the sudden appearance of rupicapra fossils in europe during the middle pleistocene age has been interpreted as resulting from immigration from the east during a cold climatic phase  <cit> . at present, chamois populations are classified into two species r. pyrenaica and r. rupicapra  <cit>  on the basis of morphological and behavioural characters: rupicapra pyrenaica  from southwestern europe and r. rupicapra  from northeastern europe  <cit> . analysis of genetic variation in a limited number of subspecies for allozyme loci  <cit> , minisatellites  <cit> , rflps of mitochondrial dna  <cit>  and the major histocompatibility complex  <cit>  showed a considerably higher divergence between populations of the two proposed species than between populations within the same species. microsatellite analysis of  <dig> of the  <dig> proposed subspecies showed a clear differentiation between every pair of populations and clearly separated two groups corresponding to the two proposed species of chamois  <cit> . the geographic distribution of separated mtdna clades allows the study of historical demographic and dispersal events and the differentiation between mtdna sequences can be used to date the separation among phylogenetic groups. the study of a fragment of cytochrome b  of  <dig> bp revealed that the two proposed species were non-monophyletic  <cit> . three cytb lineages were identified: clade west in the iberian peninsula and western alps, clade central in the apennines and the massif of chartreuse and clade east in populations to the east of the alps. clades west and central are represented in both species, while clade east is restricted to r. rupicapra. the divergence between the main clades has been estimated around  <dig> - <dig> mya  <cit>  but this cannot be directly assumed to be the divergence time between species. the study of microsatellites  <cit>  has shown a correlation between genetic and geographic distance between populations, denoting a genetic flow among contiguous populations.

to further elucidate the processes leading to the diversification of the genus rupicapra, we studied a larger sequence dataset including several mtdna fragments and nuclear markers, which has been recommended to increase the performance of phylogenetic studies  <cit> . earlier work was extended by analyzing dna sequences of four mitochondrial regions  and microsatellites  to include all subspecies of chamois and to cover its entire distribution range. here we include the subspecies cartusiana and asiatica, both missing from previous studies, as well as additional samples of ornata and tatrica . comparison of the geographic distribution of mitochondrial and nuclear markers allow us to follow the pattern of hybridization between highly differentiated lineages in the context of the climatic oscillations of the pleistocene age.

RESULTS
mitochondrial dna phylogeography
we have amplified and sequenced fragments of nd <dig>  12s, trnapro and cr from  <dig> individuals. these sequences were concatenated with a fragment of cytb obtained in a previous study  <cit> . the combined dataset contains  <dig> nucleotides ,  <dig> of them corresponding to coding sequences. the alignment resulted in  <dig> haplotypes defined by  <dig> variable sites of which  <dig> corresponded to coding regions. the overall number of mutations was  <dig>  of which  <dig> corresponded to non-synonymous substitutions in coding regions. mitochondrial dna diversity was high  with on average one distinct haplotype over  <dig>  individuals . the alpine chamois  as a whole showed very high values of diversity, both haplotypic  and nucleotidic . in particular, nucleotide diversity was very high in the sample from val di susa in the western side of the alps. on the other hand, diversity was extremely low for populations from the massif of chartreuse  and from the apennines .

n, number of individuals analysed; nh, number of haplotypes observed; h, haplotype diversity; π, nucleotide diversity. standard deviations  are shown in brackets.

a simple neighbor-joining tree based on jukes-cantor distances between individuals  revealed three well supported major clades, although these do not concur with the taxonomy of chamois. the three clades, hereinafter named clade mtwest , clade mtcentral  and clade mteast , show a strong geographic signal. clade mtw is present in individuals from the iberian peninsula  and the western alps , clade mtc in individuals from the apennines  and the massif of chartreuse  and clade mte in all individuals of populations from the central alps to the caucasus. thus, the two species were mitochondrially non-monophyletic: r. pyrenaica contains the clades mtw and mtc and r. rupicapra the three mitochondrial clades. networks computed using the four mitochondrial fragments  separately  showed identical topologies as the combined analyses with the same three major clades, indicating that the four datasets contain solely mitochondrial fragments and no nuclear pseudogenes. total network lengths are different for the four datasets, representing the different rates of nucleotide substitution among different segments. the nd <dig> fragment shows  <dig> haplotypes defined by  <dig> variable sites, the 12s fragment presents  <dig> haplotypes and  <dig> variable sites, the trnapro  <dig> variable sites defining  <dig> haplotypes and the cr,  <dig> haplotypes and  <dig> variable sites  . the haplotype network of the combined sequence is characterized by the three main clades. every haplotype is limited to a single population and haplotypes within each clade are connected to haplotypes of the same population or of a nearby population. however, the haplotypes of the western alps are connected to haplotypes of the cantabrian mounts and the pyrenees but are quite differentiated from them. the haplotypes of chartreuse belong to clade mtc and occupy a more central position within the network than the haplotypes from the apennines. pairwise differences between populations in mean number of substitutions per nucleotide  are all significant with the exception of the differences between individuals from the central and the eastern alps, rupicapra e versus caucasica and asiatica versus caucasica.

to investigate further the evolutionary history of rupicapra, the  <dig> haplotypes of the combined dataset were aligned with sequences of capra hircus, ovis aries and bos taurus and the phylogenetic relationships were investigated using maximum likelihood, maximum parsimony, neighbor-joining or bayesian approaches under different models of nucleotide substitution. following the hierarchical likelihood ratio test , as implemented in modeltest  <cit> , the combined dataset of haplotypes with outgroups was found to fit a hky + i + g model. the six parameters  given by modeltest were used to obtain an ml tree with the program dnaml of the phylyp package  <cit> . the number of different possible evolutionary rates was set to five plus a class of invariant sites. the same model of nucleotide substitution was used for the construction of the bayesian tree but the parameters were obtained by the program beast itself. there were  <dig> parsimony-informative sites. model-free parsimony analysis performed with mega  <cit>  led to thirty equally parsimonious trees with a total length of  <dig> steps. nj analysis was performed by means of the simple model of jukes-cantor.

the different methods of tree construction all led to topologies with three main well supported branches . in addition, clade mtc divides into two well supported external branches representing the chamois from the subspecies r. p. ornata and r. r. cartusiana. the other two major clades, mtw and mte, do not show consistent external nodes. only an external node including several cantabrian haplotypes is formed within clade mtw and, similarly, only an external node of haplotypes from the carpathians forms in clade mte. these groups must correspond to local lineage sorting rather than to long phylogenetic divergence.

the relationships between the three major clades or internal branches were found to vary depending on the method used for tree construction. under ml, the split between clades mtc and mte is posterior to the split of clade mtw. the topology obtained with bayesian, mp and nj methods  was always poorly supported, suggesting that the divergence of these three main clades most probably happened in a radiation within a short period of time.

using the divergence times of bovidae, caprinae and capra-ovis as calibrations, following hernandez-fernandez and vrba  <cit> , the divergence of clades w-c and e was dated at  <dig>  mya , overlapping with confidence limits for the time of divergence between clades w and c, which was calculated to be  <dig>  mya . the subsequent divergences within these three main clades are considerably younger , already in the middle pleistocene.

microsatellite dna phylogeography
the number of alleles per locus ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> with a mean of  <dig>  . observed heterozygosities were, in general, slightly lower than expected  and the difference was significant in the subspecies carpatica and balcanica. only one combination individual -locus failed to amplify, indicating that null alleles do not occur at high frequency. the test with micro-checker identified potential null alleles at frequencies higher than  <dig>  in the subspecies carpatica  and balcanica . after the exclusion of the loci with potential null alleles, the observed heterozygosity was still lower than expected . hence, the heterozygote deficit in these subspecies can be attributed to the wahlund effect rather than to the presence of null alleles. the locus sr-crsp- <dig> is identified by micro-checker as having potential null alleles at a frequency of  <dig>  in rupicapraw. the fact that this population showed no general heterozygote deficit suggests that deviation is probably due to the presence of null alleles. despite this finding, the effect in overall f-statistics and genetic distances would be limited and hence the locus was retained for analysis. the subspecies tatrica showed a diversity of 33%, in the lowest range of the values. the population of the apennines showed an extremely low diversity of 3%. six out of  <dig> individuals were homozygous for the  <dig> loci and only  <dig> loci presented more than one allele.

n, number of individuals analysed, in brackets individuals also typed for mtdna; p, number of loci polymorphic; a, mean number of alleles; pa, number of private alleles; rs: allelic richness ; ho, observed heterozygosity; he, expected heterozygosity. *p <  <dig> .

a neighbor-joining tree of  <dig> individuals  based on allele-sharing distance  shows two main clades corresponding to the iberian chamois  and the eastern chamois  and a third one  that groups the apennine chamois, the subspecies r. pyrenaica ornata. like the mitochondrial tree, the microsatellite-based phylogeny shows a strong geographic signal but at the centre of the distribution of rupicapra the mitochondrial and the nuclear data are in apparent conflict. all eight individuals of r. rupicapra cartusiana formed with r. pyrenaica ornata the mitochondrial clade mtc but group with alpine chamois r. rupicapra rupicapra for microsatellite markers. in contrast to mitochondrial data, the  <dig> individuals sampled from the west italian alps group with the nuclear clade μsate, while  <dig> of them belong to clade mtw . the microsatellite tree shows the clustering of individuals of the different subspecies even though there is not a clear-cut between them.

bayesian clustering of individuals with the software structure using the method of evanno et al.  <cit>  yields a likely number of clusters of two. nevertheless, inspection of the twenty replicate runs of structure shows inconsistencies among replicates, with clade μsatc as defined above clustered with μsatw in eight of the replicates and with μsate in the remaining  <dig> replicates. clustering of individuals with k =  <dig>  is more consistent among replicates and forms the same groups of individuals as the microsatellite tree in  <dig> replicates. in the other three, the grouping of the subspecies parva, pyrenaica and ornata varies: in two of them pyrenaica and ornata group together and parva forms a different group but in one replicate parva and ornata group together. higher orders of structure  yield clusters that tend to group individuals of the same or neighbour populations but the clusters present low consistency among replicates.

every pairwise comparison of genetic differentiation between populations  differs significantly from zero . a upgma consensus tree was generated from  <dig> bootstrap replicates based on nei's standard genetic distance. the population tree topology was represented over the geographic distribution of the genus  to highlight the geographic signature on the microsatellite variation.

discussion
our phylogenetic analysis based on either mitochondrial or nuclear dna variation gives results that are to a certain some extent discordant, even though both markers show a strong east/west phylogeographic signal that must be related to the distribution of lineages in space and time with recurrent periods of isolation and contact in contiguous areas of the species' range. the discordance between mitochondrial phylogeny and the taxonomic classification, based mostly on morphological characters, results in non-monophyly. the two species of rupicapra, r. pyrenaica and r. rupicapra, are not reciprocally monophyletic for mtdna; clades mtw and mtc are represented in both, while clade mte is restricted to r. rupicapra. it is interesting that r. rupicapra cartusiana groups with r. pyrenaica ornata regarding the mtdna, as both form the clade mtc, but clusters with its conspecific group r. rupicapra on the basis of microsatellite variation. no signs of recent admixture can be noted in the individual nuclear genotypes. the population from the west italian alps  is non-monophyletic with haplotypes belonging either to the clade mte  or to the clade mtw . these phylogenetic relationships can be interpreted either as a consequence of old hybridization among differentiated lineages  <cit>  or as a result of much more recent human-mediated translocations  <cit> . the different expectations of the two hypotheses are as follows: if translocation and hybridization were recent, within the last  <dig> years as suggested , a signature of the reintroduction should be visible both at the levels of nuclear and mitochondrial variation. as evident from the structure analysis, the  <dig> individual alpine specimens of the clade mtw belong to the nuclear clade μsate and there are no signs of admixture or recent hybridization. in addition, close inspection of the subsample of haplotypes of clade mtw from alpine r. r. rupicapra individuals argues against a recent reintroduction because: 1) the haplotypic and nucleotidic diversities  are high and similar to the values found, for example, in the pyrenean chamois; 2) none of the seven haplotypes present in this subsample were recovered from the pyrenees. our pyrenean sample is limited in number and the samples come only from two sampling locations  but it is nevertheless remarkable that locations on both sides of the pyrenees share haplotypes with each other but not with the sample from the alps; 3) the genetic distance, in mean number of substitutions per nucleotide , between the subsample of clade mtw from the alps and either the cantabrian or the pyrenean chamois  is comparable to the distance among the cantabrian and pyrenean populations themselves  and hence denotes a similar time of divergence. thus we conclude that the haplotypes from clade mtw present in the alpine r. r. rupicapra population result from ancient hybridization.

overall, phylogeographic analysis of mtdna and μsatdna allows the definition of three groups of chamois that separate in an east-west pattern. the two types of markers gave incongruent results for individuals from the regions of contact between lineages, the massif of chartreuse and the western alps. hence, our results provide strong evidence for the effect of old migrations and hybridization between highly differentiated lineages on the current composition of populations in the central area of the distribution of chamois.

taxonomic implications
the currently accepted taxonomy of chamois recognizes two species: r. pyrenaica, which include chamois from the iberian peninsula together with the chamois from the appenines; and r. rupicapra, which includes all the other populations  <cit> . however, the taxonomy of the genus has been subject to continuous revisions during the twentieth century. in  <dig>  camerano  <cit>  distinguished the species r. ornata on the basis of skull and horn morphometrics. subsequently couturier and dolan considered the ten populations of chamois as a single species  <cit> ,  <cit>  but later work based on skull evaluations  <cit> , electrophoretic data  <cit>  and different coat pattern as well as several courtship behaviour patterns  <cit>  suggested that treatment as two species is warranted. more recently, crestanello et al.  <cit>  suggested that r. pyrenaica ornata be re-elevated to species rank in accordance with the high divergence between the mtc clade and the other two. however, these authors did not take into account that r. rupicapra cartusiana also belongs to the clade mtc.

the mitochondrial dna data provide information about phylogeny that is frequently used to diagnose species using the phylogenetic species concept . evolutionary significant units , essentially equivalent to species under the psc  <cit> , have been defined as populations of individuals reciprocally monophyletic for mtdna alleles and differing significantly in the frequency of alleles at nuclear loci  <cit> . according to this criterion, mitochondrial phylogeny implies that a single species of chamois  should be recognized, as by couturier  <cit>  and dolan  <cit> . however, experiments on species delimitation that are based on markers from a single uniparentally inherited genome must be treated with caution, given that such markers are preferentially introgressed across species boundaries  <cit> . multilocus assignment methods have been proposed to have considerably more power  <cit> . the microsatellite analysis clearly separates three groups: two corresponding to the two recognized species plus a third group for individuals from the apennines, that are closer to the iberian chamois than to the other populations. this finding can be related to the classification proposed by camerano  <cit> , who accorded the rank of species to the population from the apennines . morphological differentiation between ornata and pyrenaica has also been shown by scala and lovari  <cit> , even though differences between the iberian and apennine group and all other rupicapra rupicapra spp. are much greater  <cit> . thus, microsatellite differentiation seems to be more closely related to morphological variation than does work with mtdna. mitochondrial phylogenies are frequently discordant with taxonomy, and hence with morphological differentiation  <cit> . in the case of chamois, we have shown that the introgression of mtdna into the eastern chamois corresponds to ancient hybridizations. our conclusion is consistent with the observation of intermediate phenotypes between r. rupicapra and r. pyrenaica in r. r. cartusiana  <cit> , implying that the consequences of hybridization were not limited to introgression of mtdna from local animals to the invading species. from the perspective of the biological species concept, only one species should be considered if there is widespread hybridization among the nominal species. further information on the extent of past hybridization in the central area of the distribution is therefore required to define the taxonomy of rupicapra.

overall, the genus rupicapra exhibits levels of diversity comparable to those found in other genera of wild artiodactyla in europe  <cit> . microsatellite markers show a differentiation among populations of the ten currently recognized subspecies, though differences are not always clear-cut. most populations of chamois show intermediate levels of diversity either for microsatellites or for mtdna. even though the limited number and non-random distribution of samples precludes a detailed comparison of intra-population variability, some of the data are remarkable. the subspecies rupicapra, represented by many thousands of individuals, has very high levels of diversity, both for mitochondrial and for microsatellite markers. previous studies have documented the existence of genetic fragmentation at this geographic scale  <cit> . the high level of diversity at the mtdna level in the sample from the western alps can be attributed to ancient hybridization of very different lineages, as we have discussed. the subspecies ornata and cartusiana, which were classified as vulnerable and endangered by the caprinae specialist group  <cit> , show very low diversities at the level of mitochondrial dna:  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively. these low levels of mitochondrial diversity can be related to reduced female population sizes in the past due to geographic isolation. with regard to diversity for microsatellites, the subspecies cartusiana shows a moderate level of 42%, similar to other subspecies, while the subspecies ornata presents the extremely low value of 3%. six out of  <dig> individuals are homozygous for the  <dig> loci and only three loci present more than one allele. this level of diversity is lower than the lowest values reported for several bottlenecked mammalian populations: h e =  <dig>  for a bighorn sheep population founded from  <dig> individuals , h e =  <dig>  for the brown bear subpopulation isolated in the east cantabrian mountains  <cit> , h e =  <dig>  for a mexican grey wolf population founded with fewer than ten individuals  <cit>  or h e =  <dig>  for the alpine ibex population of the alpi marittime-mercantour, which was reintroduced between  <dig> and  <dig> with an effective number of founders possibly lower than ten animals  <cit> . the diversity of the subspecies ornata for microsatellites is possibly the lowest value reported in the literature for a population of non-selfing diploid organisms. this is a reflection of the recent past of the apennines population, with two extreme bottlenecks in the last century. the subspecies ornata nearly became extinct early in the  <dig> th century and in the late 1940s  <cit>  and recovered to  <dig> animals by  <dig>  <cit> .

inferences on the evolutionary history of chamois
the distribution of variation, both of mtdna and of microsatellites, shows a clear geographic signature with a west-east differentiation. present day mtdna clades show an east-west distribution along medium to high-altitude mountain ranges of southern europe and the near east: each clade of mtdna forms a patch occupying a delimited geographic area, even though clade mtc is split into two with both in the central area of distribution. for microsatellites, genetic and geographic distances have been shown to correlate  <cit> , consistent with gene flow among populations. for both types of markers the barrier of the alps is a factor that disrupts the distribution of genetic variation. the somewhat contrasting pictures offered by the two types of markers can be related to their different modes of evolution. microsatellite markers narrate the phylogenetic history of tens of thousands of years while mitochondrial markers shed light on the deeper phylogenetic history  <cit> . in addition, both markers, especially mtdna, provide information about phylogeographic events such as migration and hybridization of populations. the largely concordant geographic distribution of both old and new genetic variation in chamois implies that differentiation occurred without major migrations since the establishment in europe of the three extant mitochondrial lineages .

the earliest rupicapra fossils stem from the middle pleistocene and have been found in france, together with hemitragus and ovis, and a few remains from the rissian age have been found in the pyrenees, the italian alps, the apennines and hungary  <cit> . masini and lovari  <cit>  have suggested that the chamois, or its direct ancestor, may have reached the european region as a late immigrant during the early or middle pleistocene, probably from southwest asia. the phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> nucleotides, including five mitochondrial genes, concurs with previous studies  <cit> . it shows an initial split of the pyrenaica  and rupicapra  lineages  <dig>  mya, based on the molecular clock. clade mtc started to diverge from mtw very soon after,  <dig>  mya. the divergence time estimates between the three lineages have overlapping confidence intervals and place the radiation back to the plio-pleistocene before the beginning of the strong climatic oscillations of the quaternary. the contrast between this dating and that obtained from microsatellites  <cit>  can be attributed to the well known effect of homoplasy of microsatellites, which leads to underestimation of separation times for long diverging populations  <cit> . thus, molecular mitochondrial data place the age of modern chamois lineages before their first occurrence in the fossil record. in addition, an older mitochondrial lineage fossilized in the nucleus as a pseudogene has been identified in both species currently recognized  <cit> . its translocation to the nucleus was close to the radiation of present day clades, suggesting the existence of older chamois precursors in europe of a lineage that did not survive until the present.

the geographic patterns of mtdna and microsatellite variation suggest that the three major mitochondrial clades differentiated "in situ" with moderate migrations after their initial radiation. in the middle pleistocene, chamois occurred in the geographic area they currently occupy  <cit> . there have probably been multiple phases of isolation and hybridization between contiguous populations, most likely caused by expansions to lower altitudes during pleistocene glacial periods and contractions to high altitudes during interglacial periods. the presence of chamois at high altitudes in the swiss alps during the riss-würm interglacial period and its wider and continuous distribution on low altitude sites during the würm has been documented  <cit> . the ice sheets in the alps and the pyrenees during glacial maxima must have constituted barriers that greatly limited contacts between populations already showing a pattern of isolation by distance. clade west was presumably isolated to the west of the pyrenees, in the iberian peninsula; clade central must correspond to the isolation of chamois, most probably between the pyrenees and the alps; and clade east was probably isolated to the east of the alps during the glacial maxima and presumably extended its distribution during interglacial periods. it is highly likely that clade west recolonized the western alps and there encountered the lineage from the east that occupied most of the alps. the populations constituting clade mtc were probably split by the expansion of the two main clades into the central region. this interpretation is consistent with the paleontological evidence for the presence of r. rupicapra spp. in holocene deposits of the northern apennines  <cit> . the subspecies cartusiana, which lives in the isolated mountain system of chartreuse on the western edge of the french alps, carries mitochondria from clade mtc, while nuclear markers place it in the eastern group , denoting hybridization. this observation is in accordance with the hypothesis of lovari and scala  <cit> , who argue that hybridization might explain why r. r. cartusiana bears some phenotypes that are intermediate between r. rupicapra and r. pyrenaica. parallel data were observed with regard to the population from val di susa in the western alps, where most individuals carry the mitochondrial clade mtw together with nuclear markers of the clade μsate, denoting hybridization among lineages in the contact zone. finally, the warm climate of the holocene definitively isolated the populations, which were restricted to the tops of the different mountain ranges.

our data concur with other studies on comparative phylogeography in europe  <cit>  in explaining the divergence between lineages in the context of divergence among three main areas and of the effect of the alpine barrier in population differentiation. the historical events of population range contractions and expansions due to climatic oscillations may have eliminated haplotypes present in glacial areas and led to hybridizations between other lineages. our findings are consistent with a scenario of diversification of the genus rupicapra without major migrations since the time of radiation of present-day clades but involving periodic isolation of populations and subsequent range overlap, most probably triggered by climatic changes, and hybridization.

CONCLUSIONS
the mitochondrial phylogeny shows three main lineages that originated in a close period at the early pleistocene. there is a first split of the clades mtw-mtc from mte , soon followed  by the split of the left branch into clades mtc and mtw. the two nominal species of chamois r. pyrenaica and r. rupicapra are not monophyletic for mtdna. microsatellite genotypes form three well defined groups that do not exactly match the mitochondrial lineages but are closer to morphology and taxonomic classification. based on all these findings, rupicapra populations are subdivided into three main groups: the iberian populations, the apennine population and northeastern populations. the geographic signature in the distribution of variability suggests that differentiation occurred without major migrations. the phylogeographic patterns suggest an evolutionary history with range contractions and expansions related to climatic oscillations during the quaternary period and reflect a major effect of the alpine barrier on west-east differentiation. the contrasting phylogenies for mtdna and microsatellites for populations of chartreuse and the western alps indicate events of range overlap and hybridization among highly divergent lineages in the central area of the distribution. in addition, the extremely reduced variability of some subspecies shows the potential importance of lineage sorting in the composition of present-day populations.

our study points to the importance of reticulate evolution, with periods of isolation and reduction of population size followed by expansion and hybridization, in the diversification of close species.

