BACKGROUND
when closely related species that have diverged in isolation come into secondary contact, we have a unique opportunity to examine the range of pre- and post-zygotic isolating mechanisms that maintain the species boundary, and the degree to which the boundary may still be permeable to gene flow  <cit> . despite great interest in the process of speciation, we continue to know relatively little concerning the range of isolating mechanisms that characterize particular systems, the order in which isolating mechanisms evolve, and the degree to which they interact under certain environmental conditions  <cit> . likewise, the roles of natural and sexual selection in shaping traits that facilitate or constrain gene flow have long been recognized, but the degree to which they act in concert or in sequence is only beginning to be understood  <cit> ).

following secondary contact, it is expected that post-zygotic isolation due to low hybrid fitness will minimize gene flow between species  <cit> . lowered fitness in hybrids can be the result of genomic incompatibility between differentiated genomes  <cit> , perhaps only made evident under certain environmental conditions  <cit> . whether initial genomic differentiation that occurred in allopatry was the result of drift or ecological adaptation  <cit> , once genomes are mixed through hybridization, selection has an opportunity to act on novel recombinants. if hybrids have lower fitness, selection should act to minimize behaviors that cause pure parental individuals to incur the costs of hybridization  <cit> . that is, when post-zygotic isolation exists, selection should promote pre-zygotic isolation, perhaps in the form of assortative mating  <cit> .

in hybrid zones characterized by low hybrid fitness, traits that determine mate preferences are expected to be under selection  <cit> . however, the same traits that play a role in mating cues, are perhaps also responding to natural selection for their roles in other ecological interactions  <cit> . for example, body size is a trait that can be under both natural and sexual selection  <cit> . large body size is often associated with augmented aggression  <cit>  and the ability to defend territory  <cit> . however, large size accompanied by aggressive behavior may be a deterrent to mating interactions  <cit> . as such, in a hybrid zone, body size and aggression may respond to aspects of natural selection related to heightened interspecific competition, but these traits may simultaneously play a role in mate choice outcomes.

we have recently documented strong selection against hybrids  in a narrow hybrid zone between two sister species of woodrats, neotoma bryanti and n. lepida. specifically, in a 4-year demographic study, juvenile hybrids survived the first year at less than half the rate of their purebred counterparts . these contrasting patterns of survival at whitney well occurred at a sharp environmental transition between relatively mesic coastal/sierran oak-scrub and the mojave desert scrub community. in this ecological setting, the species are strongly segregated by habitat type with the large-bodied n. bryanti occupying the boulder-strewn, relatively mesic habitat on the west-side of the contact zone and n. lepida occupying the desert scrub habitat on the east end of the site  <cit> . the strong genotype-environment relationship exhibited by the parental classes suggests differential ecological adaptation. as such, it is likely that lowered hybrid fitness is at least partly ecologically-based. regardless of the source of selection against hybrids, of those that survive, at least some appear to be capable of reproducing because a wide range of recombinant genotypes exist across the zone with approximately 13% of the population being of hybrid origin  <cit> .

because low hybrid survival could be a source of selection against behaviors that lead to hybridization  <cit> , we sought to understand whether other isolating mechanisms exist in this system, specifically, whether the species exhibit pre-mating isolation in the form of assortative mating. to provide context for our observations of behavioral interactions among individuals in the contact zone, we compare them to observations between individuals from nearby allopatric populations. we expect that contact zone or sympatric populations that have experienced the cost of hybridization  are under selection to minimize heterospecific matings. therefore, purebred individuals should exhibit stronger patterns of assortative mating in sympatry than in allopatry, a pattern consistent with reproductive character displacement due to reinforcement  <cit> . our experimental design focuses on intersexual interactions with females being given a choice to interact with males of either species. for these interactions, males were tethered within their home cages, and thus, visitation by a female offered opportunity for a wide range of behavioral interactions from social-affiliative behaviors, including mating, to social-agonistic and aggressive behaviors.

RESULTS
behavioral interactions: the effects of female taxon in allopatry and sympatry
we conducted  <dig> trials involving  <dig> females, with  <dig> females tested only once. here we report results from cochran-mantel-haenszel tests χcmh <dig> that test whether the occurrence of the behavior  is independent of region. the cmh statistic controls for any change in behavior observed from trial  <dig> to trial  <dig>  social-affiliation decreased in sympatric versus allopatric trials in n. bryanti  but not in n. lepida . mating activity also declined from allopatry to sympatry in n. bryanti  and less sharply in n. lepida . the regional trend in aggressive behavior was opposite that of mating activity. in both species there was an increase in aggression in trials with sympatric females compared to trials with allopatric females . the relationships between region and affiliation, mating activity, or aggression, did not differ from female trial  <dig> to trial  <dig> . for this reason, we pooled data from all trials in further analysis. when it occurred, regardless of region, mating activity began in the first hour in 96% of the trials. neotoma bryanti females frequently mated with both males during a trial , more often than did n. lepida  and more often in allopatry than in sympatry . of the n. bryanti that mated with both males, half mated first with the conspecific and half first with the heterospecific male.

we conducted additional contingency tests to see whether the link between affiliation and mating, and aggression and the absence of mating, varied by female taxon and region. in encounters with only affiliative behavior , mating was less likely in sympatry than in allopatry , and the pattern did not differ by species . trials with only aggression  were more likely in sympatry than in allopatry , regardless of female taxon . sympatric females were less likely to mate with a male with whom they had been aggressive than were allopatric females. this was due to n. bryanti females whose decline in mating given aggression was larger than for n. lepida . in n. bryanti, aggressive encounters with conspecifics  rather than heterospecifics  produced most of this decline. in n. lepida, we never observed mating with heterospecific males when aggression occurred with them; with conspecific males, mating given aggression was rare and did not change in frequency from allopatry to sympatry .

females collected during the first sampling trip were less likely to mate  than those collected in the second or third trips . there was no effect of the season a trial was conducted on the likelihood of a mating  when sampling trip was also included in the model. because poor condition due to drought may have accounted in part for the low rate of mating initially observed in females trapped in the first sampling trip, we excluded these woodrats and again compared mating activity in sympatric and allopatric females. we still found that sympatric females were less likely to mate in trials .

intensity of female activity with conspecific and heterospecific males
with respect to activity prior to mating, n. bryanti females declined from allopatry to sympatry in time, visits, and affiliation with conspecific males, whereas n. lepida was regionally constant in these responses , differences suggestive but not significant in our analyses . with heterospecific males, a similar but weaker difference was evident between females by species in time, visits, and affiliation: a regional decline in n. bryanti and no change in n. lepida . overall, n. lepida showed consistently more affiliative behavior with conspecific males than n. bryanti . females did not differ in their behavior from trial  <dig> to  <dig>  and male relative mass did not consistently affect any female response variable . mating activity with conspecific males by females of both species declined strongly from allopatry to sympatry . mating activity with heterospecifics declined from sympatry to allopatry in n. bryanti, but was low in both regions in n. lepida .

random subsampling from all trials created  <dig> bootstrap replicates for interactions with conspecific males and interactions with heterospecific males that were statistically independent . the values shown are the percentage of times that a fixed effect was significant in the resulting  <dig> anova models . for time, visits, and mating attempts, female identity was included as a random effect , which was not necessary for the female-averaged responses of affiliation and aggression. in full models, trial number and male relative mass  were included as fixed effects, while reduced models omitted these  <dig> terms. for all  <dig> responses the reduced model set produced a better fit than the full model set , hence their percentages are shown .

afor affiliation and aggression, the average relative mass for the  <dig> sets of males tested with each female.

aggression was more frequent in sympatric than allopatric females with both conspecific and heterospecific males . however, the effect of region was stronger for interactions with heterospecific males than conspecific males . moreover, n. lepida females appeared to show more aggression with heterospecific males  and n. bryanti females with conspecific males . both findings emphasize the role of large n. bryanti males. likewise, the role of male relative mass was the strongest in the aggression models with heterospecifics, although significant  in only 36% of the bootstrap replicates.

net activity with conspecific males by female region and taxon
neotoma bryanti and n. lepida females differed in their preference for conspecific males based on general and mating activity but not based on affiliative behavior. neotoma bryanti spent more time with conspecific males in allopatry but not in sympatry, a regional change in preference not evident in n. lepida . neotoma lepida visited conspecific males more often than heterospecific males , a preference not evident in n. bryanti. neotoma bryanti females showed no mating preference for conspecific males, while n. lepida showed a strong preference only in allopatry . both species showed more affiliative behavior with conspecific males, but the preference was not significant for either species in either region .

net activity was the response with the conspecific male minus that with the heterospecific male. relative mass was the mass of the conspecific minus the heterospecific male. for time, visits, and mating attempts, female identity was included as a random effect , which was not necessary for the female-averaged responses of affiliation and aggression. for all  <dig> responses, the reduced models  produced a better fit than the full models based on aicc, hence their f and p are shown .

afor df, both the numerator and denominator degrees of freedom are given for each effect.

bfor affiliation and aggression, the average relative mass for the  <dig> sets of males tested with each female.

cthe denominator degrees of freedom varied based on model structure and missing values. the values by response  were  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively.

dfor visits, the denominator degrees of freedom were  <dig> 

for emphasis,  <dig>  ≤ p ≤  <dig>  are noted in italics and p ≤  <dig>  in bold type.

the analyses of net activity clearly show the difference in aggressive behavior by female species and male type . neotoma lepida were significantly more aggressive with heterospecific males and n. bryanti with conspecific males . moreover, this difference increased from allopatry to sympatry . in sum, interactions with n. bryanti males tended to be more aggressive in sympatry than in allopatry for both species of females.

body mass by species, sex, and region of origin
the n. bryanti experimental animals were larger than n. lepida  and the males larger than females . these trends held for the broader sample that included field records from whitney well and the mvz database . we observed a marginal increase in mass from allopatry to sympatry  in the experimental animals, an increase that was significant under broader sampling  but more pronounced in n. lepida . no other terms were significant in either factorial analysis .

discussion
in the zone of secondary contact between n. bryanti and n. lepida, females have the potential to encounter heterospecific males that may be suitable mates based on certain traits, but with whom hybridization appears to be costly  <cit> . using mate preference trials, we sought to assess whether, in addition to post-zygotic mechanisms , this system was also characterized by pre-zygotic behavioral mechanisms that would reduce gene flow between the species.

our behavioral trials demonstrated that the preference for conspecific males was not higher in sympatry than in allopatry for either species of woodrat. these results contradict the classic expectations of reinforcement  <cit>  in response to selection against hybridization. however, females of both species in sympatry were less likely to mate than were allopatric females following courtship, suggesting an increase in choosiness consistent with a higher selective cost of making a mating error in the contact zone. moreover, sympatric females were more likely to have aggressive encounters with males than allopatric females, suggesting a heightened tendency to recognize males as competitors.

asymmetry in assortative mating
our results show asymmetry between females of the two species in their degree of assortative mating. because of the overall decline in mating activity in sympatry, the evidence for species-specific mate preferences is pronounced only in allopatric females: n. lepida preferred conspecific males, whereas n. bryanti showed no such preference . neotoma bryanti females, especially those from allopatric sites, often mated with both males in a trial, while n. lepida rarely exhibited such promiscuity . if n. bryanti prefer conspecifics but are adapted to breed with multiple males , they may have been more likely to mate with the heterospecific male after mating with the conspecific. however, no such ordinal pattern was evident; in trials with double matings, n. bryanti mated with the heterospecific male first in half of the trials.

two species may come into secondary contact with behaviors and preferences that favor unidirectional introgression. for example, a preference for large or exaggerated traits  may predispose females of one species to choose heterospecific males if they possess more extreme traits than conspecifics  <cit> ; reviewed in pfennig 2007]. we have no evidence that female n. bryanti, n. lepida, or their congeners  <cit>  prefer larger males or those with more extreme traits. however, the precopulatory behaviors of the two species were quite different in our trials, and may have been influenced by the body size difference of typical conspecific and heterospecific pairings. before entering male cages, both allopatric and sympatric n. lepida females went back and forth between the entry tubes of both males more often than did n. bryanti, perhaps evaluating olfactory and visual cues. neotoma lepida females also entered the cages of conspecific males significantly more than those of heterospecific males , which tracked their mate preference. we suggest that the large size difference between n. lepida females and n. bryanti males  played a role in reducing heterospecific affiliation and increasing heterospecific aggression with these females . unlike n. bryanti females, n. lepida never overcame encounters that we scored as aggressive to reach copulation with n. bryanti males.

preliminary genetic data suggest that hybridization is asymmetric in the field, and lies in the same direction as we observed experimentally; for all three f <dig> hybrid offspring with known parents , n. bryanti was the mother  <cit> . beyond our hypothesis that behavior and size dimorphism across species plays a role in this asymmetry, we cannot rule out that genomic imprinting and/or other mechanisms may also favor directional hybridization  <cit> . nor do we yet know how the survivorship and fecundity of hybrids with n. bryanti mothers compares to offspring from reciprocal heterospecific pairings. pfennig  <cit>  found that asymmetric hybridization is favored in spadefoot toads under conditions  where the traits of hybrid offspring are favored . because the woodrat contact zone occurs at a sharp ecotone between woodland and desert scrub, offspring of n. bryanti females may benefit from traits carried by n. lepida which are better adapted to desert conditions, particularly in dry years. although similar arguments could be made favoring introgression in the opposite direction , n. lepida females may typically be intimidated from reaching advanced courtship and copulation with n. bryanti males due to their large size and observed tendency to be more aggressive.

decrease in mating activity in sympatry
despite the lack of evidence for an increase in assortative mating, females of both species from sympatric sites were less likely to mate during the two-hour trial period than were allopatric females . at least three factors may explain this pattern. first, the decrease in mating activity in sympatry may result from selection favoring increased aggression, which ultimately interferes with courtship. aggression increased in sympatry between females and both species of males , matching the decrease in observed mating activity . in woodrats, “boxing”, a forward-facing, paw-to-paw jabbing by participants, often precedes lordosis by females and copulation  <cit>  but can also lead to aggressive encounters  <cit>  such as chasing or biting by either the female or the male, and retreat by one or both parties. importantly, aggressive encounters were more common with sympatric n. bryanti males, meaning that n. bryanti females were subject to more aggression with conspecific males in sympatry, and n. lepida females with heterospecifics . nishikawa  <cit>  and deitloff et al.  <cit>  observed a similar increase in interspecific aggression in sympatry in two different species pairs of plethodon salamanders. the pattern we observed in our trials is consistent with one wherein both species of woodrats in sympatry selectively benefit from increased aggression, perhaps because it increases their ability to compete for optimal den sites, especially the relatively rare boulder den sites  <cit> . as suggested by peiman and robinson  <cit> , the pattern should be more pronounced with the dominant species, as we observed in interactions with larger n. bryanti males .

we suggest that territorial interactions in sympatry may also selectively favor larger body size, particularly in the subordinate species. based on a combination of our field data and that of others from the museum of vertebrate zoology database, we found a significant increase in adult body size in n. lepida and a marginal increase in n. bryanti in the zone of sympatry . a similar increase and convergence in adult body mass was observed between neotoma macrotis and neotoma fuscipes in the sierra nevada  <cit> , also two species exhibiting strong territoriality around denning sites. in areas of multi-species overlap in woodrats, large-bodied species outcompete smaller-bodied species for access to optimal den sites  <cit> . it is reasonable to expect that when high quality den sites, such as those in boulder outcrops, are sparsely distributed across the landscape, there will be strong competition to occupy these sites, potentially selecting for increased body size and competitive behaviors . body size in woodrats is certainly also responsive to other factors, most notably environmental temperature  <cit> , and changes in this trait would alter competitive abilities in areas of sympatry.

a second explanation for the dip in mating activity in sympatry, and not exclusive to the first explanation of augmented aggressive tendencies, may be increased choosiness by sympatric females. each trial offered females only two choices, with sympatric females more likely to reject both. consistent with an increase in choosiness, when courtship occurred  without observed aggression, sympatric females were still less likely to mate than were allopatric females. this pattern was stronger in n. bryanti but numerically there were more trials in which n. lepida courted but did not mate. in allopatric populations where we measured relatively high rates of mating, such behavior began within the first hour in over 95% of the trials. while our trial length appeared adequate for mate choice in these females, it may have been inadequate for pairs from sympatric locations. successful pairing in sympatric populations may require more time for mate inspection and evaluation than our trials allowed. if true, this would suggest that a female’s prior knowledge of her potential mates may be particularly important in contact zones. even in non-contact zone woodrat populations, females typically mate with  <dig> or more neighboring males  <cit> , individuals that she has been living near and presumably had an opportunity to inspect. especially in an environment where aggression and territoriality may be heightened , established neighbor relationships may be particularly important in mediating aggression and making mating decisions.

a third hypothesis to explain the lower rates of copulation by sympatric females is that some of these females may have been in poor condition. of the sympatric females trapped in our first trip, 15% of the n. bryanti and 0% of the n. lepida copulated in their first trial in captivity, but the rate of mating by these females increased to 38-40% in their second trial ≥ 90 days after being fed ad libitum in the lab. the lower likelihood of mating for females trapped during the first sampling trip compared to the 2nd and 3rd trips was significant. however, even after excluding these females, sympatric females mated less often than allopatric females, suggesting that the condition of these females did not explain the greater reluctance of sympatric females to mate. while our results are robust to the immediate post-field condition of these females, their initial reluctance to mate raises an important issue concerning the overall condition of sympatric versus allopatric animals. in this system  the sympatric populations exist at the edge of their respective species’ ranges where environmental conditions may be suboptimal, even in the absence of a heterospecific. while captive conditions would quickly equalize some aspects of condition in test subjects, there may be lingering effects of poor field conditions that are a true reflection of life in range-edge habitats. if, on average, individuals from range-edge populations exist in relatively poor condition that contributes to low motivation to mate, this may be an important factor determining population dynamics and the potential for interspecific gene flow.

CONCLUSIONS
our previous work in this system provided evidence of pre-zygotic isolation due to fine-scale habitat segregation that limits interspecific mating opportunities, and post-zygotic isolation due to apparent low hybrid survival in the early stages of life  <cit> . in contrast, the current analysis reveals behavioral interactions that would seem to increase the potential for, at least, unidirectional gene flow between the species. specifically, our analyses show that n. lepida females from allopatric populations show a preference for conspecifics, whereas allopatric n. bryanti females are equivocal in their choice of mates. although these preferences may be due to species-specific mate recognition, the larger body size and greater aggressiveness of n. bryanti males likely play central roles in n. lepida mate preference. that is, n. lepida females may have a negative response to the much larger n. bryanti males, whereas n. bryanti females may not be similarly deterred by the smaller, relatively docile n. lepida males. because female n. lepida have a clear preference for conspecifics in allopatry, it is likely that such females would have come into secondary contact with this predisposition, and that this preference would have limited direct interspecific matings and gene flow. in contrast, given patterns in allopatry, n. bryanti females likely came into secondary contact amenable to mating with heterospecifics, a behavior promoting interspecific gene flow.

the intensity of aggression exhibited among sympatric animals was so pronounced as to make assessment of mate preferences difficult. however, even in trials where aggression did not occur, sympatric females still mated less often, which may indicate increased choosiness or decreased sexual motivation in these animals. while field observations of aggression and mating patterns are needed to confirm the findings of our laboratory trials, body size and aggression likely play key roles in the rate of interspecific gene flow in this system.

while we have yet to model evolutionary outcomes that consider the behavioral barriers  that we have described, all else being equal, if post-zygotic isolation is strong, n. bryanti would appear to be at a potential fitness disadvantage. however, there appear to be relatively few opportunities for the species to interbreed because of their strong ecological segregation. as such, the potential evolutionary impact of the behavioral patterns observed in the laboratory may not be fully realized in a natural field setting because of the over-riding role of ecological segregation. adequately modeling the dynamics of this zone will require a more complete understanding of the mate choice patterns and reproductive success of hybrids that survive to adulthood.

in conclusion, this system provides a new example of multiple pre- and post-zygotic isolating mechanisms operating simultaneously. the n. bryanti/n. lepida hybrid zone offers the potential to further understand how natural and sexual selection maintain reproductive isolating mechanisms, and how these mechanisms interact to inhibit or, in some cases, facilitate interspecific gene flow.

