BACKGROUND
one goal of microarray studies is to identify transcripts that are regulated similarly across a variety of contexts. the integration of gene expression information from multiple microarray studies can enhance the characterization of gene expression profiles that are consistently expressed across experiments. the across-study integration of information can support a more accurate identification of transcriptome biomarkers, functional categories, and pathways associated with the process of interest than results from individual studies.

typical integration of information from multiple microarray studies relies on a simple comparison of lists of genes within study considered to be differentially expressed at a predetermined statistical threshold  <cit> . this approach is a useful first step to combine information across studies. however, simple overlap of lists of genes can result in potentially biased conclusions for two reasons. first, genes that may exhibit the same pattern across studies, but do not surpass the minimum threshold within one or multiple studies, may not be detected by this approach. second, genes that may exhibit differential expression in more than one study may not reach differential expression when all the data across studies is considered, because the variation across studies is greater than the variation within study.

the usefulness of meta-analysis in clinical  <cit>  and microarray studies  <cit>  has been widely investigated. rhodes et al.  <cit>  implemented a meta-analysis of microarray studies by computing a summary statistic that consisted in summing the log-transformed significance p-values calculated for each study using one-sided random permutation t-tests. some meta-analyses of microarray experiments aim at identifying biomarkers with particular expression patterns instead of exploring all possible profiles  <cit> . other meta-analysis implementations compare the list of top ranking predictive genes using parametric and non-parametric rank aggregation approaches  <cit> . although the use of significance and rank-order metrics removes concerns of incomparable expression levels across experiments, these approaches did not consider the profile of expression. zhang and fenstermacher  <cit>  proposed the identification of promising reporter genes using a rank-sum test statistic, and the combination of expression levels across studies using a linear index that is trained and tested across data sets. a similar approach implemented by schneider et al.  <cit>  confirms the expression signature of selected genes found in one data set on other data sets. this two-stage approach may result in loss of information across stages, and accurate training and validation requires a large number of studies. conlon et al.  <cit>  proposed to use an indicator variable for differential expression that is a function of the total number of genes. however, the number of genes can vary between studies, and the indicator did not take into account the sign of the differential expression.

model-based meta-analysis is a suitable framework to conduct an objective, integrative, and comparative study of multiple related microarray gene expression experiments, and help better understand the transcriptome and genomic basis of complex traits. in model-based meta-analysis, linear models are used to combine indicators of expression patterns from individual studies  and associated test-statistics or functions used to evaluate the expression pattern across studies. traditional meta-analytical approaches that combine estimates  or observations  across studies in one single step offer a comprehensive solution to the simultaneous consideration of multiple studies  <cit> . these approaches have a solid and extensive theoretical framework, jointly model expression patterns and associated measures of uncertainty, and can be used to detect differentially expressed genes across studies or to identify biomarkers associated with the conditions of interest. in addition to providing a list of genes differentially expressed, results from meta-analysis approaches are customarily depicted in funnel plots that facilitate the interpretation of results. however, a small number of applications of model-based meta-analysis to the expression of thousands of genes have been reported  <cit> , and none have compared the performance of alternative approaches for different gene expression scenarios and across studies with different levels of relationship. choi et al.  <cit>  considered the meta-analysis of standardized mean differences, or differences between the means of the condition levels divided by the pooled standard deviation. these student's t-statistic values were computed for each study and combined using fixed and random effects meta-analyses. the difference between these approaches is that random effects meta-analysis accounts for heterogeneity across studies. random effects meta-analysis was more appropriate than fixed effects meta-analysis when combining studies from different research groups that may have substantial inter-study variation  <cit> . studies using simulated data sets have compared the advantages of different approaches under different circumstances that can be extrapolated to gene expression data sets. tudur-smith et al.  <cit>  conducted a meta-analysis of  <dig> simulated trials and concluded the absolute bias and spread of the estimate of the parameter increased as the degree of heterogeneity across studies increased. for a fixed underlying value of the parameter, the absolute bias in the estimate of the residual variance used in hypothesis testing did not exhibited a systematic pattern for increasing values of simulated heterogeneity. wu et al.  <cit>  explored the power and consistency to detect linkage and association of loci to a disease with meta-analysis of p-values , and pooled raw data analysis using simulated data. this study showed that, under homogeneous conditions, the results from meta-analysis and pooled data analysis were similar with meta-analysis having minimal loss of power.

the honey bee  is a well-established model organism to study the genomic architecture of physiological, neurological, and behavioral maturation  <cit> . worker bee behavioral maturation results at the colony level in an age-related division of labor; young bees work in the hive for the first two to three weeks of adult life  and older bees forage  <cit> . these behavioral changes are also associated with profound physiological, neuroanatomical, and neurochemical changes. gene expression studies targeting specific honey bee genotypes , time points, and environmental conditions  have demonstrated that behavioral maturation in honey bees is associated with simultaneous changes in expression of thousands of genes in the brain  <cit> . denison and raymond-delpech  <cit>  presented an extensive review of changes in gene expression that accompany the transition to foraging.

the goals of this study are 1) to demonstrate the complementary advantages of the meta-analytical approaches to objectively integrate information across studies, and identification of genes with consistent expression profiles across studies are demonstrated, and 2) to fully mine information from eight microarray studies that have characterized differences in brain gene expression between one-day-old and forager honey bees. the performance of three complementary approaches  to detect consistent differential expression on a genome-wide level were compared. functional analysis was performed to support the results from meta-analysis. from a biological perspective, the objective assessment of the degree of agreement between studies can help identify common regulatory genes and pathways that could be responsible for simultaneous  fluctuation in the expression of some genes and the inalterability in the expression of other genes.

RESULTS
a total of  <dig> transcripts were analyzed and a summary of the number of transcripts with significant  differential expression obtained from the individual-study, study-level, and sample-level meta-analyses is presented in table  <dig>  the significance threshold corresponded to an approximate false discovery rate-adjusted p-value <  <dig>  in the within study analyses. a breakdown of the results by positive  and negative  significant differential expression is provided in additional file  <dig>  the individual studies correspond to eight independent microarray datasets that do not share samples or microarrays, and include brain gene-expression measurements from one-day-old and forager honey bees. the eight studies were also divided into group <dig> and group  <dig>  corresponding to the two separate publications  <cit>  in which the studies were first presented. the four studies in group  <dig> correspond to four distinct species; a. mellifera , a. cerana , a. dorsata  and, a. florea  honey bees raised in colonies of the same species  <cit> . the four studies in group  <dig> correspond to a. mellifera  honey bees from two subspecies raised in two host colonies: a. mellifera mellifera honey bees raised in an a. mellifera mellifera  host colony, a. mellifera mellifera honey bees raised in an a. mellifera ligustica  host colony, a. mellifera ligustica honey bees raised in an a. mellifera ligustica  host colony, and a. mellifera ligustica honey bees raised in an a. mellifera mellifera  host colony. thus, in addition to individual- and meta-analysis, results from the two sets of studies  are also described.

1ac: apis cerana bees raised on an apis cerana colony; ad: apis dorsata bees raised on an apis dorsata colony; af: apis florea bees raised on an apis florea colony; am: apis mellifera bees raised on an apis mellifera colony, ll: apis mellifera ligustica bees raised on an apis mellifera ligustica colony; lm: apis mellifera ligustica bees raised on an apis mellifera mellifera colony; ml: apis mellifera mellifera bees raised on an apis mellifera ligustica colony; mm: apis mellifera mellifera bees raised on an apis mellifera mellifera colony.

2number of transcripts with differential expression  within individual analyses, study-level standardized , and sample-level  meta-analysis .

3upper off-diagonals are the number of transcripts identified differentially expressed in all pairs of analyses relative to the maximum number of significant transcripts that can overlap in both analyses.

4lower off-diagonals are the percentage of transcripts identified differentially expressed in all pairs of analyses relative to the maximum number of significant transcripts that can overlap in both analyses.

comparison of individual-study and meta analyses
the number of transcripts with significant differential expression between one-day-old and forager honey bees obtained from the individual study analyses ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> . the ad study had the lowest number of differentially expressed transcripts and lowest overlap with any other study. excluding results from ad, the number of differentially expressed genes present in at least two studies in group  <dig>  was on average  <dig>  and slightly lower than the number of genes in at least two studies in group  <dig> that ranged between  <dig> and  <dig>  the percentage of cdna transcripts differentially expressed and overlapping among the studies ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> %  relative to the number of cdnas identified in one of the studies. the highest and lowest overlap of differentially expressed transcripts was found in the comparison of studies ac against am and ad, respectively . using the number of differentially expressed transcripts between one-day-old and forager honey bees as an indicator of the similarity between studies, ac, af, and am in group  <dig> are more similar to each other with an overlap ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> transcripts, or approximately 38% of the significant genes. in group  <dig>  all studies have a similar overlap in number of significant transcripts, ranging from  <dig> to  <dig>  or approximately 20% of the significant genes. the number of differentially expressed transcripts found in studies from two different groups ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  excluding ad that also had the lowest overlap with studies from group  <dig>  across groups of studies, mm, ml, and lm are next in proximity to am with  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> genes in common, respectively. the highest overlap of differentially expressed genes among studies from different groups was found between a. mellifera am and mm studies.

the study-level and sample-level meta-analyses were able to overcome the weak consistency among studies, identifying  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts with significant differential expression, respectively . the overlap of transcripts with differential expression between the study-level and subject-level meta-analyses was  <dig> % of the minimum number of transcripts identified among both analyses. the overlap of transcripts with significant differential expression between the individual-study analyses and the study-level meta-analysis ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> % of the transcripts identified within study, excluding study ad that had an overlap of  <dig> %. the overlap of transcripts with significant differential expression between individual studies and the sample-level meta-analysis ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> %.

the venn diagram in figure  <dig> depicts the overlap of transcripts identified as differentially expressed by the study-level and sample-level meta-analyses in at least two individual-study analyses. of the  <dig> transcripts detected by the sample-level meta-analysis,  <dig> transcripts were not detected in at least two individual-study analyses, and  <dig> transcripts were not detected by any single individual-study analysis. likewise, of the  <dig> transcripts detected by the study-level meta-analysis,  <dig> were not detected in at least two individual-study analyses. of the  <dig> transcripts differentially expressed in the analysis of at least two studies,  <dig> were detected by meta-analysis, and  <dig> transcripts could not be confirmed by either the study- or sample-level meta-analyses. the differential expression of  <dig> transcripts was corroborated in all three cross-study approaches. the number of transcripts differentially expressed in two, three, and more studies was  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> respectively .

the number and percentage of transcripts detected by any individual-study analysis and sample-level meta-analysis is equal to or higher than the number of transcripts detected by the same individual-study analysis and study-level meta-analysis . in addition, the relative percentage of genes that overlap between individual analyses and sample-level meta-analysis is substantially higher and more variable than the overlap with the study-level meta-analysis in all the group  <dig> studies, relative to the group  <dig> studies. the analysis of the ac study had the highest relative overlap of differentially expressed transcripts with sample-level meta-analysis among all individual-study analyses , but had an intermediate overlap with the study-level meta-analysis results  relative to other individual-study analyses. conversely, the analysis of the ml study had the lowest overlap of transcripts differentially expressed with the sample-level meta-analysis among all individual-study analyses , but had an intermediate overlap with the study-level meta-analysis  relative to other individual-study analyses. the overlap between the transcripts detected to be differentially expressed by the individual analyses of group  <dig> studies and study-level or sample-level meta-analyses were consistent across studies .

consideration of gene expression profiles
consideration of the sign  of the transcripts detected by the individual and meta-analyses provided additional insights into the results . there were no changes in the sign of transcripts detected as differentially expressed in two or more individual-study analyses within group, with the exception of  <dig> transcripts that had positive signs  in the analysis of the am study, and had negative signs in the analysis of the af study. in addition, a few transcripts exhibited changes in the expression pattern when studies from both groups were considered simultaneously. amongst the group  <dig> individual-study analyses, the am study had the highest number of transcripts  that had a different sign in at least one group  <dig> individual-study analysis. the percentage of transcripts differentially expressed with the same sign and overlapping among the studies ranged from  <dig> % to  <dig> %, relative to the number of transcripts identified in one of the studies. the highest and lowest overlap of differentially expressed transcripts with the same sign was found in the comparison of the analysis of the ac study against the am and ad studies, respectively . the percentage of transcripts differentially expressed with different signs and overlapping among the studies ranged from 0% to  <dig> %, relative to the number of transcripts identified in one of the studies. the analysis of the ad study resulted in the highest percentage of transcripts that had an opposite sign in any other individual-study analysis , followed by the analysis of the am study. the difference in ranking between absolute and relative counts is due to the fewer number of significant transcripts detected in the analysis of the ad study, compared to the am study.

all the transcripts that exhibited differential expression in an individual-study analysis and study-level meta-analysis had a consistent pattern or sign . most transcripts that exhibited differential expression in an individual-study analysis and sample-level meta-analysis had a consistent pattern or sign. the transcripts that had a different sign in an individual-study analysis compared to the sample-level meta-analysis had the same sign as the meta-analysis in other individual-study analyses. most analyses, individual-study and meta-study, had similar numbers of differentially expressed transcripts with positive  and negative signs. in addition, no particular sign or pattern of differential expression dominated across analyses. the exception was study am that had  <dig> and  <dig> positively and negatively differentially-expressed transcripts, respectively . although there were no substantial differences in the number of positive and negative estimates across all analyses considered, the overlap of counts by sign between individual analyses and sample-level meta-analysis did not necessarily reflect the trends observed in the individual analyses. this situation was observed in the lm, ml, and mm studies. for example, the total number of positive and negative results in ml was  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively, yet the overlap with sample-level meta-analysis was  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively .

transcript meta-analysis scenarios
to typify the strength of the different types of approaches to integrate information across studies, results from the individual-study, study-level and subject-level meta-analyses for scenarios of particular statistical and biological relevance were compared. figure  <dig> presents the estimates  of differential expression between forager and one-day-old honey bees corresponding to four transcript scenarios. figure 2a depicts a transcript case where meta-analysis detected differential expression, meanwhile each individual-study analysis failed to detect differential expression. both the sample-level and study-level meta-analyses detected differential expression for transcript bb170018a20b <dig>  with significant differential expression across maturation stages. however, none of the eight individual-study analyses detected differential expression. this transcript represents the honey bee gene gb10350-pa that is similar to the fruit fly gene  fbgn <dig> , which encodes a protein reported to interact with the cyclin k and muscle lim proteins  <cit> . figure 2b depicts a transcript  that exhibited differential expression in four individual-study analyses. neither meta-analysis was able to detect this transcript because there was an inconsistent pattern of differential expression across the studies considered. this transcript represents the honey bee gene gb19001-pa that is similar to the fruit fly gene fbgn <dig> , which encodes a protein reported to interact with a pall  protein  <cit> . figure 2c depicts a transcript  that was differentially expressed in all except one individual-study analysis and the sample-level meta-analysis. however, the study-level meta-analysis was not able to uncover a significant difference. this transcript represents the honey bee gene gb13606-pa, predicted to code for a hypothetical protein. on the other hand, figure 2d presents a transcript  that was consistently and differentially expressed in three individual-study analyses and in the study-level meta-analysis, but the sample-level meta-analyses was not able to uncover a significant difference. this transcript represents the honey bee gene gb15917-pa that is similar to the fruit fly gene fbgn <dig> , which encodes a protein reported to interact with the mephisto/sickle and the kcnq potassium channel proteins  <cit> .

genes and gene ontology classes
individual genes and gene ontology  <cit>  categories detected by the meta-analyses approaches were evaluated. of the  <dig> unique transcripts with differential expression detected by either meta-analysis,  <dig> were new transcripts that would have not been detected in at least one individual-study analysis. of the  <dig> transcripts,  <dig> transcripts were solely detected by the sample-level meta-analysis, two transcripts were solely detected by the study-level meta-analysis , and two additional transcripts  overlap between the study-level and sample-level meta-analyses. the latter four transcripts have not been assigned to honey bee genes or fruit fly gene orthologs.

the  <dig> transcripts detected by the sample-level meta-analysis mapped to  <dig> fruit fly genes with go information . the representation of molecular functions and biological processes among the  <dig> genes was analyzed using fisher's exact test  <cit> . genes for two molecular functions, cofactor binding  and purine nucleotide binding  had significant over-representation at p-value <  <dig>  × 10- <dig> and p-value <  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  respectively. biological processes in which transcripts were significantly over-represented were macromolecule metabolic process , cellular metabolic process , and primary metabolic process  with p-values <  <dig>  × 10- <dig>   <dig>  × 10- <dig> and  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  respectively. functional analysis of transcripts significant and differentially expressed from the sample-level meta-analysis that overlapped with any other individual-study or study-level meta-analyses identified enrichment of the following go biological process categories: generation of precursor metabolites and energy , cellular macromolecule metabolic process , transport , cell differentiation , and system development .

in terms of individual genes, among the  <dig> transcripts detected solely by the sample-level meta-analysis, two transcripts merit special attention because they are new to the list of genes associated with one-day-old and forager differences, and because of their known biological role. transcript bb160024a10a <dig> similar to the fruit fly gene fbgn <dig> , was over-expressed in forager relative to one-day-old honey bees, and is involved in adult behavior , adult locomotory behavior , and response to heat . transcript bb170016b10a <dig>  similar to fruit fly gene fbgn <dig> , was also over-expressed in foragers and is involved in olfactory behavior .

forty-five genes were identified as differentially expressed in four or more studies, of which  <dig> appeared in one or both meta-analyses and  <dig> had go information . genes over-expressed in foragers relative to one-day-old honey bees include genes corresponding to flybase ids fbgn <dig>  fbgn <dig> and fbgn <dig>  gene fbgn <dig> exhibits chitinase activity and chitin can be found in the exoskeleton of insects. flybase id fbgn <dig>  the para gene, functions in male courtship behavior and veined wing generated song production. conversely, genes under-expressed in foragers relative to one-day-old honey bees include flybase ids fbgn <dig> , fbgn <dig> , fbgn <dig> , fbgn <dig> , fbgn <dig> , fbgn <dig>  and fbgn <dig> . two genes had opposite differential expression patterns  among studies. the sick gene , that participates in the defense response to gram-negative bacterium, was over-expressed in forager relative to one-day-old honey bees in studies ll, ml and mm, yet was under-expressed in forager relative to one-day-old honey bees in the study ad. this gene is represented as a funnel plot in figure 2b. the oatp26f gene  that participates in organic anion transportation, was over-expressed in forager relative to one-day-old honey bees in studies ac, af and am, yet under-expressed in forager relative to one-day-old honey bees in study mm.

discussion
comparison of individual-study and meta analyses
transcripts with an inconsistent direction of differential expression or significance across the different meta-analyses require further study within and across studies. adequate characterization of these possible scenarios can help design additional targeted experiments aimed at resolving the discrepancies among studies. the sample-level meta-analysis detected more differentially expressed transcripts than the study-level meta-analysis in cases with consistent expression profile across studies that exceeded potential variation across studies. the study-level approach was more appropriate to detect differential expression in transcripts with patterns that were consistent across studies, but less pronounced than the variation across studies. because study is the experimental unit of the study-level meta-analysis, this approach may have insufficiently consistent and precise information to detect differential expression when a limited number of microarray experiments are available. a clear demonstration of the complementary advantage of the meta-analytical approaches across gene and study scenarios is provided in figure  <dig>  for example, figure 2a illustrates the ability of the meta-analyses to combine consistent expression patterns of genes across studies and gain precision of estimates.

the imperfect overlap of results from the individual- and meta-study analyses corroborates reports that the association between the expression of numerous genes and behavioral maturation is highly sensitive to other genetic or environmental factors  <cit> . the complementary nature of the individual and meta-study approaches allows the identification of study-independent and study-dependent gene expression patterns. evaluation of the overlap between individual-study analyses and sample-level meta-analysis provided insights into the multi-study scenarios that benefit the most from meta-analyses. for example, among group  <dig> studies, the am study had the highest overlap in number of significant transcripts with other studies, followed by ac and af studies . the same trend was observed in the overlap between these studies and the sample-level meta-analysis. on the other hand, the greater overlap in significant transcripts between group  <dig> studies  relative to the overlap among group  <dig> studies was not reflected in the overlap between group  <dig> studies and the sample-level meta-analysis. an explanation for the seemingly contradictory behavior of sample-level meta-analysis and group  <dig> versus group  <dig> studies is the dimensionality of the overlap across more than two studies. most of the overlaps between studies within group  <dig> and other studies were generally observed only on pairs of studies, whereas most overlaps between studies within group  <dig> and other studies were generally observed on more than two studies.

another insight gained from the application of model-based meta-analysis approaches to the eight honey bee studies was the assessment of the variation in brain gene expression across studies, relative to the variation across honey bee genotypes. the reason for the higher overlap of differentially expressed genes among group  <dig> studies, relative to the overlap among group  <dig> studies, is that the samples pertain to a. mellifera subspecies while group  <dig> studies corresponded to a. mellifera and other honey bee species. as expected, the transcripts identified in the analyses of the am study in group  <dig> exhibited the higher overlap with results from the group  <dig> studies that used two a. mellifera subspecies .

the transcripts detected in the analysis of the ac study had the highest relative overlap with sample-level meta-analysis and average overlap with the study-level meta-analysis results . these results are consistent with the high overlap between the lists of transcripts detected by ac, af and am. the superior performance of the sample-level relative to the study-level meta-analysis for this study suggests that the analysis of the observations was able to pool the consistent information across studies that have low study-to-study variation. the combination of eight consistent estimates of differential expression in the study-level meta-analysis was not able to compensate for the number of estimates, and thus the overlap between the lists of transcripts from individual studies was lower. the inability of study-level meta-analysis to overcome partial consistency on a limited number of studies was also observed in the meta-analysis of mouse embryo studies  <cit> .

consideration of gene expression profiles
although the list of transcripts detected in the analysis of the am study had high overlap with the lists of transcripts differentially expressed in the ac and ad studies, the am list of transcripts had the lowest overlap with the sample-level meta-analysis list of genes. this result was related to the change in the sign or pattern of the differential expression of one-day-old relative to forager honey bees between the individual analysis and sample level meta-analysis . the consideration of the overlap of significance p-values and sign of the estimates is critical to understanding this scenario. although there was a high number of transcripts with significant differential expression in am and ac or ad, the sign of some of these transcripts differed between these studies, and consequently, the meta-analysis did not detect these transcripts.

the analyses of af and ad studies had the highest and lowest overlap of transcripts with study-level meta-analysis, respectively . the former outcome suggests a situation where consistent estimates in af and other studies, together with the low variation within study, overcomes the limited number of studies  analyzed, enhancing the capability of the study-level meta-analysis to detect differential expression. in this situation, the sample-level meta-analysis was unable to detect differential expression because the consistency of the results across studies was not able to compensate for the variation across studies. the outcome associated with the ad study is due to the low consistency of estimates between ad and other studies together with limited number of studies analyzed.

the sample-level meta-analysis detected more differentially expressed transcripts than the study-level meta-analysis in the presence of consistent patterns of expression in a few studies, and small variation between studies relative to the overall signal of differential expression. this is particularly evident on the ability of the sample-level meta-analysis to detect differentially expressed transcripts that overlap with individual studies, even though the signs may differ . transcripts with significant yet different expression patterns in one study and sample-level meta-analysis were detected in other studies with patterns consistent with the meta-analysis. there was no change in the sign of the profile of differential expression between individual analyses and study-level meta-analysis. thus, the analysis of eight estimates by the study-level meta-analysis was not able to detect transcripts that may be significant in multiple studies but have different sign, for the levels of variation within study in the present work.

comparison to previous work
results from the analyses of individual studies were consistent with results from the combined analysis of the ac, ad, af, and am studies presented by sen sarma et al.  <cit> , and with results from the combined analysis of the mm, ml, lm, and ll data sets presented by whitfield et al.  <cit>  and rodriguez-zas et al.  <cit> . sen sarma et al.  <cit>  reported a total of  <dig> genes with differential expression  between one day-old and forager honey bees across all four species , and of these,  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in two or more species. in the present analysis,  <dig> transcripts were differentially expressed in at least one species, and  <dig> transcripts were differentially expressed in two or more species in group  <dig>  also studied by sen sarma et al.  <cit>  . in the present study, a simple comparison of lists of differentially expressed genes indicated that ac and am had the highest number of genes in common . this result is consistent with the fact that, among all four species, ac and am are most similar in ecological, physiological, and behavioral characteristics  <cit> .

the difference on the total number of differentially expressed genes reported by sen sarma et al.  <cit>  and in this study can be attributed to two reasons. first, the size of the data sets in the individual analyses presented in our study is approximately one-fourth of the total data set analyzed in sen sarma et al.  <cit> . the combined analysis of all four data sets is likely to offer more precise adjustments for technical sources of variation. because a purpose of this study was to demonstrate the implementation of meta-analysis to integrate multiple studies, the four species were treated and analyzed as independent studies, thus potentially reducing the capability of each analysis to detect differentially expressed transcripts. second, the model used to detect differential expression in sen sarma et al.  <cit>   differed from the model considered in this study.

similarly the lower number of genes with differential expression detected in any one individual analysis in the present study  compared to whitfield et al.  <cit>   was attributed to different sample sizes and experimental models. whitfield et al.  <cit>  analyzed brain gene-expression measurements from  <dig> microarrays including one-day-old, forager, and honey bees at four additional intermediate stages of development, all arranged in a loop design. in the present study, only data from one-day-old and forager honey bees were compared, thus reducing the size of the data analyzed and information available to adjust for technical sources of variation. this difference in data sets was accompanied by a difference in the model used by whitfield et al.  <cit> .

the higher number of genes exhibiting differential expression between one-day-old and forager honey bees found in group  <dig> studies relative to group  <dig> studies is consistent with the higher number of differentially expressed genes reported by whitfield et al.  <cit>  relative to the number reported by sen sarma et al.  <cit>  . in the present work, the analyses of the ll and lm studies, that shared the subspecies of bee and differ on the colony, had the highest number of differentially expressed genes that overlapped . this result is in agreement with rodriguez-zas et al.  <cit>  that reported that the vast majority of the genes with differential expression across six time points in a. mellifera ligustica honey bees exhibited the same pattern across colonies.

the higher overlap of differentially expressed transcripts observed between pairs of group  <dig> studies was expected, as all the samples corresponded to closely related honey bees subspecies . also, the highest overlap of differentially expressed genes among studies from different groups was found between am and mm, followed by am and ml. this result reflects that samples from the same bee species  were used in both groups, and confirms the stronger association of the bee species relative to the colony species on the gene expression patterns  <cit> . results from the present studies also identified similarities between am and lm that share the same colony subspecies . this similarity may be due to the adjustment or adaptation of a. mellifera ligustica bees to the a. mellifera mellifera host colony. the reason for the limited overlap between genes differentially expressed across groups of studies, even within honey bee species, may be the use of different populations and environments. the four species of honey bees used by sen sarma et al.  <cit>  were all collected from suburban areas of bangalore, while the honey bees in group  <dig>  <cit>  were collected in france.

gene ontology classes and individual genes
gene ontology analysis identified enrichment of generation of precursor metabolites and energy, cellular macromolecule metabolic process, transport, cell differentiation, system development, cofactor binding and purine nucleotide binding. these results were consistent with sen sarma et al.  <cit>  that identified enrichment of numerous go categories including protein binding, ion binding, and nucleic acid binding functions, response to biotic and abiotic factors, metabolism, pigmentation, and regulation of circadian rhythm, among others. functional analysis of "hive to forager" genes found by whitfield et al.  <cit> , with hive encompassing 0-, 4-, 8-, 12-, and 17-day old bees, identified enrichment of genes associated with energy pathway physiological processes.

among the transcripts only found differentially expressed in the sample-level meta-analysis, transcripts corresponding to the fruit fly genes adar and innexin  <dig> were over-expressed in forager relative to one-day-old honey bees. the adar gene is associated with adult locomotory behavior and innexin  <dig> is associated with olfactory behavior, both behaviors critical for honey bee foraging.

consistent with sen sarma et al.  <cit>  and whitfield et al.  <cit> , the expression of the honey bee orthologs to the fruit fly genes tctp and pebiii was lower in forager compared to one-day-old honey bees, but the differential expression was only significant for tctp. whitfield et al.  <cit>  reported a list of candidate genes for honey bee behavioral maturation that span all six maturation stages  considered. out of this list, the percentages of transcripts differentially expressed  in two or more individual-study analyses in the present work and in at least one species studied by sen sarma et al.  <cit>  were 70% and between  <dig> and 75%, respectively. this result suggests that the results from the meta-analysis are supported by a previous independent study, and reiterates the superior ability of meta-analysis to detect differentially expressed transcripts compared to individual studies . among the genes detected in whitfield et al.  <cit>  and by meta-analysis in the present study are inos, cah <dig>  hsc70cb, mlc-c, bm-40-spa, zormin, smd <dig>  tctp, orc <dig>  ef2b, sh3beta, pebiii, rfabp, fax, and mmpp <dig>  and the flybase ids were fbgn <dig> , fbgn <dig> , fbgn <dig> , fbgn <dig> .

model extensions
the effect of behavior on gene expression may vary with other  factors or covariates. the interaction between the main  and secondary factors may originate at the study or sample level. study-level factors influence all samples within a study in a similar fashion; meanwhile sample-level factors can have variable effects among honey bee samples. study-level secondary variables can be included in the meta-analysis model. in this study, adjustment for secondary study-level factors, like study group, can be incorporated into the individual or traditional estimate-based meta-analysis because there are multiple studies per level of secondary factor. group represents a study-level covariate, and thus, unbiased estimates can be obtained even in the presence of maturation stage heterogeneity across studies  <cit> . colony is an example of a within-study source of variation that can also be included in the meta-analysis model. group was not included in the present meta-analysis because the main goal was to investigate the benefits of meta-analysis expected in most situations, and because of the limited number of studies  per group. the availability of multiple studies per group that would allow an accurate adjustment for group effects is rare. in addition, the honey bee sample effect included in the individual-study and sample-level meta-analysis models also accounted for the previous sources of variation.

CONCLUSIONS
the objective combination of information implemented in the complementary meta-analytical approaches was able to mine the signal of differential expression of data in different scenarios. model-based meta-analysis approaches can rise above seemingly weak consistency among studies based on simple comparison of lists of genes. the sample-level meta-analysis detected more differentially expressed transcripts than the study-level meta-analysis among transcripts with consistent patterns of expression in a few studies, transcripts with expression well-described by similar model parameter estimates across studies, and transcripts with low variation between studies relative to the overall signal of differential expression. study-level meta-analysis is the appropriate approach when only estimates of differences in expression among conditions of interest are available. genes that do not conform to the assumptions of the sample-level meta-analysis, and have consistent expression patterns but substantial variation across studies, are benefited by the study-level meta-analysis.

meta-analytical approaches uncovered genes associated with differences between one-day-old and forager honey bees across studies, regardless of the species or sub-species of honey bee sampled or in the colony. among these, genes adar, innexin  <dig>  chitin, para, transferrin  <dig>  sick, oatp26f, fbgn <dig>  fbgn <dig>  fbgn <dig>  fbgn <dig>  fbgn <dig>  fbgn <dig>  fbgn <dig>  fbgn <dig>  and fbgn <dig> are strong candidates for additional studies.

