BACKGROUND
gene expression analysis with dna microarrays has been used to develop molecular taxonomies of various types of cancers  <cit> . small gene sets or signatures of tens to hundreds of genes have been examined for their potential utility in defining tumor subtypes and providing specific prognostic or diagnostic information. one factor that will influence the capability to fully realize the potential utility of these signatures for biomedical research, toxicogenomics, pharmaceutical development, and diagnostics is the reproducibility of the technology used to measure them.

several studies have examined the reproducibility of gene expression analysis by dna microarrays across different laboratories. one study used aliquots of a common mouse liver and pooled rna, and compared gene expression measurements made in seven laboratories using a total of  <dig> microarray platforms  <cit> . they found that correlations were highest between labs when the same platform was used with standardized protocols. a second study measured gene expression in a set of four knockout human cell lines across ten laboratories using three different microarray platforms  <cit> . they found that the particular laboratory which performed the analysis had a greater effect on the precision than did the choice of platform, and the results from the best-performing labs agreed fairly well. a third study done in four laboratories using the same platform to analyze tumor tissue blocks, cell lines, and rna samples found that correlation within laboratories was only slightly better than correlation between laboratories, with correlations weakest for genes expressed at low levels  <cit> . more recently, the microarray quality control project  compared gene expression measurements of two rna samples using a number of microarray platforms, as well as alternative technologies, and demonstrated intraplatform consistency and interplatform concordance in terms of genes differentially expressed  <cit> . a related study found consistency among microarray platforms at different sites using  <dig> different rnas from rats treated with three chemicals  <cit> . neither of these two recent studies examined whether the variation seen between laboratories was due to the labeling or hybridization steps, or both. while these papers give a general overview of the reproducibility of microarray-based gene expression profiling across a variety of platforms, they focused on the overall reproducibility of measurements made with arrays containing probes designed to measure the majority of known human transcripts, rather than on the reproducibility of gene expression signatures composed of relatively small numbers of genes analyzed on a smaller, targeted array.

in this study, we examined the interlaboratory reproducibility of a specific 70-gene breast cancer signature  <cit> , recently developed into a diagnostic tool   <cit> , using the same microarray platform and standardized protocols for labeling and hybridization across three different laboratories. in particular, we examined the level and primary sources of variability between technical replicates using a small array containing probes that measure only a fraction of known human transcripts. in order to better understand the degree and sources of errors attributable to the measurement itself, independent of any biological variability among the samples, we assayed aliquots of the same four breast tumor rnas in all three laboratories. we specifically measured the variability introduced by each step of the microarray analysis protocols: labeling, hybridization, and scanning. we found that the sample labeling was the largest source of technical variability in this study. however, this variability did not have any significant influence on the overall 70-gene breast cancer signature correlation values, which were quite robust within and between laboratories.

RESULTS
experimental setup
to compare dna microarray data reproducibility within and between laboratories, we employed the experimental scheme shown in figure  <dig>  aliquots of the same preparations of total rna from four different human breast tumors were given to three laboratories, one in california, one in amsterdam, and one in paris.

in the first phase of this study, we examined the reproducibility of microarray measurements between the california and amsterdam laboratories. both laboratories amplified and labeled each rna sample, and sent aliquots of each labeled product to the other laboratory. both laboratories then hybridized all the samples labeled in both labs, scanned the slides, and then shipped the slides to the other laboratory for rescanning. the same lot of labeling kits and microarrays were used in both labs. in this manner we could compare the intra- and inter-laboratory variations in each step of the microarray assay, starting with purified total rna.

each slide contained eight individual microarrays, which could be hybridized separately. the hybridization setup is shown in table  <dig>  both labs hybridized each tumor rna labeled in each lab in dye flip pairs against the reference. each site hybridized replicates of the two separate slides on two different days, for a total of four slides per lab.


                              slide number
                              array number
                              cy <dig> sample
                              cy <dig> sample
                              labeling
signals correlate extremely well between replicate hybridizations
variability among microarray assays might arise from differences between labeled samples, between the arrays themselves, or between hybridization conditions. a replicate hybridization is defined here as a pair of assays for which the sample labeling and hybridization conditions are held constant; that is, aliquots from a single labeling reaction are hybridized to different arrays at the same location. comparison of replicate hybridizations allows us to determine the noise attributable to hybridization, washing, and scanning, and to variations among the arrays themselves. contributions to noise include an additive background, a proportional precision, and a stochastic element. in figure  <dig> we compare the background-subtracted green  and red  signals for each of the eight pairs of hybridization replicates of tumor  <dig>  all three sources of noise are evident in the plot: a consistent proportional noise of a few percent, increasing as the signals approach the background noise level , and a smattering of single-feature outliers. the pearson correlation reflects all these noise sources, while remaining insensitive to normalization issues. for tumor  <dig>  seven out of eight of the replicate pairs showed pearson correlation values of >  <dig>  in both signal and reference channels, while the other replicate pair had a correlation of  <dig> . for the other three tumors, all samples had replicate correlations greater than  <dig> , with all but two replicates above  <dig>  . these results indicate that the signals from replicate hybridizations correlated extremely well for genes expressed at all intensity levels measured.

scanners correlate extremely well between sites
in order to determine whether differences between microarray scanners introduce significant variability into the results, we scanned the hybridized arrays at each site and then shipped them to the other site for rescanning. figure  <dig> compares the scan and the rescan for the tumor  <dig> hybridizations. the signals from the original scan of each of the  <dig> arrays are plotted against the rescans in green  and red . the cy <dig> signals correlated extremely well between the scan and rescan, regardless of whether the slide was first scanned in amsterdam or california . the cy <dig> signals correlated less well, and the signals were always much lower on the rescanned slide, especially for slides scanned first in amsterdam. this was likely due to degradation of the cy <dig> during shipment of the slide between labs, possibly caused by atmospheric ozone  <cit> . hybridized slides for the other tumor rnas showed similar results . we conclude that the scanner adds virtually no variability to the array results, as the variability seen in the cy <dig> channel is due to shipment of hybridized slides, which typically does not occur in a standard microarray experiment.

70-gene signature values correlate between different hybridizations
as a biologically relevant way of measuring the reproducibility of the microarray results, we computed the 70-gene breast cancer signature correlation value as previously described  <cit>  for each dye-swapped pair of arrays. the 70-gene signature correlation value is determined by taking the weighted average of the log <dig> ratios for each of the triplicate probes for each of the  <dig> genes, and then determining the cosine correlation of the average log <dig> ratios for the  <dig> genes in the particular tumor sample with the average profile of these genes in tumors from a specific, defined set of patients. this procedure eliminates the effect of random variation in microarray signal strength between probe replicates  <cit> . the variability of this signature correlation value among the tumor hybridization dye swap pairs under different conditions is a good measure of overall variability in the microarray assay.

small differences are seen due to labeling site
in order to further examine the differences between labeling sites, we averaged the log <dig> ratios of signature probes from the four arrays  that shared the same labeling and hybridization location, as there is little systematic variation between replicate hybridizations . this resulted in four sets of averaged, dye-bias corrected log <dig> ratios, corresponding to the four combinations of labeling and hybridization locations: amsterdam labeled/hybridized, california labeled/hybridized, amsterdam labeled/california hybridized, and california labeled/amsterdam hybridized. averaging dye-swapped pairs in this manner eliminates systematic dye bias and reduces random variation, allowing the small differences between samples labeled at the two sites to be observed. these small differences between log <dig> ratios of the samples can be clearly seen by examining the differences between the averaged log <dig> ratios of probes between two different combinations of labeling/hybridization sites. figure  <dig> shows plots of the distributions of such log <dig> ratio differences for the  <dig> of the  <dig> probes on the array corresponding to the breast cancer associated genes  <cit>  that had signals significantly above background. each of the curves in figure  <dig> is the probability distribution  of the differences between the average log <dig> ratios of the significant probes in one condition, and their average in the other condition. the green distributions compare the arrays with the same labeled sample, but hybridized in different laboratories. these distributions are very narrow, and are centered around zero, indicating there is no systematic difference depending on the hybridization site. the blue distributions compare arrays labeled at different locations, but hybridized in the same laboratory, and the black distributions were with different labeled material, hybridized in different laboratories. these distributions are wider, indicating the log <dig> ratios show more variance, and are also not always centered at zero, indicating a systematic difference depending on the labeling reaction, but not on the hybridization site. clearly it mattered little where the arrays were hybridized, but the log <dig> ratios differ depending on where they were labeled. these differences were still relatively small however, as a log <dig> ratio difference of  <dig>  is equivalent to a 5% difference in the actual expression ratio.

we next asked whether the residual variation in the correlation values between labeling sites  is distributed across all the signature genes, or is due to a particular subset of genes that consistently vary between labeling sites. to investigate this, we performed an anova analysis on the log <dig> ratios for each of the  <dig> signature genes separately, to see if they varied significantly between hybridization or labeling sites. a synopsis of the anova p values determined for each tumor is shown in figure  <dig>  when the hybridizations were grouped by hybridization site, the number of genes showing a statistically significant difference between the two sites  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . four of the  <dig> genes in each signature would be expected to exhibit p values of <  <dig>  by chance alone . in contrast, when the hybridizations were grouped by labeling site, the number of genes showing a statistically significant difference was much higher, ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig> . thus many of the  <dig> signature genes in all four tumors showed significant differences between labeling sites, even though the signature correlation values only showed significant differences between labeling sites for tumors  <dig> and  <dig>  further analysis showed that  <dig> out of the  <dig> genes varied in at least one tumor, and only five were significantly different in all four tumors. this suggests the variation in labeling was due to increased noise, rather than some sort of systematic variation.

70-gene signature values correlate using different reagent lots at a third laboratory
the assays performed in the california and amsterdam sites used the same batch of arrays, dye-ntps, and labeling kits in order to minimize differences between the two laboratories. to further look at the variability of the system, we analyzed the same four tumor rnas in a third laboratory , at a time several months after the initial comparison was finished, using a different lot of microarrays and different lots of labeling reagents.

discussion
in this study we examined the reproducibility of a 70-gene breast cancer signature in a series of experiments performed in three laboratories, one in amsterdam, one in california, and one in paris. in the first part of the study identical rna samples were labeled and hybridized to identical microarrays using the same platform and protocols, in both the amsterdam and california laboratories. reproducibility of signals and ratios was measured for replicate assays in each laboratory. we found that the results were very reproducible between sites. the low noise across the entire platform, as shown by the reproducibility of replicate hybridizations , allowed the averaging of the replicates, with the result that minor differences in the data became more apparent . in the second phase of the study, the same tumors were labeled and hybridized in the paris laboratory. despite being done several months later, and using different lots of microarrays and labeling reagents, the results from the third laboratory were in close agreement with those from the two other laboratories, giving another indication of the robustness of the measurement technology.

we took care to be sure the same operating protocols were used between all the laboratories, and the operators in all laboratories were well trained. we found that if variations in the wash protocol were introduced between laboratories, significant discrepancies in the results emerged . it is clear from our findings and those of others  <cit>  that microarray protocols must be uniform and strictly adhered to in order to achieve good reproducibility between laboratories and operators. however, as we show here, if this is done then reproducibility is very high.

a dna microarray measurement can be considered as hundreds or thousands of simultaneous analytical measurements of the relative concentrations of mrnas in a sample. in order to examine the analytical precision, accuracy, and detection limits of these measurements, several laboratories have published cross-platform and other comparisons of microarray measurements  <cit> . however, there has not been a detailed examination of the factors contributing to any observed variability in the measurements. a microarray measurement requires several distinct steps. the microarrays themselves must be printed, handled, and stored until use. the rna sample is purified, labeled with fluorophores, possibly amplified, and possibly fragmented. the labeled sample is hybridized to the arrays, which are then washed, dried, and scanned. at each of these steps variation and errors can arise which could contribute to imprecision in the overall measurement. by using the same input rnas, the same batches of arrays and reagents, and by exchanging labeled samples and hybridized slides between the amsterdam and california laboratories, we were able to examine which steps exhibited the largest variation between the two sites.

it should be noted that the experimental setup used in this study cannot measure every possible source of variation. since all of the hybridizations involving a common sample were hybridized to arrays on the same slide, and the replicate slides in each laboratory were hybridized on different days, we cannot determine whether any variation observed between the two replicate slides is due to slide-to-slide variability or day-to-day variability, or a combination of the two. however, since the experimental setup compounds both potential sources of variation, we would expect that any such differences would be maximized in this study. despite this, the 70-gene signature correlation values did not vary significantly by hyb day .

another possible source of variation is inter-individual variability. since all the labelings and hybridizations done at each site were performed by single individuals, the cross-laboratory variability cannot be de-convoluted from the inter-individual variability. however, we would expect that if two different individuals took care to follow the exact protocols, as in this study, that interlaboratory variation would be greater than inter-individual variation, due to use of a different set of laboratory equipment . another study reported measuring the 70-gene signature correlation values of two tumor samples repeatedly in the same laboratory, by six different individuals, with very consistent results .

we found that the largest discrepancy between the amsterdam and california sites was in the amplification/labeling step. this discrepancy was relatively small  but is detectable nonetheless. we used labeling kits from the same lots and purchased at the same time, so all labeling reagents were equivalent. while the labeling site differences were significant for only two of the four tumors when comparing the tumor signature correlation values, the differences extended to all four tumors when examining the log <dig> ratios of the  <dig> signature genes on an individual basis. this suggests that the differences seen on an individual gene level are relatively random, and cancel one another out when looking at the signature as a whole, which represents a correlation of the log <dig> ratios of all  <dig> genes and averages of measurements from three replicate features for each gene. the variation in individual genes did not correlate with the expression level of the genes, which differs from the findings of dobbin et al.  <cit>  who found that lower expressed genes were more variable between laboratories.

several previous studies examined the cross-platform comparability of microarray measurements  <cit> , with some studies reporting less variability between platforms than others. our findings that array results on one platform performed with identical protocols are reproducible across laboratories are similar to the findings of other studies  <cit> . however, ours is the first report of the reproducibility of a gene expression signature comprised of a small, defined set of genes. such signatures have great potential utility in biomedical research, toxicogenomics, pharmaceutical development, and diagnostics. reproducibility across labs and over time is essential in all these application areas, and our results are an encouraging indication that microarray-based analysis of defined gene signature sets can yield highly robust and reproducible measurements.

CONCLUSIONS
we tested the reproducibility of dna microarray measurements by measuring a 70-gene breast cancer expression signature across three different laboratories. we found high intralaboratory and interlaboratory reproducibility when using strictly controlled standard operating procedures.

