BACKGROUND
subtype iis reases, unlike classic type ii reases which recognise palindromic dna sequences and cleave within those sites, bind an asymmetric dna sequence and cleave outside it at a defined distance, up to  <dig> nt, regardless of the sequence within the cleavage site  <cit> . further structural and functional complications include atypical iis enzymes, which are a fusion of rease and mtase in a single polypeptide  and/or require/are stimulated by sam . further diversity within subtypes iis/iic/iig  <cit>  is a family of enzymes grouping reases originally found in thermus sp., which includes tsoi. since we are aiming at studying the thermus sp. iis/iic/iig enzymes family, we have undertaken cloning, expression and characterisation of tsoi. the thermus sp. family enzymes recognise 5– <dig> bp dna sequences which show certain similarities: tspgwi , tth111ii/tthhb27i isoschizomers  and tsoi ]. as detected by bioinformatics analysis, enzymes from mesophilic bacteria – rpai, recognising the 7-bp degenerate sequence 5’-gtyggag-3’  and cchii, recognizing 5’-ggarga-3’  apparently belong to the thermus sp. family as well  <cit> . the family shares common biochemical features , such as a large molecular size of approximately  <dig> kda, rease activity affected by sam or its analogues, similarities in amino acid  sequences despite distinct specificities, an identical cleavage distance of 11/ <dig> nt downstream from the recognition site and the domain architecture related to simplified type i reases. all characterised family members originate from the genus thermus, suggesting that they have evolved from a common ancestor  <cit> . further comparison has revealed that the group is further internally diversified  <cit> . bioinformatics analysis and site-directed mutagenesis have led to the differentiation between two subfamilies of closely related enzymes: the tspdti-subfamily, containing tspdti, tth111ii/tthhb27i, tsoi, cchii and the tspgwi-subfamily, which includes tspgwi, taqii and rpai  <cit> . besides aa sequence homologies, the subfamilies are also differentiated by the types of their catalytic motifs: the tspdti-subfamily has atypical rease catalytic motif d-exe  and cysteine+serine containing sam binding motif pacgsg, while the tspgwi-subfamily has typical rease catalytic motif pd-xk and sam binding motif gtg  <cit> . moreover, the tspgwi-subfamily exhibits an interesting feature: a novel phenomenon of rease specificity change, induced by a cofactor analogue. both tspgwi and taqii can be converted to very frequent app.  <dig> bp cutters from canonical 5– <dig> bp sites by replacing sam with its analogue sinefungin , with reversed charge distribution . these chemically-induced changes in the recognition sequence differ from the well-known “star activity” phenomenon. they are apparently a result of sin interaction with an allosteric pocket on the protein surface which binds the stimulatory sam molecule. hence, two more novel prototype specificities have been generated by chemical means  <cit> . because of the very high frequency of dna cleavage, they are uniquely suited for use as molecular tools for generating quasi-random genomic libraries  <cit> .

RESULTS
cloning, sequencing and analysis of the tsoirm gene
following our studies of the thermus sp. family of enzymes  <cit> , we cloned the genes coding for tspgwi  <cit> , tspdti  <cit> , taqii , tthhb27i/tth111ii  and tsoi . previously, as a result of the enzymes’ feature of incomplete dna digestion, complicating the application of known methods of biochemical selection both for the methylation phenotype  <cit>  or the related ‘white-blue’ screen for dna damage/modification  <cit> , we developed an in vitro approach for thermophilic rease cloning  <cit> . tsoi has a substantially lower reaction optimum than other thermus sp. reases - app. 10-15°c. thus, according to the chemical rule whereby reaction speeds decrease 2– <dig> fold per 10°c drop in reaction temperature, it was assumed that tsoi would retain a substantially higher activity in vivo in recombinant e. coli cells at 37°c than other thermus sp. reases. accordingly, we expected specific methylation in vivo of plasmids carrying the cloned tsoi mtase gene at a high enough level to allow the classic biochemical selection method to be used  <cit> . due to the partial cleavage feature of tsoi, however, selection difficulties were anticipated. thus, a new variant of the classic method of selecting for the methylation phenotype of recombinant “positive” clones was developed. an integral part of the procedure was the use of the proprietary positive selection vector psekm’-mcs . the vector features resistance for both ampicillin and kanamycin, possesses five tsoi targets and selects for any cloned insert, thus decreasing the cloning background which may have resulted from self-ligated vector molecules. non-specific selection of recombinant plasmids was combined with two rounds of the classic biochemical selection method for the tsoi methylation phenotype. since the vector included five target recognition sites for tsoi, it was expected to be an efficient substrate for tsoi rease. notwithstanding, transformation yielded  <dig> ×  <dig> colonies, thus providing an over 1000-fold genome coverage. such a high coverage seems preferable in order to increase the chances of obtaining intact rease genes, as when cloning highly toxic genes, such as those coding for reases. owing to the negative selection pressure in the recombinant e. coli host against detrimental plasmids, libraries tend to be non-representative. considering the partial digestion feature of tsoi and the lower enzyme activity in vivo at 37°c, a departure from the standard biochemical selection procedure was made: following plasmid dna isolation from colonies collected as a pool and digestion with excess tsoi, re-transformation and repeated plating, no analysis of the surviving colonies was performed. instead, the next round of pooled in toto colonies from the first round of selection was subjected to repeated plasmid dna isolation, excess tsoi cleavage, re-transformation and re-plating. after two biochemical selection rounds,  <dig> clones were analysed by colony pcr to screen for plasmids carrying fragments larger than  <dig> kb . figure  <dig> shows that  <dig> hindiii-digested large recombinant plasmids isolated during the screening procedure which share common cloned fragments of  <dig>  and  <dig>  kb in size, suggesting that all contain the same genetic locus from t. scotoductus.

the initial verification of clones, based on the detection of common restriction fragments , was followed by functional analysis. the putative tsoirm gene was expressed at a detectable level in e. coli, since its presence was high enough to ensure protection against tsoi digestion in the biochemical selection procedure. dna of five individual recombinant plasmids were digested in excess tsoi and analysed using agarose gel electrophoresis . as shown in figure  <dig>  only traces of completely protected plasmid dna were observed. inclusion of λ dna into parallel reactions served as an internal control which revealed that  dna of isolated plasmids do not interfere with the activity of tsoi, and  the same minute amount of completely protected plasmid dna was observed in both reactions with/without λ dna, which suggest that the tsoi-specific methylation was probable cause of plasmid dna resistance to cleavage. these in vivo results were subjected to further validation by in vitro assays for the native tsoi methylation activity using homogeneous enzyme. under a variety of conditions tested, the mtase specific activity was substantially lower than that of the rease . thus, the mtase activity in vivo was probably enhanced by cytoplasmic environment and/or extended incubation of cells prior to plasmid isolations. this has provided enough reaction time to significantly protect dna from further tsoi rease cleavage. taken together, selection difficulties were possibly related to both the partial cleavage feature of tsoi and incomplete dna protection by tsoi mtase activity. what’s worthy of note, a relatively low level of protection explains why two rounds of biochemical selection were required in order to enrich the library by plasmids carrying the cloned tsoirm gene. the clones shown in figure  <dig> were subjected to sequencing of inserted fragments, first by using vector-specific primers and then by insert-specific primers. as a result, the combined and cross-checked 4365-bp long genomic contig from t. scotoductus rfl <dig> was determined . the fragment, as analysed by dnasis max software, contained  <dig> bp orf, which encoded a putative long polypeptide, exhibiting a high level of similarity with the tth111ii bifunctional rease-mtase . since the orf sequence-based predicted molecular weight of putative  <dig> aa tsoi is  <dig>  kda  which matches very well our previously published sds/page results of native tsoi   <cit> , we concluded that the detected cloned orf indeed codes for the tsoirm gene. further bioinformatics analysis has revealed that tsoi is moderately basic, with a calculated pi of  <dig> - <dig>   . no sequence similarity of tsoi to any mtase or dna-binding protein was found in the flanking regions of the orf. there is only a single tsoi recognition site present within the orf. the orf begins with the atg start codon and contains  <dig> putative upstream rbss: -  <dig> ag, - <dig> agaa and - <dig> ggga. note therefore, that within the orf there is a second potential atg start codon, located at residue  <dig>  with a ribosome-binding site upstream gaggag, located at a sub-optimal distance of − <dig> . translation from the second start codon would result in slightly smaller protein of  <dig> aa and  <dig>  kda. the orf of  <dig> aa is gc rich ; nevertheless, it is markedly lower than other thermus sp. family coding genes, except tspdtirm <cit> . thus, like tspdtirm, tsoirm may have been acquired/evolved differently than other thermus sp. genes, which may have included horizontal gene transfer from a lower gc content bacteria. according to the previously published bioinformatics analysis  <cit> , tsoi exhibited similarity to several known and putative type iic/iig enzymes, including the previously characterised nucleases tthhb27i/tth111ii isoschizomer pair and tspdti with alignment covering essentially the whole length of the polypeptide. despite such a high sequence similarity between tthhb27i/tth111ii and tspdti enzymes, tsoi has a different sequence specificity – 5’-tarcca-3’  <cit>  to tspdti  and tthhb27i/tth111ii  – while cleaving at the same distance of 11/ <dig> nt from the recognition site. nevertheless, all of these asymmetric cognate sequences share two common adenine residues, located at the same positions. in contrast, two other type iic/iig enzymes from thermus, i.e. tspgwi  and taqii , showed very low sequence similarity between tspdti, tthhb27i/tth111ii and tsoi in pairwise comparisons, dividing the thermus sp. enzymes family into two sub-families. nevertheless, both sub-families share a common organisation scheme, sharing a modular structure with the same linearly located functional/physical domains of very similar sizes  <cit> . this scheme is followed by tsoi, which has consecutive fused segments, starting from the n-terminus:  dna cleavage/mg2+ -binding ,  a helical region/interaction between domains  - recently, the crystal structure of a type iic/iig bifunctional bpusi rease was established and an alpha-helical domain connecting the rease and mtase domains was suggested to link and regulate structure as well as domain communication - furthermore, it may determine the cleavage distance from the recognition site  <cit> ,  dna m6a methylation  and  dna sequence recognition region , app. aa 790-c-terminus)  <cit>  . overall, this organisation resembles the simplified  hsdr, hsdm and hsds subunit domain architecture of type i reases  <cit> .

expression analysis of the cloned tsoirm gene
since the primary clones expressed the tsoi rease-mtase at a very low level, as judged by recombinant plasmid partial protection in vivo, further constructs were made by subcloning of pcr-amplified tsoirm gene into a pet-derivative vector pet21ns. the minor multiple cloning site  modification  was made to allow for directional cloning of the noti-smii cleaved pcr fragment encompassing the full-length tsoi-coding gene. the tsoi orf was placed under the control of the t <dig> promoter and strong rbs. iptg-induction was used to evaluate whether the cloned tsoirm gene was indeed expressed. crude cell extracts from small scale induced cultures of individual clones revealed a trace amounts of tsoi rease activity, while sds-page demonstrated abundant amounts of a large enzyme  that appeared after induction . testing of the tsoi protection level of  <dig> individual plasmids, chosen from pcr subcloning, revealed that they are all unprotected before induction and only partially protected after induction, suggesting that either the chosen pcr conditions may have been favourable for the appearance of errors, or there may have been selective pressure for growth of only those colonies which contain plasmids coding for mutants of tsoi with reduced either the rease, mtase or both activities. sequencing results of a few of these clones revealed the presence of multiple mutations, which most probably appeared during pcr and were further spontaneously selected in vivo, due to lower toxicity to e. coli host. in order to isolate clones, which encode highly active tsoi,  <dig> ampicillin-resistant colonies obtained after the transformation of expression host e. coli er <dig> with a ligation mixture of expression vector and pcr amplified tsoirm gene were subjected to a third round of biochemical selection. transformants were pooled without separate cultivation of single clones and used directly to inoculate  <dig> ml lb media . cells were grown at 37°c until the mid-log phase, the t <dig> promoter was induced by the addition of iptg, the culture was grown further at 37°c for  <dig> hours and then used for isolating total plasmid dna. the latter was cleaved with tsoi and the reaction mixture was introduced back to e. coli er <dig>  the  <dig> resulting colonies were again tested for tsoi activity in crude cell extracts and for protection level against tsoi cleavage of recombinant plasmids isolated from induced cultures. in contrast to previous experiments, the crude cell extracts in this case exhibited a much higher tsoi rease activity , while plasmids, containing the cloned tsoirm gene and isolated from induced strains, were almost completely protected from tsoi cleavage, indicating an adequate mtase activity at the same time . four of the selected plasmids were subjected to insert sequencing, and two of them were found to have no mutations in the pcr-amplified tsoi-coding gene, while expressing large amounts of tsoi protein . one of these plasmids  was used for further protein isolation and characterisation experiments.

characterisation of tsoi protein
as shown in the previous section, the expression experiments resulted in the appearance of specific dna cleavage activity as well as large amounts of a high molecular weight recombinant polypeptide band of app.  <dig> kda, which was in fact the dominant protein band in the recombinant e. coli lysate. the observed protein location on the sds/page gel is in very good agreement with the predicted protein size of  <dig>  kda coded by the tsoirm gene. the band on sds/page, corresponding to the recombinant protein, also perfectly matches the position on the gel of purified wt tsoi from t. scotoductus . on the other hand, preliminary estimation of the tsoi activity in crude cell extract allowed the conclusion to be drawn that it is much lower than it could be expected based on the amount of enzyme synthesised, and suggested that either the recombinant enzyme is insoluble or has lower specific activity. in order to identify the cause for the discrepancy between tsoi activity and its intracellular amount, solubility studies of recombinant tsoi were conducted. the results in figure  <dig> clearly indicate that tsoi, when expressed in e. coli, apparently retains a soluble conformation. therefore, disproportionally low endonucleolytic activity of the induced tsoi may be either due to the slower turnover of recombinant enzyme compared with the wt isolate, or higher mtase activity, which  could dominate and modify substrate dna, preventing it from undergoing tsoi endonucleolytic cleavage. if so, dominant mtase activity could explain the apparently lower rease activity of recombinant tsoi. in order to test this idea, bacteriophage λ dna was incubated in the presence of sam and mg2+ with cleared lysates prepared from induced and uninduced cultures . the use of cleared lysates was not problematic, owing to the relatively high concentration of expressed recombinant tsoi. subsequently, reaction products were purified by chloroform extraction and isopropanol precipitation, following dissolution in tsoi reaction buffer , which were incubated with wt tsoi. the experiment clearly demonstrated that the induced culture not only has quite a weak endonucleolytic activity , but also a substantial tsoi mtase activity, which is manifested by the conversion of bacteriophage λ dna into a partially cleaved yet completely modified form that is resistant to cleavage by the subsequent addition of wt  tsoi . the additional amount of unmodified λ dna was subsequently cleaved by adding wt tsoi either completely  or partially , thus suggesting that chloroform extracted and isopropanol precipitated substrates had inhibitory effect on wt tsoi in some cases. taken together, conclusion could be made that the substrate was completely methylated during incubation with cleared lysate of induced culture in the presence of sam . furthermore, methylation appears to be complete even when a very small amount of cleared lysate is used . these results were compared with further assays using purified, homogeneous wt tsoi, which in turn failed to show that the specific activity of tsoi mtase was higher than that of tsoi rease, regardless of the variety of conditions tested . however, the standard mtase assay, based on in vitro protection against a subsequently added cognate rease, while yielding quantitative results in the case of classic type ii reases, is not perfect for analysis of subtype iig/iic reases. in the case of tsoi, the assay was complicated due to at least three factors:  fusion of both activities in the same polypeptide, thus allowing for concurrent actions, when divalent cations were present,  the rease and mtase protein domains interactions, including sam binding/allosteric effect and  incomplete cleavage by tsoi rease, which prevents from precise distinguishing protected dna from uncleaved dna. other reasons which may explain the difference between higher tsoi mtase activity in vivo and in crude lysates as compared to purified wt tsoi, may include:  protective effect of the high concentration of cellular proteins present in vivo and in crude lysates stabilising tsoi mtase,  an important cytoplasmic component for methylation is missing or  selective inactivation of the mtase domain during purification, while the tsoi rease domain remains functionally intact. this interwound rease-mtase activities’ relationship is further complicated by the fact that tsoi is a very slow enzyme. to test whether tsoi rease is a multi- or single turnover enzyme, the serial dilutions under controlled enzyme:recognition sites molar ratios were performed, both in the presence and absence of sam . reactions were performed for a prolonged time , to allow consecutive cleavage reaction cycles. results shown in figure 8abd clearly show that at a molar ratio 1: <dig> and lower, a single tsoi rease molecule on average performs less than  <dig> cleavage per single cognate site. considering that a competitive tsoi mtase reaction may not proceed in an experiment without sam , unless some tightly bound sam is carried over during purification, the conclusion can be drawn that either tsoi rease is a single turnover enzyme or a majority of tsoi molecules were inactivated during purification, diluting functional enzyme molecules with non-active ones. thus the turnover issue was not conclusively resolved, nevertheless it was confirmed that tsoi is a very “slow” enzyme, as even a very long reaction time did not result in substrate digestion exceeding a 1: <dig> molar ratio. tsoi approaching the characteristics of a single-turnover may represent an intermediate evolutionary stage.

based on the fact that the mtase activity of tsoi is entirely dependent on sam, whereas the activation of the rease function by sam is weak, although noticeable both during prolonged digestions  and time-limiting conditions , the idea was proposed that the mtase activity of recombinant tsoi might use tsoi-bound  sam which potentially could make a difference between activities of wt and recombinant tsoi variants. in order to test this idea, the same experiment as in figure 7a was repeated, without the addition of sam . bearing in mind the absolute prerequisite of the presence of sam for the mtase dna modification reaction, we expected to obtain the same result if the enzyme used bound sam, and less methylation if this was not the case. the results shown in figure 7b are nearly identical to those shown in figure 7a, suggesting that either the cleared lysate of induced culture has a sufficiently high concentration of sam which is enough to promote efficient dna methylation even when a very small amount of the cleared lysate was used , or that the recombinant enzyme has sam already bound. previously, we suggested that the thermus sp. family enzymes might have two physically separate binding sites for sam: one for allosteric stimulation of rease activity and another for typical sam binding/methylation  <cit> . however, the important conclusion from these two experiments is that, regardless of the source of the necessary cofactor for the mtase reaction, the mtase activity of recombinant tsoi is predominant over rease activity under the same reaction conditions, when tested on crude lysates, which mimics reaction conditions in vivo. such an rease-unfavourable equilibrium between the two activities of tsoi raises the question of how effective is dna cleavage by tsoi in vivo in its natural host t. scotoductus and whether indeed the primary function of this bifunctional rease-mtase is defence against invading foreign dna. it is possible that other functions, such as participation in recombination, by rare dna cleavage, area primary goal of this system. further characterization studies were conducted on a wt t. scotoductus-isolated homogeneous tsoi preparation. initial tests on the newly found wt tsoi prototype enzyme have indicated that sam slightly stimulates tsoi rease activity  <cit> ; . hence, three potential effectors, adjudged from our previous work  <cit> , were compared for their influence on tsoi activity: sam, a natural and obligatory co-substrate for mtase activity and an allosteric stimulator for thermus sp. rease activities; sin, a sam analogue, which apparently causes subtle changes in tertiary thermus sp. reases structures, either stimulating dna cleavage  <cit>  and/or causing substrate specificity changes towards much more frequent cleavage  <cit> ;  and s-adenosylhomocysteines , the methylation reaction by-products. these results as well as tsoi digestions performed for a prolonged time under various enzyme: substrate molar ratios show that the activation of rease function by sam, sin and sah is weak, but detectable . nevertheless, this may lead to indirect conclusion that the enzyme retained some capability for allosteric interaction of the tsoi protein with sam and its analogues, even though this interaction is not fully functional. a more precise answer to the interesting problem of the pleiotropic effect of sam as well as the enzyme’s inability to conduct multiple cleavage reactions signalled in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig> would come from detailed in vitro studies using dna-band-shift-assay, radiolabelled sam and dna as well as tsoi mutants with an inactivated rease catalytic motif and/or mtase catalytic motifs . atp was also tested as potential effector, even though it is chemically more distant molecule as compared to sam. however, since the thermus sp. enzymes resemble “streamlined halves” of type i reases  <cit> , the possibility of atp effect, was evaluated. in addition, unusual type ii rease of eukaryotic origin – cviji is stimulated by atp while its specificity changes  <cit> . nevertheless, atp had no effect on tsoi .

further evaluation of wt tsoi properties included molecular sieving in the reaction buffer ‘g’    <cit> . the experiment showed that the native rease elutes as a monomer, just like other thermus sp. family enzymes, confirming their common organisation scheme  <cit> . activity temperature profiling has shown somewhat surprising results, indicating that tsoi is the least thermostable enzyme in the thermus sp. family, with an optimum at 55°c and retaining only  <dig> % activity at 65°c . we previously showed that the typical optimum temperature for thermus sp. enzymes is 65-75°c  <cit> . the reaction optimum of tsoi is considerably lower, by app. 10-15°c, even though its natural host t. scotoductus grows optimally at 67°c  <cit>  . this indicates that certain cellular components may be much more sensitive than an organism as a whole entity and are still able to fulfil their function. also, such a property may be reminiscent of a past acquisition of tsoi coding genes by t. scotoductus from less thermophilic bacteria. the ph influence on the tsoi rease activity was determined. trace rease activity was detected in the  <dig> - <dig>  range; while activity increased from  <dig>  to 100% in the  <dig> - <dig>  range, and decreased from  <dig>  to  <dig> % in the  <dig> - <dig>  range . the results obtained were similar to those described for other thermus sp. family members. at optimised ph , a buffer with variable concentrations of nacl was used to determine optimal ionic strength. the maximum activity was close to 100% in the relatively wide 10– <dig> mm concentration range, and decreased gradually to  <dig> mm nacl . for practical applications of tsoi in dna manipulations,  <dig> mm nacl is preferred, as a compromise between maximum enzymatic activity versus enzyme stability during the reaction and lowered “star” activity.

CONCLUSIONS
i. the prototype tsoi rease gene was cloned in e. coli and sequenced using a new modification of a classic biochemical selection method, where the positive selection vector was combined with two rounds of selection for the methylation phenotype.

ii. expression of a cloned tsoirm gene under a t <dig> promoter, yielding enzymatically active bifunctional tsoi rease-mtase, required an additional round of the biochemical selection of expression subclones to eliminate abundant spontaneous mutants.

iii. tsoi is a member of the thermus sp. modular enzyme family and the tspdti-subfamily, exhibiting a rare phenomenon among reases – relatively high homologies to tspdti, tth111ii and tthhb27i, even though they recognise distinct cognate sites.

iv. within the recombinant tsoi bifunctional enzyme, mtase dominates rease activity both in vivo and in vitro in crude lysates assays. this may suggest the existence of an additional biological role different than the restriction of invading dna.

v. reaction parameters and cofactor requirements were determined, including a surprisingly low temperature optimum of 55°c and lower than expected tsoirm orf gc content, which suggests the occurrence of horizontal gene transfer in the past.

