BACKGROUND
modern biology is quantitative and scientists now pursue the exciting goal to link quantitative phenotypic variations to mechanistic molecular regulations. a frequent limitation in these investigations is the ability to accurately quantify the phenotype of interest. tracking molecules and their abundance is sometimes not an issue, but defining and acquiring phenotypic traits precisely can be very demanding. in particular, most phenotypic measurements are made on macroscopic quantities reflecting the contribution of many cells. this is the case when describing tissue morphologies, growth rates of microorganisms, virulence of pathogens, yields of plants or the clinical outcome of a patient. however, rare cells, or heterogeneities among cells, may have important macroscopic consequences. traits such as cancer, developmental defects, escape from drug treatment, or latency of infections can rely on one or few cells that did not follow the average behavior of a tissue. in these cases, quantifying biological traits at single-cell resolution is invaluable because it offers the possibility to link molecular variations to the microscopic sources of phenotypic variation. for example, an increased penetrance of a macroscopic trait may be associated to increased noise or to the presence of a stochastic switch, but finding this association requires to track the underlying mechanism in numerous individual cells  <cit> . biologists will therefore gain enormous information from a statistical description of individual cells behaviors.

in particular, the potential fitness advantage that biological ‘noise’ may confer to organisms is frequently discussed. intuitively, maintaining a diversified population of cells is costly in constant and unperturbed environments but can prove advantageous if the environment fluctuates, because a fraction of cells may then be readily adapted. examples of a fitness advantage provided by stochastic switches were found for bacterial persistence under antibiotic exposures  <cit>  and bacterial morphology or pigmentation under experimental evolution of dimorphism  <cit> . in addition, simulations have explored evolutionary scenarios that could explain the emergence of stochastic switching  <cit> . importantly, evidence of positive selection for high noise was found for yeast genes coding for plasma-membrane transporters  <cit> . yet, this discussion suffers from a central unanswered question: does phenotypic noise vary among different natural populations? from the effect of artificial mutations, some authors successfully classified gene products by their contribution to phenotypic buffering  <cit> . but what about natural alleles, which exist in the wild and through which evolution takes place? do they also confer specific buffering capabilities? so far, only few examples suggest that they do. one is the fact that developmental asymmetry can be fixed using supervised crosses between natural fly stocks  <cit> . another is the observation that noise in gene expression varies as a complex trait between natural genotypes of the yeast s. cerevisiae <cit> . however, molecular noise can be buffered in various ways and does not necessarily generate phenotypic variation. negative feedbacks can efficiently attenuate noise levels in gene circuits  <cit> . so can redundancy between molecular pathways: if two independent chains of reactions contribute to the phenotypic output, then molecular noise in only one chain may not affect the buffering provided by the other chain. it is therefore essential to directly track phenotypic noise levels in natural populations to determine whether they differ in the wild. if the answer is positive, then microevolution may take place to select for or against elevated noise. if negative, then selection for elevated noise first requires a step where genotypes generating higher noise or phenotypic switches appear in the population.

a preponderant model system for the study of cellular traits is the yeast s. cerevisiae <cit> . yet, obtaining robust quantitative estimates of phenotypic traits in this system can be very demanding if the trait is not directly coupled to a growth rate. in the case of cellular morphology and organization, this limitation was released some years ago by the development of a semi-automated protocol, which can profile hundreds of individual cells  <cit> . the method consists of a triple labelling of fixed cells to visualize their cell wall, dna and actin by fluorescent microscopy. images are automatically acquired and analyzed with a dedicated algorithm that extracts  <dig> quantitative parameters  that reflect various aspects of cellular morphology. this single-cell phenomics approach is extremely sensitive, as it was able to detect unsuspected trait variation among a collection of gene-deletion mutants  <cit> .

using this technique, we provide here a comprehensive quantification of hundreds of single-cell traits in numerous unrelated natural strains of s. cerevisiae. we found an abundant variation of cellular morphology and organization between strains. morphological differences did not reflect the population history of the species. importantly, the single-cell resolution of the dataset provides a direct observation that, indeed, phenotypic noise does vary between natural contemporary genetic backgrounds.

RESULTS
single-cell phenomics of unrelated wild strains
to estimate the extent of natural variation for morphological traits within the s. cerevisiae species, we selected  <dig> wild strains from various geographical and ecological origins . these strains belong to a larger panel which was previously used to explore the genetic diversity of the species  <cit> . we selected this subset of strains in such a way that 1) most ecological and geographical classes were represented, 2) genetic distances between selected strains reflected all s. cerevisiae subgroups, 3) all strains were mata/matα diploids originating from the selfing of a haploid spore and 4) liquid cell cultures of these strains contained predominantly unattached individual cells rather than flocculent aggregates or clumps of unseparated cells. this latter criterion was essential to enable semi-automated image analysis of individual cells. we cultured each strain as five biological replicates in standard laboratory conditions as previously described  <cit>  . cells were then fixed with formaldehyde and their cell wall, nuclear dna and actin were stained using specific fluorescent dies. images of at least  <dig> cells per culture were acquired by fluorescent microscopy. these images were then analyzed using the calmorph software  <cit>  to quantify  <dig> parameters reflecting the size, shape, orientation, and intracellular organization of the cells. altogether, more than  <dig>  cells were acquired for each strain, allowing the statistical inference of intra-species variation.

cellular morphology varies greatly across the s. cerevisiae species
to directly test each of the  <dig> traits for intra-species variability, we performed a kruskal-wallis test on the null hypothesis of no strain effect. results were compared with those obtained across  <dig>  permutation tests where the  <dig> values of the trait were resampled. a total of  <dig> traits showed k >  <dig> from the actual dataset, while the empirical false discovery rate  associated with this threshold was  <dig>  . detecting so many differences  across only  <dig> strains suggests that most of the morphological organization of s. cerevisiae cells is subjected to intra-species quantitative variation.

the most striking phenotypic variation was the elongation of cells. for example, mother cells of the baker strain clib <dig> were nearly round whereas those of yjm <dig>  isolated from apple juice, were clearly elongated, with a long axis about  <dig>  times longer than their short axis . this axis ratio was highly variable across strains both before and during budding, and for both mothers and buds . thus, its variation does not reflect different properties at specific stages of the cell cycle but inherent differences in cell shape across the various backgrounds.

another trait that greatly varied across strains was the position of bud neck. some strains such as yjm <dig>  by <dig>  clib <dig> or uc <dig> budded almost longitudinally along their long axis, whereas other strains such as yjm <dig>  dbvpg <dig> or clib <dig> initiated budding at angle positions reaching 30– <dig> degrees . this suggests that molecular determinants of bud initiation, such as bud9p, bud8p  <cit>  or the 12s polarisome  <cit>  may have strain-specific localization patterns along the cell cortex.

the size of cells was also highly variable across strains . this fully agrees with previous observations made on industrial strains  <cit> .

importantly, many traits that were highly variable were not correlated. this is particularly apparent on figure 1c-e, where values of the three traits mentioned above ranked strains in three different orders. thus, the natural variation of s. cerevisiae cellular morphology represents a set of multiple independent traits with different sources of variability. we then investigated further the properties of this variation using conventional tools of multidimensional analysis.

wild strains are continuously distributed in the phenome space
variation of multiple traits may take place in several ways. a first possibility is the existence of one or few strains showing peculiar morphologies compared to an overall profile globally conserved within the species. a second possibility is the co-existence of two or more distinct groups, each containing numerous strains. finally, the morphological space may not be particularly structured, and strains may all differ continuously without presenting notable outsiders. to distinguish between these possibilities, we examined the overall landscape of phenotypic variations by performing principal component analysis . a permutation test determined that no principal component was expected to explain more than 5% of the variance by chance only. from the actual dataset, five phenotypic principal components  were observed to exceed this threshold, and their cumulated contribution reached ~60% of the variance . the first two components were contributed by traits reflecting cell elongation . after representing the position of strains along the first four components, several observations could be made . first, strains were almost evenly spaced with no particular subgroup that could explain any of the components. this reveals that s. cerevisiae has a continuum of morphological features rather than discrete classes of distinct morphologies. secondly, strains from common ecological origin did not group together. this indicates that differences in the cellular traits measured do not simply reflect adaptation to the annotated environments. less generally, adaptation could involve subtle changes of few traits. in this case, a dedicated test should be done to detect possible links between variation of one trait and the strain origin. we therefore tested, for every trait, the effect of ecological or geographical origin using a kruskal-wallis rank-sum test . no significant association was found. this could be due to limited power in our small sample size . it is also possible that some properties of the strains original microenvironments  were shared between strains of similar morphological profiles. detecting this possible adaptation would require exhaustive annotations of these environments at the time of collection. finally, measuring morphological traits in a standardized laboratory condition may not interrogate the consequences of adaptation to specific environments. acquiring morphological profiles from relevant ecological conditions would be more appropriate to reveal associations between traits and ecological origin.

although the overall landscape of trait variations was not structured, it remained possible that some subgroups of strains shared morphological similarities. to examine this possibility, we performed a classification based on hierarchical clustering and multiscale bootstrap resampling to infer statistical significance of the resulting dendrogram  <cit> . for each cluster, its derived approximately unbiased probability value  estimates the probability that the cluster would be observed if unlimited observations were available . the procedure defined three classes  of strains that were significantly grouped at au p-value >  <dig>  . interestingly, each of the three classes contained strains from various ecological origins, indicating that the fine-scale structure detected could not simply be explained by shared environmental histories. to determine the phenotypic characteristics of these three classes, we performed a linear discriminant analysis . this extracted  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> parameters that significantly contributed to classes i, ii and iii, respectively . the main features of class i were a large region of actin at s/g <dig> and a bud nucleus located close to the neck. class ii specificity was to display nuclei that were round and centered in mother cells but elliptical in buds. class iii contrasted by small cells at g <dig> and nuclei that were distant from the neck in both mother cells and buds .

however, most strains  remained unclassified, which is consistent with the continuous distribution of strains along the major principal components described above. observing multiple singletons can sometimes result from high measurement errors. however, the high number of traits for which a significant strain effect could be detected indicates that our measures have small residual variance . thus, these numerous singletons more likely reflect that intra-species variation of s. cerevisiae cellular morphology is poorly structured.

relationship between phenotypic and genetic distances
in order to study the relationship between genetic and phenotypic distances, we considered all  <dig> pairwise combinations of strains. figure 4a represents their phenotypic similarity  as a function of their genetic distance . except for three pairs of strains that were very close both genetically and phenotypically, there was absolutely no correlation between the two types of divergence . nevertheless, this absence of correlation could be due to the fact that our population/sample is a combination of strains coming from clean and mosaic lineages. by contrast to non-mosaic strains, mosaic isolates that are genetically distant might share common parts of the genome leading to a phenotypic similarity. we therefore examined correlation across  <dig> strains that were previously described to represent a clean lineage . on this subset, genetic and phenotypic distances remained uncorrelated , suggesting that our mixed population is not the major reason for not detecting any correlation. we conclude that, globally, morphological resemblance did not reflect genetic relatedness.

it still remained possible that subsets of traits co-varied with parts of the genetic structure of the population. to address this possibility, we extracted the principal components of the genotypic variance of the population . the first component, gpc <dig>  caught more than 25% of the variance and discriminated a cluster of european wine strains previously described  <cit> . the second component explained 7% of the variance and discriminated a pair of related clinical strains from the rest of the population. gpc <dig> and gpc <dig> explained about 5% of the variance each, and all successive ones had minor contributions. we then tested if these genotypic components of the population were correlated with any of the phenotypic principal components. we computed spearman’s rank correlation coefficients among all combinations between the  <dig> gpcs and the  <dig> ppcs. none of these coefficients exceeded the correlations obtained when using ppcs from a randomized dataset. this implies that morphological traits and genotypic variations of this s. cerevisiae sample follow different structures.

when representing strains from classes i, ii and iii on the tree of genetic distances, we observed that class i strains were genetically close . all five strains of class i belonged to a group of strains genetically related and generally associated with wine making  <cit> . the common features of these strains were to have large actin regions and a specific position of the nucleus . this suggests that phenotypic and genetic distances can be correlated locally. however, this was not the case for classes ii and iii. class ii contained strains yps <dig>  by and yjm <dig> that were all at different edges of the genetic tree, and class iii contained clinical strain yjm <dig> and baker strain clib <dig> that were at extreme genetic distances from each other.

natural strains vary in their degree of cell-to-cell trait variation
the fact that traits were measured on individual cells allowed us to investigate whether the level of phenotypic ‘noise’ differed between natural yeast backgrounds. nearly half of the  <dig> traits reported above already estimated this intra-sample variability, since they were coefficients of variation  of measured quantities. however, these parameters sometimes varied concomitantly with the mean value of the trait considered. in agreement with previous observations made on the same type of data  <cit> , this dependency could be positively or negatively correlated, and was not necessarily linear . to obtain estimates of cell-to-cell variability that were independent of mean trait values, we followed a procedure previously described that uncoupled cvs from mean by extracting residues from a lowess regression . this way,  <dig> traits reflecting phenotypic noise per se were obtained for each sample. we then applied a kruskal-wallis test for each of these ‘noise traits’ on the null hypothesis of no strain effect. at p <  <dig>  × 10- <dig> threshold ,  <dig> noise traits were detected to be significantly affected by the strain background. this was one third of the traits considered and corresponded to variability of various cellular features: cell width, length and shape, size of actin regions within cells, bud size and orientation, and size of the bud nucleus . the trait for which cell-to-cell variation had the stronger dependence on the strain background was the short-axis length of unbudded cells , indicating that some backgrounds control cell width more tightly than others. budding cells also showed traits with particularly different noise levels among strains. bud size, for example, was more variable among y9j cells than among uc <dig> cells . the size of the region of bud occupied by actin was also more variable among dbvpg <dig> cells than among yjm <dig> cells . interestingly, bud neck position  also had higher cell-to-cell heterogeneity in some strains  as compared to others , suggesting that all backgrounds do not control bipolar budding with equal precision.

phenotypic noise varies both globally and specifically
the fact that many traits displayed strain-dependent noise raised the following question: is this variation global or specific? in the former case, one would expect to observe elevated noise of many unrelated traits in the same strains and little cell-cell variation in other strains. alternatively, if variation is specific, a given strain may display high noise for some traits while remaining robust for other traits, and this spectrum of variability/robustness would differ between strains. to examine the first possibility, we compared strains for their phenotypic potential  <cit> . this value captures phenotypic noise in a broad sense, by averaging noise values from a large number of independent traits . it was previously used on calmorph datasets to detect artificial null mutations that affect general phenotypic buffering in yeast  <cit> . in principle, natural genetic variation may also affect the global molecular buffering of morphological traits, which would be detected by differences in phenotypic potentials among natural strains. after computing  <dig> independent estimates of the phenotypic potential of every strain, we observed that it significantly varied between backgrounds , although to a lesser extent than noise of specific traits. this shows that part of noise variation is indeed global, with strains y9j, y <dig> and dbvpg <dig> showing pronounced global heterogeneities as compared to strains yjm <dig> and y <dig>  the modest statistical significance also indicates that variation is not entirely global. if it were, then the strain effect on global noise should be detected at similar or higher significance as the effect on specific noise traits, because measurement of global noise benefits from cumulated observations on various traits. this was clearly not the case, which suggests that the variation of noise is also specific.

to study this possibility, we performed a principal component analysis on the  <dig> noise traits that had a significant dependence on the strain background. the method is equivalent as the one presented above, except that the phenotypic values considered are now the noise of the traits instead of the trait values themselves. if noise of all traits was increased in the same strains , then the first principal component should explain most of the differences between strains, and this component should discriminate ‘noisy’ from ‘buffered’ strains. the analysis produced  <dig> significant components that altogether explained 71% of the variance . the first component alone explained ~21% of the variance. representing strains coordinates along these components showed that there was no obvious subgroup of strains with specific phenotypic noise values . analyzing the contribution of each trait to the principal components revealed that the first component corresponded to high variability of bud size and size of bud nucleus, but robust cell size at g <dig>  the second component was also related to variability in bud size, whereas the third and fourth components corresponded to variability in the positioning of the dividing nucleus and variability of the size of the actin region in bud, respectively . thus, in general, genetic backgrounds affected noise of specific sets of traits but not of all traits together. we conclude that a large fraction of cell-to-cell heterogeneity varies in a strain/trait specific manner, while another fraction varies because some strains are globally ‘noisier’ than others.

discussion
morphological traits of living organisms have always fascinated evolutionary biologists since the very early days of the discipline, because they are highly informative on adaptation processes. for multicellular organisms, morphology has a direct impact on fitness, because it is tightly connected to survival , reproduction, feeding, etc. this is probably less true for the morphology of yeast cells, where adaptation is guided by the shape and performances of the colony as a whole, but not of individuals. growth ability across various environmental conditions directly reflects the fitness  of a microorganism, whereas the shape and size of individual cells do not.

it is therefore interesting to compare the results we found here with those previously obtained on phenotypes corresponding to growth fitness. two studies have described growth rates of various wild yeast species and strains in a large variety of environments  <cit> . this allowed the authors to define strain-strain phenomic distances that reflect fitness similarity across a broad spectrum of growth conditions. both groups found a substantial correlation between these inter-strain distances and their degree of genetic divergence  <cit> , which is consistent with accumulations of phenotypic and genotypic differences under poor selection. in addition, the growth rates of inter-strain hybrids were consistent with numerous complementations of loss of function mutations  <cit> . this observation, together with the fact that the yeast population structure is profoundly shaped by frequent genetic drift generated by repeated bottlenecks and expansions  <cit> , supports the idea that mutations affecting growth rates in certain environments have accumulated over time by genetic drift. such properties are not apparent from the morphological traits presented here: morphological similarities did not reflect relatedness in population history. why? as mentioned above, a correlation between genetic and morphometric distances could be blurred by genomic mosaicism. however, if this were the only explanation, we would have expected to detect an association when using a subset of strains from ‘clean’ lineages, which we did not. also, if numerous quantitative trait loci were contained in mosaic genomic portions, they would probably cause a correlation between traits and one or several genomic principal components  and we did not find any such association. another possible explanation is the impact of environmental factors on morphological traits. we grew strains in a standardized laboratory condition that is drastically different from the natural habitats in which they normally live. this was necessary to allow for inter-strains comparisons, but the natural environment of each strain is specific and can be totally different from one strain to another. our results are therefore not in contradiction with previously reported correlations based on growth in various environments. another possible interpretation is that morphological variation may have fewer degrees of freedom than growth fitness across various environments. the topological organization of cells is limited by physical constraints and highly conserved cellular mechanisms, whereas growth efficiency is guided by metabolic activities and stress responses that benefit from flexible and complex molecular networks. these constraints on cellular organization and morphology likely apply across many environmental conditions, preventing accumulation of relevant loss of function mutations in isolated subpopulations. extending our study to the morphological profiling of diploid hybrids would be interesting in this regard: additivity would suggest gradual drift of cellular regulations whereas non-additivity would imply more discrete phenotypic changes possibly emerging from loss of function mutations.

our results provide an estimate of the natural variation of phenotypic noise among natural populations. since our experimental design included enough biological replicates of sufficient sample size, we could test whether cell-to-cell heterogeneities were more pronounced in some clonal populations as compared to others. we obtained three major conclusions. first, one third of cellular traits  had noise levels that were significantly affected by the strain background. this remarkable proportion shows that many cellular regulations are not equally buffered in every strain. secondly, when pooling noise values of unrelated traits into a single metric , we found that some backgrounds were generally ‘noisy’ as compared to others. importantly, this variation in general noise was not associated with relatedness of the strains. for example, strains y9j, yjm <dig> and y <dig> all had global noise but represented various branches of the genetic tree. finally, decomposing traits with varying noise levels showed a substantial specificity regarding which traits were noisy in which strains. in other words, phenotypic noise did not vary only because some strains were globally noisy but also because some strains were noisy for specific subsets of traits. this observation complements previous reports made on artificial null mutations. levy and siegal computed phenotypic potentials from calmorph morphological profiles of systematic gene deletion mutants  <cit> . they observed that high global noise was associated with mutations targeting genes that 1) were highly connected in networks of protein-protein or synthetic lethality interactions and 2) were essential for efficient cell growth. when occurring in the wild, such dramatic loss-of-function mutations are probably counter-selected, for they affect numerous cellular regulations and likely reduce fitness in a wide range of environmental conditions. the results presented here are therefore important as they show the properties of noise variation across natural genetic contexts. global noise significantly differed among strains. this may result from dna polymorphisms targeting capacitor genes, by producing more subtle changes of activity than full inactivation. alternatively, it may result from the accumulation of mutations on various regulatory pathways, each contributing to a reduced buffering. however, the pattern of noise variation that we observed clearly tended to be specific. this is particularly apparent in the principal component analysis: the analysis did not discriminate any subgroup of strains with particularly high noise levels, and the first component obtained was made up of two traits with high noise  and one trait with low noise . there is no straightforward interpretation to why these noises appear anticorrelated, but this illustrates that noise of individual traits vary rather independently from one another. this independence probably results from mutations affecting specific molecular pathways. dissecting the molecular sources of noise in cellular traits would be very informative. this may be achieved by treating noise as a complex trait in a quantitative genetics design, as was done for the regulation of gene expression  <cit> .

a fascinating question is whether evolutionary forces directly modulate phenotypic noise levels. a simulation by wang and zhang showed that global gene expression noise in metabolic pathways dramatically affects fitness and is likely counter-selected  <cit> . this study also suggests that noise can slow the rate of fixation of beneficial mutations. nonetheless, in the context of fluctuating environments, maintaining intra-clonal diversity may be advantageous and elevated noise itself may be selected for  <cit> . in other words, noise may simply result from a relaxed buffering when some traits no longer need to be precisely controlled, or it may result from adaptive strategies that bet on long-term survival through environmental perturbations . such strategies were found to happen in yeast when individual cells challenged by heat-shock were monitored  <cit> . bet hedging may therefore happen in the wild to maintain elevated noise. our results do not prove that this is the case, but they add two very important factual observations: noise levels do differ between natural subpopulations, and this variation happens rather independently from one trait to another. thus, microevolution may take place on these contemporary genotypes by selecting for or against the ones that maintain individuals with different physiological properties than the bulk of the clonal population. in this respect, increasing noise of only a few traits in some backgrounds is likely advantageous. this modularity may confer trait-specific adaptive potential without affecting global robustness. now that we identified which wild backgrounds displayed elevated noise for some traits, it will be interesting to test whether they confer fitness advantages in fluctuating environments or during exposure to environmental catastrophes. this would exemplify how natural genotypes can favor bet-hedging strategies.

CONCLUSIONS
by profiling numerous traits of thousands of individual cells from different wild genetic backgrounds of yeast, we found abundant intra-species variation of cellular morphology and internal organization. these phenotypic differences did not reflect the population history of the species. importantly, our results show that phenotypic noise does vary between natural backgrounds. thus, microevolution may take place in the wild to fix or discard genotypes conferring elevated phenotypic noise.

