BACKGROUND
since the early sixties and the first protein gels to assess genetic diversity in human and drosophila, genotyping methods have gone a very long way. researchers working on model organisms have now at their disposal a repertoire of different molecular markers to help answer various biological questions  <cit> . for such species, the recent advances in genotyping throughputs and data management allow to simultaneously examine many loci in the genome of many individuals, leading the way to the genomic era  <cit> . however, as regards non-model species, the picture is not so bright. for most organisms indeed, whole genome surveys are often hampered by a shortage of genomic sequences and/or a lack of interspecific transferability of known molecular markers such as microsatellites or single nucleotide polymorphisms   <cit> . in this context, there is an obvious need for new methodologies allowing the low-cost, fast and high-throughput genotyping of virtually any species.

the diversity arrays technology  has the potential to fill in this gap  <cit> . this innovative genotyping method can provide from hundreds to tens of thousands of highly reliable markers for any species in theory, as it does not require any precise information about the genome sequence  <cit> . moreover, dart was recently shown to provide good genome coverage in wheat and barley  <cit> . the keystone of the dart protocol is a step called "genome complexity reduction". this step aims at providing a genomic representation of the studied dna sample, by extracting informative loci while avoiding repetitive sequences that usually plague eukaryote genomes. this is generally achieved by methylation sensitive restriction enzyme digestion, adaptor ligation and subsequent pcr amplification  <cit> . the number of markers dart detects is determined primarily by the level of dna sequence variation in the material subjected to analysis and by the complexity reduction method deployed  <cit> . in many cultivated species in which selection through traditional and modern breeding reduced genetic diversity, dart usually generates several hundreds highly reproducible markers in a single assay in a single biparental cross  <cit> . another noteworthy property of dart markers is that their sequence is easily accessible. this distinguishes them from other random markers such as amplified fragment length polymorphisms  and offers interesting perspectives in functional genomics. overall, these characteristics make dart a method of choice for non-model species  <cit>  when it comes to assess genetic variation at the genome scale, to construct quantitative trait loci  or linkage maps, or to conduct genomic scans in order to track loci under selection in the genome.

the dart technique was applied for the first time to the rice genome  <cit> . thereafter, it has met an increasing success and was developed for a wide range of crop and plant species  <cit>  and was even used to identify soil micro-organisms  <cit> . however, despite an initial proof-of-concept work on mouse , attempts to develop darts for animals have been strongly delayed so far. this can be explained by differences in genome organization between plants and animals, demanding significant changes in the complexity reduction step.

this study has been motivated by research on the genetic basis of insecticide resistance in the mosquito aedes aegypti, the primary vector species for the yellow fever and dengue viruses  <cit> . in particular, we were interested in characterizing genes linked to resistance to bacillus thuringiensis var israelensis , a soil bacterium producing insecticidal crystal proteins which are widely used for controlling aedes mosquito larvae  <cit> . in order to identify these genes, we chose to adopt a population genomics approach, i.e. to screen the genome of ae. aegypti to detect loci showing a signature of selection by bti. a prerequisite was thus to obtain many  random markers that could be surveyed at low cost and effort, and the dart technology appeared as an appealing option for this purpose given the current shortage of snps markers isolated in ae. aegypti.

in this article, we present a modification of the complexity reduction step of the dart protocol taking advantage of the abundance of transposable elements  in many eukaryote genomes. indeed, most tes have conserved sequence motifs which can serve as specific anchors for the primers used to amplify fragments from the dart genomic representation. here, we implement the dart technique for aedes aegypti by targeting a te called pony, which belongs to the miniature inverted repeat transposable element  family of tes and can be found in many copies in the genome of ae. aegypti  <cit> . we show that this method is powerful enough to detect dna polymorphisms even between populations separated by only a few generations of artificial selection. beyond these promising results, this example testifies of the flexibility of the dart technology and opens new prospects as regards its application to a wider range of species, including animals which have been refractory to it so far.

RESULTS
principle of the new complexity reduction method implemented
the dart technique is based on the analysis of "genomic representations", which are simplified surrogates of the dna samples of interest. concretely, a genomic representation is a set of dna fragments of various sizes and sequences which are characteristic of the studied sample and obtained through highly reproducible  methods. these methods are usually based on restriction digestion: genomic dna is digested using one or several restriction enzymes, with simultaneous ligation of appropriate adaptors to the restriction fragments and subsequent amplification of fragments by pcr using the adapter and the restriction site as targets for primer annealing  <cit> . a suitable genomic representation typically includes  <dig> – <dig>  amplified fragments, i.e. a number low enough to ensure the reproducibility of the pcr reaction, but high enough to yield a reasonable number of polymorphic markers. fragment sizes are ideally evenly distributed in a 100– <dig> bp range, and representations showing distinct bands on agarose gel are avoided because these are presumably derived from repetitive genomic sequences and/or mitochondrial or chloroplast dna.

in ae. aegypti, several restriction enzyme combinations were tested , but all of them gave genomic representations unfavourable to the application of the traditional dart protocol, with clear repetitive bands and/or an unsuitable range size for the fragments . on the basis of these results, a different strategy was thus adopted. the underlying idea was to exploit any kind of motifs occurring frequently in the genome as a second anchor during the pcr reaction, in addition to the adaptor-ligated restriction site. by adjusting pcr conditions, it was possible to preferably amplify fragments with the restriction site on one extremity and the chosen motif on the other one, so that the genomic representations to be obtained were expected to be a mixture of such fragments. because of their abundance in eukaryote genomes, tes were good candidates for such a purpose. we selected a particular mite family named pony to perform the role of second anchor in the ae. aegypti genome . pony tes have all the characteristics of mites, including terminal inverted repeats, a+t richness and a small size  <cit> . two highly divergent subfamilies, pony-a and pony-b, can be distinguished and occur in about  <dig>  and  <dig>  copies in ae. aegypti genome, respectively  <cit> . we designed a primer targeting any pony sequence present in the genome , as well as one specific to the pony-b subfamily .

evaluation of the mite display approach for dart genotyping
a library comprising  <dig> dart clones was constructed using the approach described in figure  <dig> . hybridizations were performed for  <dig> aedes aegypti individuals with two, three and four replicated representations independently hybridized for  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> individuals, respectively. these ae. aegypti individuals belonged either to the bora-bora strain , susceptible to all insecticides, or to a strain artificially selected for several generations to develop resistance to the insecticidal bacillus thuringiensis var israelensis  toxins .

the polymorphism analysis was performed on the obtained images focusing on three parameters which are central for the data quality:  the call rate, which corresponds to the percentage of successfully scored replicates for a given marker;  the p value, which measures the fraction of the total variation across all individuals due to bimodality  for a particular marker; and  the discordance, which measures the overall variation of scores within replicates and is thus an indication of the marker reproducibility. first, the most unreliable markers  were discarded from the analysis. the remaining markers were then sorted out by decreasing p values and grouped in bins with an increment of  <dig> markers between two successive bins. as shown in figure 2a, the average discordance increased as the average p value of a marker group increased . there was also a quasi-linear relationship between the decrease in average p and the decrease in call rate . overall, the top  <dig> markers  showed a satisfactory call rate  while displaying an acceptable level of discordance . they met the standard quality thresholds usually applied to dart data, giving a polymorphism rate of about  <dig> % in the whole mosquito dataset.

working dataset and marker redundancy
the primary goal of this study was to characterize loci potentially responsible for resistance to bti. for this purpose, population genomics was adopted to reveal loci displaying apparent selection footprints, such as an atypical pattern of genetic variability compared to the rest of the genome. to implement this approach, a robust estimation of the overall genetic diversity throughout the genome first had to be obtained. this was achieved by slightly relaxing the quality parameters to include more markers in our analyses and allow a more comprehensive sampling of the genome. a polymorphism analysis was thus performed with a minimum call rate, minimum p value, and maximum discordance set at 81%, 71%, and 5%, respectively. it identified a set of  <dig> markers  with a mean call rate, p value, and discordance of  <dig>  %,  <dig>  %, and  <dig> %, respectively.

in this working dataset comprising  <dig> markers, linkage disequilibrium was low with only  <dig> % and  <dig> % of pairwise linkage indices >  <dig>  and <  <dig> , respectively. furthermore, a subset of  <dig> markers involved in  <dig> % of the marker pairs showing high linkage disequilibrium was sequenced. only two of them  turned out to be redundant, with one pair of markers differing by a gap and the second one by a mutation . after trimming the pony motif, the  <dig> unique marker sequences  were blasted against the ae. aegypti genome. in total,  <dig> of them could be assigned without ambiguity to single genomic positions distributed on  <dig> different supercontigs. the two markers situated on the same supercontig were separated by more than  <dig> kb.

assessment of genetic diversity between and within mosquito strains
the working dataset was used to assess the genetic diversity observed between and within the two studied mosquito strains. as revealed by an analysis of molecular variance , most of the genetic variation was distributed between the resistant and the susceptible strains , corroborating the high genetic differentiation observed between the two strains . likewise, in a principal coordinate analysis , the first axis unmistakably separated the two strains and explained  <dig>  % of the variation . however, when the pco analysis was carried out on each strain independently, enough genetic diversity seemed to be retained within each strain to clearly differentiate individuals , with the first two axes explaining  <dig>  % and  <dig>  % of the variation for the susceptible strain and the resistant strain, respectively.

assessment of genetic diversity within strains allowed to complete this picture and revealed a strong difference between the two strains . all the diversity indices calculated  give evidence of a high level of genetic diversity within the susceptible strain, whereas these indices were substantially lower for the resistant strain, except the mean pairwise jaccard coefficient.

discussion
in this article, we report a substantial refinement to the dart genotyping technique which allowed its implementation for the yellow fever mosquito aedes aegypti. more specifically, the genome complexity reduction step was achieved thanks to a mite-display procedure which utilizes the ae. aegypti pony element  <cit>  as an additional primer anchor. after restriction digestion of genomic dna and ligation of specific adaptor to compatible ends, pony-containing fragments were amplified using two primers, one annealing to the adaptor sequence and the other to a conserved sequence motif of the pony element .

in the 6144-clone library we generated, the relationships observed between the quality parameters  for the best markers were consistent with those reported in other species, for example wheat . it has to be noted that the mean discordance, although acceptable, is 3– <dig> times higher than that usually published in plants  <cit> . genomic representations generated with the mite procedure are potentially more complex, and there is also a competition for amplification between three types of fragments . both of these factors may contribute to increase the mean discordance in the mite procedure compared to the traditional dart protocol. in any case, the discordance parameter can be viewed as a genotyping error rate, and the value reported here  is excellent in comparison to those typically obtained with other marker systems  <cit> . this high reproducibility of the dart technique is mainly due to the routine practice of systematically genotyping samples at least twice, in order to discard unreliable markers as soon as the scoring step. another reason of this high data quality is the computerized scoring of dart markers, which transforms detected fluorescence intensities into presence/absence of a given fragment and limits scoring subjectivity.

our mite approach was successful to reveal a substantial number of dna polymorphisms in the two closely related laboratory strains of ae. aegypti studied here, with  <dig>  % of highly reliable polymorphic markers in the library. this polymorphism rate is slightly lower than that obtained in other species where the mite procedure has also been tested, probably because of an inherent lower diversity in the laboratory material studied here. in the sugarcane genome, for example,  <dig>  % of the cloned fragments turned out to be polymorphic with similar average quality parameters .

our working dataset, containing  <dig> polymorphic dart markers selected with less stringent quality parameters, helped highlight substantial genetic differences between the two mosquito strains, with an observed fst value reaching  <dig> . although the two strains diverged only  <dig> generations ago, this high level of genetic differentiation was not surprising in the light of the intensity of selection  applied to the selected strain at each generation. in addition to this strong inter-strain genetic structure, the dart dataset was also able to reveal high genetic diversity within both strains. linkage analyses combined with marker sequencing also suggested that most of the markers were unique and scattered in the genome, and thus that our results could not be overly inflated by redundant or physically linked markers. in short, dart markers appear to be discriminatory at both the intra- and inter-population levels, and have therefore the potential to become valuable tools in population genomics, even if they have not been used in this purpose so far.

as exemplifies by our study and others in molecular genotyping  <cit> , tes can be wonderful devices to help identify dna polymorphisms. they are not only omnipresent in most genomes, but also tightly associated with various types of genetic variability, from changes in genome size and arrangement to single nucleotide mutations  <cit> . mites are particularly fascinating in this respect. the mode of transposition of most mite families discovered so far has long remained mysterious  <cit> . they lack an active transposase, but according to recent studies, they seem to originate from ancestral autonomous tes and to depend on transposases encoded by related autonomous tes for contemporary transposition events  <cit> . incidentally, there are hints indicating that stress may be a triggering factor in contemporary transposition events of mites  <cit> . in our case, one can speculate that the stress represented by insecticide selection could have played a role in shaping the strong genetic structure between the two strains. moreover, despite their apparently deficient transposition capability, mites are usually present in high copy numbers in many eukaryote genomes. for example, the tourist mite superfamily represents alone more than  <dig> % of the rice genome  <cit> , and between  <dig> and  <dig> copies of the angel element can be found in the zebrafish genome  <cit> . mites also generally display well conserved motifs, which is particularly convenient for primer design  <cit> . last but not least, they tend to insert in or near transcriptionally active genomic regions  <cit> . this particularity offers exciting prospects in studies of phenotypic traits of economical interest, or in genomic surveys tracking genes under selection. interestingly, transposable elements often initiate the rapid evolution of insect resistance to insecticides, including resistance to bt toxins  <cit> . in ae. aegypti, dart markers with atypically high genetic differentiation between the susceptible and resistant strains might thus be linked to genes involved in resistance to bti toxins. some of these markers have already been sequenced and at least two promising candidate genes have been identified in their vicinity .

CONCLUSIONS
the mite approach described here  allowed obtaining the first dart dataset ever published for an animal genome, although it has to be noted that the dart method had previously been successfully developed for the mice genome . this example in ae. aegypti testifies of the flexibility of the dart genotyping technique, which can accommodate a wide range of other strategies for genome complexity reduction. its quasi-universal applicability, the fact that limited genome information is necessary to its development, the possibility to obtain markers near coding regions and the possibility to rapidly sequence markers of interest are some of the features that can make dart a serious competitor to other markers such as snps in non-model organisms  <cit> . in particular, dart has a role to play in the current burst of whole-genome scans tracking signatures of selection in order to unravel the genetic basis of adaptation  <cit> .

