BACKGROUND
the evolution of xylem was a critical step that allowed vascular plants to colonize vast areas of the earth's terrestrial surface. xylem plays an essential role in the transport of water and nutrients and provides mechanical support for vascular plants. herbaceous vascular plants develop primary xylem, and woody plants also produce secondary xylem . evolution from tracheids to vessels reflects a more efficient way for angiosperms to develop secondary xylem  <cit> . primary xylem consists of cellulose, hemicellulose, pectin and proteins, while secondary xylem contains higher amounts of cellulose and lignin. from a practical point of view, wood represents a renewable natural resource for the timber, fibre and biofuel industries and it is a major carbon sink in natural ecosystems.

in the last few decades the molecular basis of xylem formation and evolution has been investigated. syringyl  lignin biosynthesis was found to be an evolved lignin pathway in angiosperms, representing an addition to the ancient and predominant guaiacyl  lignin pathway conserved in land plants  <cit> . however, the s lignin pathway was also recently observed in lycophytes  <cit> , suggesting a complex evolutionary history of lignin biosynthesis in vascular plants. genes involved in wood formation have been identified in many plant species  <cit> , allowing investigation of xylem evolution at the transcriptome level. a core xylem gene set was identified in white spruce among which  <dig> transcripts are highly conserved in arabidopsis  <cit> . the expanding genomic resources of model plant species  <cit>  are invaluable for exploring many aspects of plant development and evolution, including xylem formation and evolution. recent studies suggest whole-genome duplication and reorganization  <cit>  have been a major driving force in plant evolution.

comparative genomics is a powerful tool for investigating plant evolution at the whole-genome level  <cit> . lower collinearity across dicots and monocots  <cit>  and lineage-specific genes have been observed using comparative genomics  <cit> . comparisons between rice and arabidopsis showed that 50% of the rice genome was homologous to arabidopsis  <cit> , while as much as 88% of the poplar genome shares homology with arabidopsis  <cit> . comparative genomics of poplar with arabidopsis revealed at least  <dig>  protein-coding genes were present in the ancestral eurosid genome  <cit> . the recently sequenced selaginella moellendorffii  <cit> , moss  <cit>  and eucalyptus grandis  <cit>  genomes provide new opportunities for comparative genomics in vascular plants.

many commercial crops and forest trees do not have sequenced genomes; thus, comparative genomics in these species must rely on studies of the transcriptome . using a transcriptome approach about half of loblolly pine xylem unigenes did not match arabidopsis unigenes  <cit> , and 39-45% of pine contigs had no hits in the genomes of arabidopsis, rice and poplar  <cit> . in white spruce and sitka spruce between  <dig> and 36% of the unigenes lacked homologs in poplar, arabidopsis and rice  <cit> . similar results were also observed in other comparisons between gymnosperms and angiosperms  <cit> . by contrast, comparison of different gymnosperm species revealed highly conserved transcriptomes. for example, about 84% of the white spruce transcripts had matches in the pine gene index  <cit> , and 60-80% of spruce contigs had homologs in loblolly pine and other gymnosperms  <cit> .

although comparative genomics has increased our understanding of plant evolution at the genome level, most studies to date have focussed on the entire genome sequence, and/or mixed est resources developed from a range of tissues. in order to examine xylem evolution in vascular plants we focused our attention on genes expressed specifically in xylem. we selected ten species which represent different categories of vascular plants, including gymnosperms , angiosperms  and lycophytes. the non-vascular plant moss was included as a reference for xylem evolution. up-to-date public genome sequences and xylem transcriptomes of selected plant species were used for comparative genomic analysis, aiming to explore the evolution of the xylem transcriptome in vascular plants.

RESULTS
the xylem transcriptome is highly conserved in conifer species
we compared the xylem transcriptomes among different conifer species , and analysed the homologs between conifer xylem transcriptomes and the xylem  transcriptomes or genomes of angiosperms, lycophytes and moss . at the nucleotide level 63-66%  and 78-82%  of radiata pine xylem unigenes have homologs in the xylem transcriptomes of loblolly pine and white spruce . a higher proportion  had homologs in the entire transcriptomes of conifers based on gene indices of pine and spruce . these results suggest that radiata pine xylem unigenes are highly conserved as full  or partial sequences  in other conifer species. additional analysis with loblolly pine and white spruce nucleotide sequences  revealed similarly high percentages of homologs in other conifer species. using deduced amino acid sequences more than 58%  or 79%  of the radiata pine xylem transcriptome are conserved as functional genes or domains in the three conifer species. comparisons of average percentage of homologs among different conifers  further confirmed that the xylem transcriptomes are highly conserved in conifers at both the nucleotide  and deduced amino acid sequences .

conifer xylem transcriptomes are significantly distinct from the xylem transcriptome or genomes of angiosperms, lycophytes and moss . for example, at the nucleotide level only 1-4%  and 15-32%  of radiata pine xylem unigenes have homologs in angiosperms, selaginella and moss. furthermore, average percentage of homologs between conifer xylem transcriptomes and angiosperms  at the nucleotide level is only 2%  or 23%  ; while even lower percentages  are observed between conifers and selaginella & moss. comparisons between two xylem transcriptomes would be expected to reveal fewer homologs than comparisons between a xylem transcriptome and a total transcriptome or a whole genome. the low percentage of homologs detected is statistically significant  compared to the high percentage of matches among conifer xylem transcriptomes. unsurprisingly, the deduced amino acid sequences of conifer xylem unigenes have relatively more homologs in non-coniferous plants . however, they are still significantly  lower than the homologous xylem unigenes among the three conifers.

we further examined the nucleotide identity of homologous unigenes in the xylem transcriptomes of different conifers as well as homologs between conifer xylem transcriptomes and unigenes of other plant species. the nucleotide identity between radiata pine and loblolly pine is consistently higher  at different e-value cut-offs ranging from  <dig> to 1e- <dig>  than between radiata pine and the two spruce species  . by contrast, lower nucleotide identity  was observed in the homologs between radiata pine and angiosperms  or moss. similar results were also observed in the analyses with loblolly pine . the average nucleotide identity of homologous xylem unigenes in different conifers is about 92%, significantly higher  than the homologs between conifers and angiosperms & moss  . thus, comparisons of nucleotide identity provide further evidence of the higher conservation of the xylem transcriptomes in conifers and its divergence in angiosperms and other plants.

the xylem transcriptome has evolved considerably in angiosperms
poplars are woody angiosperms and are used as a model tree species for wood formation. surprisingly, at the level of nucleotide sequence less than 5% of poplar xylem unigenes have homologs  in the scaffolds or gene models of other woody and herbaceous angiosperms  . poplar xylem unigenes also have few homologs  in the gene indices of pine or spruce and in the gene models of selaginella and moss . these results suggest that the poplar xylem transcriptome is distinct compared to other vascular and non-vascular plants. because gene models of a species represent its entire genome which includes the xylem transcriptome, the few homologs shared between the poplar xylem transcriptome and gene models of other angiosperms suggest that the xylem transcriptome has undergone considerable evolution in angiosperms. this contrasts with the highly conserved xylem transcriptomes in gymnosperms observed earlier . the entire genome of poplar is also unique at the nucleotide level among the species examined in this study . however, the functional gene sequences of the poplar xylem transcriptome and its entire genome  are moderately  conserved, while their functional domains are highly conserved  in other vascular and non-vascular plants. clearly, all land plants share an ancestral xylem transcriptome which may have been largely involved in cell wall biosynthesis in ancient non-vascular plants.

the xylem transcriptome is relatively more conserved in vascular plants
we examined the pattern of the xylem transcriptome evolution by comparing it with the total transcriptome derived from a range of tissues. although the xylem transcriptomes of pine, spruce and poplar have few homologs in the gene models of arabidopsis, rice, selaginella and moss , there are about two to four times more homologs than there are for the total transcriptome . when using a lower stringency e-value , the xylem transcriptomes of pine, spruce and poplar have more homologs  in the above four model species compared to the total transcriptome . thus, at the nucleotide level the xylem transcriptome is relatively more conserved in vascular and non-vascular plants. notably both the conifer xylem and total transcriptomes have few homologs in poplar  and herbaceous species  , suggesting conifer transcriptomes are distinct from other land plants.

the conservative evolution of the xylem transcriptome was more clearly observed when using deduced amino acid sequences . for example, 37-46% of the conifer xylem transcriptome matched the genomes of angiosperms , lycophyte and moss; nearly two times more than the matches with the total conifer transcriptome. similar results were also obtained with the poplar xylem transcriptome in the comparisons with the total transcriptome. therefore, the functional gene sequences in the xylem transcriptome are significantly more conserved in vascular plants than that in the total transcriptome.

different functional gene groups have distinct patterns of evolution
we divided the xylem transcriptome into different functional gene groups for investigating their diverse patterns of evolution. we defined xylem unigenes with matches  in the moss gene models as ancestral xylem genes, and those with no matches as vascular plant-specific xylem  genes. among the ancestral xylem genes derived from radiata pine, loblolly pine and white spruce, 96-99%, 78-94% and 48-60% , or 41-48%, 20-26% and 28-35% , respectively, have homologs  in the genomes of the three angiosperms and the lycophyte . in contrast, only 8-28%  and  <dig> -1%  of the conifer vsx genes are homologous to the genomes of these model vascular plants . these results suggest that the ancestral xylem genes are moderately to highly conserved in non-coniferous vascular plants, while considerable divergence has occurred in vsx genes among conifers, angiosperms and lycophytes. similar patterns were observed in the comparisons of vsx and ancestral xylem genes with the poplar xylem transcriptome .

cell wall genes were identified according to the cellwallnavigator  <cit>  and maizewall  <cit>  databases. we compared the level of conservation of cell wall genes to non-cell-wall genes . in the four woody species  the cell wall genes have  <dig>  to two times more homologs than the non-cell-wall genes in the genomes of the four herbaceous model plants . this suggests that cell wall genes have been highly conserved across diverse land plants. comparisons of transcription factors   with non-tfs and known functional genes with unknowns revealed significantly more conservation of transcription factors and known functional genes among different groups of vascular and non-vascular plants .

identification of putative xylem orthologs in vascular plants
putative xylem orthologs conserved in diverse plant groups were identified using deduced amino acid or protein sequences , and their numbers are briefly presented at two e-value cut-offs  in figure  <dig>  the xylem orthologs  shared by loblolly pine, white spruce and sitka spruce represent a common gene set expressed in conifer wood formation. while the xylem orthologs common to the three conifers and poplar  are putative woody plant xylem orthologs. surprisingly, the number of putative xylem orthologs in deeper plant groupings is only slightly smaller , suggesting that very limited numbers of xylem orthologs are specific to each plant group. the majority  of the vascular plant xylem orthologs have matches in the gene models of a non-vascular plant . this suggests that the xylem transcriptome of vascular plants has largely evolved from a subset of genes found in non-vascular plants. this is likely to be a group of genes predominantly involved in cell wall biosynthesis that have been recruited to synthesize secondary xylem in higher plants.

of the  <dig>  loblolly pine xylem unigenes with homologs  in the six vascular plants, 94% and 100% have hits in the uniprot known proteins and tigr gene indices databases, respectively, and 94% are assigned with go terms . among these unigenes  <dig>  were identified as cell wall genes, and the largest gene families are tubulin  and cellulose synthase  . several primary wall genes are abundant including pectate lyase , pectinesterase , xet , expansin  and peroxidase . lignin biosynthesis-related genes are well represented in the cell wall gene lists, including sams , laccase , methionine synthase  , 4cl , comt , cad  and ccoamt . in addition,  <dig> transcription factors were found, including nac, phd, hb, myb, lim, ccch, etc. the large number of transcription factors suggests that wood formation involves considerable transcriptional regulation. interestingly, aquaporins  is one of the largest gene families in the  <dig>  unigenes, reflecting their central importance in water transport in xylem.

the  <dig>  loblolly pine xylem unigenes have between  <dig> and  <dig> close homologs  in white spruce, sitka spruce, poplar, arabidopsis, rice and selaginella, with  <dig> xylem orthologs common to the above  <dig> species. these common xylem orthologs matched   <dig> unique gene models in moss, indicating that at least  <dig> ancestral xylem orthologs are shared in land plants. we also identified all loci in arabidopsis and rice with homology to the  <dig>  loblolly pine xylem unigenes. all possible homologs in arabidopsis are represented by  <dig>   or  <dig>  unique loci , and in rice by  <dig>  or  <dig>  unique loci. based on the numbers of close homologs in arabidopsis  and rice , an average of 4- <dig> and 4- <dig> paralogs may have arisen from each xylem ortholog in these two species, respectively.

the xylem orthologs and paralogs are relatively evenly distributed across the chromosomes of arabidopsis and poplar, but may be unevenly distributed among rice chromosomes . however, eight hot spots were detected within the five arabidopsis chromosomes , which contrasts with the even distribution of all arabidopsis genes across each chromosome  <cit>  . these hot spots may be a result of gene and chromosome duplication in arabidopsis  <cit> . within the chromosomes of rice and poplar the xylem orthologs have a relatively even distribution . different distribution patterns of the xylem orthologs among the arabidopsis, rice and poplar genomes may reflect their diverse history of gene duplication and segmental chromosomal rearrangements.

molecular evolution of xylem orthologs in vascular plants
we used the  <dig> ancestral xylem orthologs for phylogenetic analysis because they largely  represent the  <dig> unique xylem orthologs and it allowed us to include the non-vascular plant moss as a reference. two slightly different trees  were constructed using three alignment methods, two of which generated the same tree configuration . these trees clearly separate angiosperms and gymnosperms from lycophytes and moss. based on tree b moss and selaginella emerged at the earliest time point followed by the two conifers  and then by the two dicots . the monocot xylem transcriptome appears to be the most evolutionarily distinct. in summary, the phylogenetic analysis suggests that molecular evolution of xylem orthologs largely parallels the trend of plant evolution.

from individual phylogenetic trees of  <dig> ancestral xylem orthologs,  <dig>  genes showed an evolutionary pattern that generally followed the trend of plant evolution . these genes are likely more sensitive to evolutionary forces. molecular evolution of other xylem orthologs  did not closely resemble the general pattern of plant evolution. a large proportion of orthologs in this category  had trees with similar patterns between angiosperms  and ancient plant species , but quite distinct branches for the gymnosperms  . these genes have possibly undergone slower evolution, although considerable evolution appears to have occurred within the gymnosperms. this type of genes may have unique and important roles in softwood formation. other orthologs  exhibit complex evolutionary patterns which are poorly correlated with plant evolution, suggesting that genetic shift might be a major driven force for their evolution.

using go terms at various levels we compared gene functions between xylem orthologs which paralleled and diverged from plant evolution. genes involved in cellular components and biological process are significantly  more abundant in the divergent orthologs . further analyses with go terms at lower levels  suggest that genes involved in ribosome, transporter activity and translation tend to parallel plant evolution; while genes with functions in cell parts, binding and metabolic process have distinct patterns of evolution. among cell wall genes 4cl-like, xet and beta-galactosidase have a molecular evolutionary pattern paralleling plant evolution. however, many other cell wall genes have not tightly followed plant evolution, such as ccoamt, pectate lyase, pectinesterase, sucrose synthase, actin, alpha tubulin, comt, cesa, fla, laccase and peroxidase.

identification of putative conifer-specific xylem genes
a total of  <dig> loblolly pine xylem unigenes which matched unigenes of white spruce and sitka spruce , but have no homologs in the gene models of poplar, arabidopsis, rice, selaginella and moss, as well as no hits in any other angiosperms in the uniprot known protein database , were identified as putative conifer-specific xylem unigenes . all conifer-specific xylem unigenes are unknown protein sequences based on the uniprot database, and only 16% were assigned with go terms in the tigr gene index database. this contrasts with 94% of the xylem orthologs annotated with go terms. the poor annotation of the conifer-specific xylem genes is likely due to the intense functional characterisation of genes that has taken place in angiosperms.

of the conifer-specific xylem unigenes several relatively abundant transcripts have low homology to arabinogalactan-like proteins , glycine/proline-rich proteins , metallothionein-like class ii proteins, neurofilament triplet h proteins, zinc finger proteins, cytochrome c <dig>  etc . genes with low similarity to other cell wall proteins  are present. the conifer-specific xylem unigenes also include genes similar to transcription factors, i.e. aux/iaa, nac, ccaat-binding, wrky, r2r3-myb, bhlh and ccaat-binding . these conifer-specific xylem unigenes may share the functions of related homologues, but some may have unique roles in gymnosperm wood formation.

discussion
gymnosperms and angiosperms have distinct patterns of xylem transcriptome evolution
our data revealed that the xylem transcriptome is highly conserved in conifers but has undergone considerably more diversification in angiosperms. this suggests the xylem transcriptome has a distinct pattern of evolution in angiosperms compared to gymnosperms. pine and spruce diverged 120- <dig> ma  <cit> , slightly earlier than the radiation of angiosperms   <cit> . the rapid evolution of the angiosperm xylem transcriptome suggests greater sensitivity to evolutionary forces in flowering plants. our results also showed that poplar has a relatively distinct genome and xylem transcriptome, thus poplar is unlikely to be a useful model for investigating wood formation and other developmental processes in gymnosperms. mechanisms underlying the diverse patterns of xylem transcriptome evolution in angiosperms and gymnosperms are not well understood. gene duplications and segmental chromosome rearrangements may be the major driving forces for this diversification; however, the role of genome size or gene number remains unclear.

the common ancestor of the xylem transcriptome in vascular plants
our data demonstrated that the nucleotide and protein sequences of the xylem transcriptome are highly diversified among different categories of vascular plants, but that their functional domains are moderately to highly conserved in vascular plants. this is consistent with the diversification of all vascular plants from a common ancestor which is thought to have lived about  <dig> ma  <cit> . some of these conserved patterns are also consistent with comparisons using the total transcriptome in previous studies  <cit> . the conserved functional domains of the xylem transcriptome suggest the existence of a shared ancestral xylem transcriptome of vascular plants.

the common ancestral xylem transcriptome should be present in the earliest ancient vascular plants, which produced hilate/trilete spores during the late ordovician  <cit> . the lycophyte selaginella is among the closest living relatives of these plants and its xylem transcriptome is likely to resemble most closely the ancestral xylem transcriptome. the  <dig>   xylem unigenes of loblolly pine with homologs  in the six vascular plants including selaginella could largely represent the ancestral xylem transcriptome. because the vast majority  of the ancestral xylem transcriptome has homologs  in the moss genome, the xylem transcriptome is likely to have evolved largely from the cell wall transcriptome of non-vascular plants, which can be traced back as far as  <dig> ma  <cit> .

conservative evolution of the xylem transcriptome in vascular plants
xylem functions in the transport of water and solutes throughout the plant and together with the phloem makes up the vascular transport tissues of plants. our data suggests that the xylem transcriptome is relatively more conserved than the total transcriptome in vascular plants. several functional gene groups within the xylem transcriptome are significantly more conserved among vascular plants, including cell wall genes, ancestral xylem genes, transcription factors and known protein genes. this implies that xylem has evolved more slowly compared to other organs of vascular plants such as leaves, flowers and seeds. on the other hand, the unknown function and vsx genes have been more rapidly evolving in vascular plants. the rapid evolution of vsx genes contrasts with the generally conservative evolution of the total xylem transcriptome, suggesting vsx genes are particularly sensitive to evolutionary forces. these genes will be useful targets for functional characterisation in order to understand xylem formation and evolution in vascular plants.

our data showed that the loblolly pine xylem transcriptome has significantly more homologs in spruce  than in poplar and eucalyptus, thus it is possible to identify genes specific to gymnosperm wood formation . interestingly, the number of homologs of the loblolly pine xylem transcriptome in woody angiosperms  is similar to that in herbaceous angiosperms , suggesting that evolution in a small number of xylem genes in angiosperms gave rise to woody plants. furthermore, the number of homologs of the conifer xylem transcriptome in angiosperms is only slightly more than the number in lycophytes and moss. the limited number of xylem genes specific to woody plants suggests that differential transcriptional regulation may have played an important role in xylem evolution; in a similar way that transcriptional regulation gives rise to plant diversity  <cit> .

comparison of gene expression between softwoods and hardwoods
a previous study in cryptomeria japonica identified  <dig> putative conifer-specific transcripts, including three specific to reproductive organs and one  specific to woody tissues  <cit> . here we identified  <dig> conifer-specific xylem unigenes, all of which are of unknown function. transcripts with low homology to some cell wall genes  are abundant or present in the conifer-specific xylem unigenes . these cell wall gene families may include some unique members which are specific to conifer wood formation. the identified conifer-specific xylem genes could provide clues to the molecular processes that give rise to the distinct cell wall structures and chemical properties of softwoods compared to hardwoods. genes related to lignin biosynthesis are not present in the conifer-specific xylem unigenes, which is consistent with the earlier conclusion that the conifer lignin pathway is conserved in other vascular plants  <cit> .

transcripts similar to arabinogalactan protein  genes are the most abundant genes in the conifer-specific xylem unigenes. in loblolly pine six agps including ptagp <dig> were identified in xylem tissues  <cit>  and  <dig> agps were identified in radiata pine. radiata pine pragp <dig> is highly abundant in earlywood  <cit>  and preferentially transcribed in earlywood at different tree ages across a rotation period  <cit> . the conifer-specific xylem agps and agp-like genes had no homologs with any of the  <dig> agps of arabidopsis  <cit> . agps are a large class of hydroxyproline-rich glycoproteins. most agps are anchored to the plasma membrane  <cit>  and released into the cell wall after cleavage of the gpi anchor  <cit> . agps may act as cell wall plasticizers, enlarging the pectin matrix, and allowing wall extension and cell expansion  <cit> . radiata pine agps are located in the compound middle lamella of newly developed tracheids  <cit> . expression of agps containing fla domains has recently been found to influence the mechanical strength of stems of the herbaceous  and woody  angiosperms  <cit> . however, fasciclin-like domains  were not found in the agp genes specific to conifer wood formation, suggesting different agps may have distinct roles in softwood and hardwood formation.

we identified  <dig> xylem orthologs in vascular plants, including many primary and secondary cell wall genes as well as transcription factors. conservation of cell wall genes suggests that cell wall biosynthesis is a central event in xylem formation in vascular plants. these xylem orthologs maintain the stability of the basic xylem machinery in vascular plants and may regulate development of xylem structures and properties shared by different vascular plants, such as the common features of softwoods and hardwoods. comt was previously thought to be one of three enzymes  specifically involved in s lignin synthesis of angiosperms  <cit> . the occurrence of comt genes in the xylem orthologs of vascular plants suggests their involvement in diverse functions other than s lignin synthesis.

CONCLUSIONS
the xylem transcriptome is highly conserved in conifer species, but the nucleotide sequences of the xylem transcriptome are significantly distinct among angiosperms, thus considerable evolution of the xylem transcriptome has occurred in angiosperms. the functional domains of the xylem transcriptome are moderately to highly conserved among vascular and non-vascular plants. this suggests that vascular plants share an ancestral xylem transcriptome which is likely to have evolved predominantly from the cell wall transcriptome of non-vascular plants. in comparison to the total transcriptome from a wide range of tissues, the xylem transcriptome has evolved conservatively in vascular plants. several functional gene groups within the xylem transcriptome, including cell wall genes, ancestral xylem genes, transcription factors and known function genes, are relatively more conserved in vascular plants. a total of  <dig> xylem orthologs of vascular plants and  <dig> conifer-specific xylem genes were identified in this study. these genes provide good candidates for molecular investigations of xylem formation and evolution in softwoods  and hardwoods . the uneven distribution of xylem orthologs within arabidopsis chromosomes suggests genome rearrangements have played an important role in xylem evolution. phylogenetic analysis of the  <dig> ancestral xylem orthologs suggests that molecular evolution of the xylem transcriptome has largely paralleled the trend of plant evolution despite several gene classes did not tightly track it.

