BACKGROUND
development in wild-type organisms is robust to genetic and environmental variations.
conrad hal waddington introduced the notion of ‘canalisation’ to describe
how developmental processes resist perturbations during embryogenesis  <cit> . the canalised nature of development explains, he argued, why most phenotypes
are discrete and distinct. to illustrate these ideas, he developed the epigenetic
landscape, one of his most well-known concepts  <cit> .

in waddington’s epigenetic landscape, the current state of a developing system is
indicated by a ball on an undulated surface   <cit> . the topography of this landscape determines the developmental potential or
repertoire of the system. the top-most edge of the surface shown in figure 1a  represents the initial state of the system given by,
for example, a particular set of initial protein concentrations in a cell. valleys in
the landscape symbolise the various differentiation pathways that are available. the
landscape’s topography—together with the initial state—determine a
developmental trajectory that follows a particular valley. the structure of the
landscape is such that, if the system is slightly perturbed, the sloping valley walls
will cause it to correct and readjust its trajectory. this behavour is called
‘homeorhesis’—the maintenance of a dynamic trajectory—in analogy
to the more static concept of homeostasis—the maintenance of a  state of
the system  <cit> . the wider and deeper a valley is, the more canalised the developmental
trajectory. waddington named such canalised trajectories ‘chreodes’.
two different views of waddington’s epigenetic landscape taken from
“the strategy of the genes” published in  <dig>  <cit> . the top panel shows a top view of the landscape. the path that the
ball will follow represents the developmental trajectory  of a given
system. valleys indicate alternative differentiation pathways, branch points imply
developmental decisions. the bottom panel shows the view from below the landscape.
it illustrates how genes remodel the surface by pulling on it through ropes.
waddington used this sketch to show how the landscape’s topography changes
during development and evolution.  panel 1: diagrammatic representation
of the toggle switch network used in the simulations. activating interactions are
indicated by arrows, repressing ones by t-bar connectors. see model and methods
section for detailed parameter descriptions. panel 2: mathematical formulation of
the toggle switch model. x and y indicate concentrations of the
protein products of genes x and y. ordinary differential
equations define the rate of change in protein concentrations
. sigmoid functions with fixed hill coefficients of
 <dig> are used to represent auto-activation and mutual repression. decay and external
activation are taken to be linear. parameters as in panel  <dig>  panel 3: phase
portrait for a constant set of parameter values of the toggle switch model in the
bistable regime. x- and y-axes represent protein concentrations
x and y. we use this example to illustrate relevant features
of phase space: arrows indicate flow, blue points mark the position of stable
steady states , the red point shows an unstable steady state 
lying on the separatrix that divides the two basins of attraction . see
the main text for detailed descriptions of the highlighted features. panel 4:
quasi-potential landscape associated to the the phase portrait shown in panel  <dig> 
the steepness of the quasi-potential surface correlates with the flow at each
corresponding point on the phase portrait. attractors, saddle, and separatrix are
indicated as in panel  <dig>  see main text for details.

an additional feature of waddington’s landscape is crucial in our context: it is
the fact that its surface is not necessarily fixed, but can change over time due to the
influence of genetic or environmental signals. waddington represented this by pegs
connected to the underside of the landscape by ropes   <cit> . as the genetic or environmental context of the system changes, these ropes
pull and stretch the surface, thereby changing its topography and hence its
developmental potential.

waddington’s epigenetic landscape was conceived as a conceptual tool to illustrate
the nature of developmental robustness and its effect on evolutionary dynamics  <cit> . as such, it remained at a rather metaphorical level of explanation, since
complex non-linear biological processes are hard to formulate and analyse  <cit> . this is still the predominant way in which it is used in various reviews on
contemporary stem cell research . however, in order to understand the precise nature of specific
developmental trajectories or chreodes in real systems, we have to take
waddington’s landscape a step further: we have to calculate it based on
experimental evidence, and use it to characterise the transient behaviours that govern
the observed developmental dynamics  <cit> .

the increasing availability of quantitative gene expression data renders this approach
feasible. however, before we can successfully apply it, we also require new conceptual
and mathematical tools to deal with the analysis of data-driven models that are
formulated in terms of non-autonomous  dynamical
systems. explicit time-dependence is necessary to reproduce the changing topography of
waddington’s landscape. however, such systems are difficult to study in a rigorous
mathematical manner, and few analysis tools exist at this point. in this work, we
address this challenge by proposing a classification scheme for transient dynamic
behaviours observed in a non-autonomous version of a simple gene network model. this
scheme is meant to provide the foundation for the analysis of more complex
time-dependent models that reproduce the dynamics of specific, experimentally tractable,
biological regulatory systems.

dynamical systems
in this study, we focus on dynamical systems formulated in terms of ordinary
differential equations, and illustrate how such models can help explain the function
and potential of developmental gene regulatory networks in terms of their dynamical
repertoires, that is, in terms of the set of behaviours that can be implemented by
the system. a system’s behaviour is defined by its trajectories, which
represent the change of the state of the system—e. g. consisting of a set of
transcription factor concentrations—over time. the shape of these trajectories
depends on the structure or organisation of the underlying regulatory network . it is possible to gain a general qualitative understanding of what the
system’s trajectories can and cannot achieve without the need to solve the
dynamical system analytically  <cit> . most of this information comes from the geometrical analysis of phase
space, i. e. an analysis of the number, nature and relative arrangement of the steady
states of the system.

the phase space of a dynamical system is an abstract space, in which each dimension
represents the value of a specific state variable. here we use a well established
double-repressive feedback loop model, known as the toggle switch , to study transient dynamics in a
two-dimensional, time-dependent gene regulatory network . in this case, the state variables represent the concentrations
of the transcription factors that constitute the network . the graphical
representation of phase space is called the phase portrait. it shows the rate of
change of the system at any given state. this is known as the flow of the system. the
flow of the toggle switch model is indicated by arrows of a given length and
direction in the phase portrait shown in figure 1b, panel  <dig>  if
we follow the flow from all possible initial states, we obtain the totality of
possible dynamic trajectories.

it is evident from the inspection of the flow in figure 1b
 that trajectories tend to converge to specific points in phase space: the
steady states of the system. there are different kinds of steady states, those that
are stable, and those that are unstable. the most simple stable steady state is an
attractor point  <cit> . attractors, as their name implies, draw trajectories towards them.
furthermore, they have the special property that once a trajectory has reached an
attractor, it will return to it if the system is slightly perturbed. an example of an
unstable steady state is a saddle point .
saddle points attract trajectories from some directions, but repel them in others.
usually, the system will move away from a saddle upon perturbation, towards the
nearest attractor. the repelling trajectory follows a structure in phase space called
an unstable manifold. this manifold is defined by the the path that links a saddle
with an attractor point. note that unstable manifolds correspond to chreodes at the
bottom of valleys in waddington’s landscape.

in our phase portraits, we plot steady states as points coloured according to their
stability: attractors in blue, and saddle points in red . the region of phase space around an attractor, from which
all trajectories converge towards it, is called its basin of attraction. curves known
as separatrices set apart the different basins and their attractors . saddle points are always located on separatrices.

attractors and saddles, with their associated basins and separatrices can be created
or annihilated through the process of bifurcation  <cit> . bifurcations represent sudden qualitative changes in the structure of the
phase portrait caused by small changes in the values of a given set of control
parameters.

to date, the best example illustrating the importance and usefulness of geometric
approaches for understanding the dynamics and function of specific, experimentally
tractable, developmental regulatory systems comes from an analysis of the gap gene
regulatory network involved in pattern formation during early embryogenesis of the
vinegar fly drosophila melanogaster. manu and colleagues  <cit>  identified features of phase space responsible for patterning and
canalisation of spatio-temporal gene expression in the drosophila blastoderm
embryo. the analysis is based on low-dimensional projections of phase space to study
the geometric arrangement of attractors in the four-dimensional system representing
the change in protein concentration for four transcription factors encoded by the gap
genes hunchback , krüppel , knirps , and
giant . gene expression domain boundaries that remain at a constant
position over time could be attributed to movements of attractors in phase space, or
nuclei switching between attractor basins depending on their position in the embryo.
in contrast, more posterior expression boundaries, which keep shifting position over
time, were associated with transient behaviours along a canalising unstable manifold,
forming the equivalent of a valley in waddington’s landscape  <cit> .

potential landscapes
phase portraits of systems with two state variables can be visualised in terms of
their associated potential landscape  <cit>  . in this representation, the
steepness of the potential landscape corresponds to the flow of the system . trajectories travel downhill
towards the attractor points. the topography of the potential landscape is therefore
a direct result of the topology  and the geometry
 of the underlying
phase portrait.

potential surfaces can be thought of as mathematical representations of
waddington’s epigenetic landscape  <cit> . attractors represent differentiated states , separatrices form the ridges between the valleys, which are formed by
unstable manifolds representing their associated chreodes , and the flow is represented by the steepness of the
slopes on the landscape. canalisation is explained by the depth and width of each
valley in the potential landscape. this provides a way of probing and understanding
the features that confer robustness to the system . branching valleys can arise through particular types of bifurcation
events. in particular, new attractor states can branch off from existing ones during
development or stem cell differentiation through  pitchfork
bifurcations  <cit> .

due to this analogy to waddington’s epigenetic landscape, potential landscapes
are becoming increasingly popular as explanatory tools in fields such as evo-devo,
developmental biology, and especially in stem cell research. in the case of stem
cells, the positioning of the valleys in the landscape relative to each other
explains which differentiation pathways can be reached by a given stem cell, and
which cell fates can  be trans-differentiated into each other  <cit> . this illustrates how specific biological meaning can be gained from
studying the topography of potential landscapes, which ultimately, is nothing more
than a visually accessible way of studying the underlying phase portrait.

waddington meant his epigenetic landscape as a “diagrammatic
representation” of development and warned explicitly against interpretations
that were too rigorous or literal  <cit> . detailed topographical interpretations of waddington’s landscape
may be quite inaccurate and even misleading. ferrell  <cit>  points out that waddington’s landscape, where valleys progressively
split into an increasing number of branches, does not help explain many realistic
cell differentiation processes. in particular, many inductive processes in
development  involve saddle-node rather than pitchfork
bifurcations, which correspond to the disappearance of valleys rather than to their
creation by branching. the system shifts to a new attractor only once the old one has
vanished. this is why it is important to move from metaphorical uses of
waddington’s epigenetic landscape to accurately calculated potential surfaces
whenever possible, or more importantly, to the detailed analysis of the underlying
phase portraits, which is where the dynamics of specific regulatory networks are
determined.

potential landscapes can only be calculated and visualised explicitly for a
restricted range of dynamical systems, belonging to the class of gradient systems  <cit> . note that the notion of a gradient system is defined mathematically by
the absence of limit cycles or any other complex attractor structures in their phase
portraits, and has nothing to do with biochemical or other biological gradients . in cases where we do not know whether
the system under study is a gradient system or not, we can approximate the actual
potential using various numerical methods  <cit> . the resulting approximations are called quasi-potential landscapes.

however, even such quasi-potential landscapes can only be visualised directly when
the number of state variables of the system does not exceed two. this is not true for
most biologically realistic systems. nevertheless, potential landscapes are
still useful as conceptual tools for the analysis of higher-dimensional regulatory
networks. in some cases, it is possible to reduce a high-dimensional system to a
lower-dimensional one . but even if this is not the case, the concept of the potential landscape
provides two advantages. first, as discussed above, quasi-potential surfaces link
waddington’s intuitively accessible concept of the epigenetic landscape to the
biological interpretation of  phase space analysis. and second,
potential surfaces are useful as visual guides to diagnose features of the underlying
phase portrait of the system that are characteristic of specific dynamic behaviours
of the regulatory network under study.

the importance of transient dynamics
many models of biological systems are formulated with the assumption that the
relevant dynamics occur near or at a steady state. for instance, thom’s
pioneering systematic and rigorous analysis of morphogenesis in terms of catastrophe
theory explicitly and strongly relies on this assumption  <cit> . similarly, work on robustness and evolvability, using ensembles of
simulated networks, standardly assumes that the steady state pattern produced by a
model can be taken as a satisfactory and realistic representation of the phenotype of
the system . furthermore, stem cell models that make use of potential landscapes are
analysed with a strong focus on how their attractors govern system behaviour  <cit> .

in some cases, the steady state assumption makes obvious sense based on biological
reasoning. one example is the analysis of the segment polarity network in
drosophila melanogaster, which amplifies and maintains a periodic input,
and thus performs an intrinsically stabilising patterning function  <cit> . in most cases, however, biological pattern formation is highly dynamic
and far from equilibrium, and the steady state assumption is justified based on
methodological, rather than biological considerations. focussing on asymptotic
behaviour at or near steady state greatly simplifies the analysis of the system.
first, it discretises and reduces phase  space into a small
number of possible states—represented by the system’s attractors . second, it enables the powerful toolkit of
linear stability analysis to be employed to examine the characteristic properties of
system states  <cit> .

however, there are both theoretical and practical reasons indicating that steady
state analysis misses essential and biologically relevant systems behaviours. one
line of theoretical reasoning is provided by waddington himself, who reminds us that
“n the study of development we are interested not only in the final state to
which the system arrives, but also in the course by which it gets there”.  <cit> . his concept of homeorhesis and his representation of developmental
trajectories or chreodes as descending valleys in the epigenetic landscape places the
focus explicitly on the transient dynamics of cells on their way to their final,
differentiated state. in the same spirit, other authors have suggested that
phenotypes should be defined over developmental trajectories, rather than
representing some sort of ‘final’ outcome or ‘end state’ of
the system  <cit> . to decide what a final pattern is, and when exactly it occurs, is always
arbitrary to some degree, while transient features  are clearly important when considering the function
and dynamics of developmental processes.

there are also practical reasons to consider transient dynamics explicitly. for
developmental processes that consist of continuous transitions between patterns
rather than the production of a final output, it is impossible to decide a
priori whether the system is representing a non-autonomous succession of
steady states , or whether its behaviour is truly transient . in the case of gap domain shifts, we have evidence for the latter  <cit> , although there is no reason to assume that the two situations need to be
mutually exclusive. the gap gene model analysed by manu and colleagues  <cit>  exhibits boundary shifts that are caused by trajectories following a
canalising unstable manifold. assuming steady state dynamics would collapse the
trajectories representing these shifts into a single attractor point at the final
configuration of gene expression. any such analysis would miss the relevant
underlying features of phase space , and therefore fail to
provide a proper characterisation and explanation for the observed gene expression
dynamics .

other examples of developmental processes, where transient dynamics are clearly
important are dorso-ventral patterning of the vertebrate neural tube, which involves
boundary shifts strikingly similar to those of the gap domains  <cit> , and vertebrate somitogenesis or short-germband segmentation in arthropods
where transient travelling waves of gene expression are an essential component of the
underlying clock-and-wavefront patterning mechanism  <cit> . incidentally, similar considerations can be made for models dealing with
ecological networks, and several examples exist in the literature that consider
transient dynamics explicitly .

non-autonomy: explicit time dependence
another important aspect of biological regulatory processes, which receives
surprisingly little attention, is the explicit time dependence of these systems. as
soon as we consider cellular dynamics, development, or evolution over a large-enough
time span, the organisation of the underlying regulatory system starts to change.
this affects the parameters—not just the state variables—of the system.
such explicitly time-dependent dynamical systems are called non-autonomous  <cit> . time-dependent signalling cues and environmental conditions have long
been known to shape many processes in the fields of evolutionary and developmental
biology. obvious examples of such phenomena are inductive processes or external  cues that are essential to trigger many developmental pathways , or evolutionary dynamics driven by changing environmental conditions
.

still, it is rare to find studies based on explicitly non-autonomous models in the
literature, and most authors avoid the challenge of dealing with dynamical systems
where the parameters representing external cues are time-dependent. this is the case
in the study of gap domain shifts by manu and colleagues  <cit> , where maternal morphogen gradients providing regulatory input to the
system were assumed to reach steady state before gap gene boundary positioning was
analysed. such simplifications can be risky, especially when describing biological
phenomena where the time scales of change in parameters and state variables are of
similar order. in such cases, time scales should not be separated, nor quasi-steady
states considered since it is easy for dynamical properties and behaviours of the
system to be missed or misinterpreted under these conditions.

recently there have been some attempts at including non-autonomy in biological
models. corson and siggia  <cit> , for example, offer an explanation for vulva development in c.
elegans which explicitly considers temporal parameter changes due to
inductive signalling cues in their model. their model considers differentiation of
cells into three differentiated states depending on inputs from two signalling
pathways. signalling inputs are encoded in the model by altering values of system
parameters, which change and distort the geometry of the phase portrait by displacing
separatrices from their original position . when a cell receives a signal, its developmental trajectory comes to lie
within another basin of attraction, inducing an alternative cell fate to that which
would have been reached in the absence of the signal. this study illustrates the
importance of non-autonomous dynamics in development. however, it remains somewhat
limited in its implementation of explicit time-dependence. although parameter change
is included in the model, signalling occurs before cells embark on their
developmental paths, and trajectories develop purely autonomously thereafter.
therefore, this approach does not fully capture the transient dynamics of cell
differentiation. in other words, although their model is able to offer an explanation
for cell differentiation in vulval development, it cannot capture the full
non-autonomous nature of the developmental process, since it does not reproduce
developmental trajectories, chreodes, in an accurate and fully time-dependent
manner.

similarly, most of the few other examples of non-autonomous models in the biological
literature do not explicitly consider the effect of parameter changes on transient
behaviour . this simplification may be justified in many cases and is necessary for
any kind of rigorous analytical treatment of a model. in many situations, however, it
fails to capture essential features of the system. for instance, a truly accurate
analysis of gap gene regulatory dynamics would require the inclusion of both
non-autonomy from the rapidly changing maternal morphogen gradients, and transient
dynamics, which are known to underlie the temporal shifts in domain position. before
we can undertake such an analysis we must first build a conceptual toolkit for phase
space analysis of transient, non-autonomous dynamics. due to the limited amount of
analysis possible in such systems, this toolkit will need to be developed in a
pragmatic and empirical manner, using numerical simulation and exploration of a
simple conceptual model as its basis.

in the following sections, we present such a simulation-based attempt at developing
concepts to classify transient, non-autonomous behaviours. for this purpose, we use a
simple two-component model of a genetic toggle switch, whose potential landscape can
be explicitly visualised. we use time series of graphs and animations of systems
dynamics on this potential to identify mechanisms leading to state transitions, and
other forms of pattern formation. from this, we are able to identify four basic types
of dynamical mechanism and behaviour—transitions, pursuits and two types of
captures of trajectories—that can be used to classify and understand dynamical
behaviour in more complicated and realistic models, such as a full non-autonomous
version of the gap gene model. while this present paper provides the methodological
foundation for such an analysis, detailed results for a realistic model of the gap
genes will be presented elsewhere.

model and methods
to develop our methodology for analysing transient behaviour in non-autonomous dynamical
systems, we use a simple toggle switch model  with time-dependent parameters. we consider two
interacting genes x and y .
concentrations of the corresponding protein products are labelled x and
y. x and y mutually repress each other, are linearly
activated by external signals and can auto-activate themselves . protein products decay linearly dependent on their
concentration. the mathematical formulation of our toggle switch model is thus given by 

  dxdt=αx+x4a4+x4b4b4+y4−λxxdydt=αy+y4c4+y4d4d4+x4−λyy 

where parameters α
x
 and α
y
 represent the external activation on genes x and y
respectively. sigmoid functions with hill coefficients of  <dig> are used to represent
auto-activation and mutual repression, where parameters a and c
determine auto-activation thresholds, while b and d determine
thresholds for mutual repression. protein decay rates are represented by parameters
λ
x
 and λ
y
.

the toggle switch model  exhibits different dynamical regimes depending on the values
of its parameters . its name derives from the
fact that it can exhibit bistability over a wide range of parameters. when in this
bistable region of parameter space, the underlying phase portrait has two attracting
states and one saddle point . all phase portraits
associated with parameters in the bistable range are topologically equivalent to each
other, meaning that they can be mapped onto each other by a continuous deformation of
phase space called a homeomorphism  <cit> .
exhibit three different dynamical regimes depending on parameter values.
 in the monostable regime, the phase portrait has one attractor point
only . at this
attractor, both products of x and y are present at low
concentrations.  in the bistable regime, which gives the toggle switch
its name, there are two attractor points  and
one saddle  on a separatrix , which separates the two basins of
attraction. the attractors correspond to high x, low y , or low x, high y . the two factors never
coexist when equilibrium is reached in this regime.  in the tristable
regime, both bistable switch attractors and the steady state at low co-existing
concentrations are present . in addition, there
are two separatrices with associated saddle points . these regimes convert
into each other as follows : the monostable attractor is converted into two bistable attractors
and a saddle point through a supercritical pitchfork bifurcation; the saddle in
the bistable regime is converted into an attractor and two additional saddles in
the tristable regime through a subcritical pitchfork bifurcation; the bistable
attractors and their saddles collide and annihilate in two simultaneous
saddle-node  bifurcations to turn the tristable regime into a monostable
one. graph axes as in figure 1b, panel  <dig> 

the toggle switch model has two other dynamical regimes: monostable and tristable. phase
portraits associated with parameters in the monostable range have only one attractor
point , while those in the tristable range have three
attractor states and two saddle points . again, phase
portraits within each regime are topologically equivalent to each other. while phase
space can be geometrically deformed within each regime , its topology only changes when one regime transitions into another
through different types of bifurcations  <cit>  . the transition from monostable to bistable
is known to be governed by a supracritical pitchfork, the transition from bistable to
tristable involves a subcritical pitchfork bifurcation, and the transition from
tristable to monostable takes place through two simultaneous saddle-node bifurcations
involving the two attractors labelled in darker blue in figure 2c.

definition of the potential landscape
potential landscapes can only be calculated explicitly for the class of dynamical
systems called gradient systems  <cit> . a two-variable gradient system is a dynamical system 

  dxdt=fdydt=g 

which satisfies the following relationship between partial derivatives 

  fy=gx. 

for gradient systems, it is possible to calculate a closed-form  potential
function, v such that 

  vx=−dxdtvy=−dydt. 

the local minima on the two-dimensional potential surface given by
v correspond mathematically to the steady states
of the system in  since, if  is such that 

  vx=vy= <dig>  

then 

  dxdt=0dydt= <dig>  

and, therefore,  is a steady state of .

calculating quasi-potential landscapes
condition  will not always be met. in particular, dynamical systems representing
gene interaction networks are not in general gradient systems, and therefore an
associated potential function and landscape may not exist. in such cases, we can
still take advantage of the visualisation power of potential landscapes by
approximating the true potential using a numerical method. the numerical
approximation method we adopt for our study was developed by bhattacharya and
colleagues  <cit>  using a toggle switch model very similar to the one used here. this allows
us to calculate a quasi-potential landscape for any specific set of fixed parameter
values.

the quasi-potential, which we denote by v
q
, is defined to decrease along all trajectories of the dynamical system as they
progress on the phase portrait over time 

  Δvq=δvqδxΔx+δvqδyΔy=−dxdtΔx+−dydtΔy. 

Δx and Δy are defined as small-enough increments along the trajectory such that
dx/dt and dy/dt can be considered constant in the interval
. in addition, Δx=dxdtΔt and Δy=dydtΔt, where Δt is the time increment. substituting into equation  <dig>  we obtain 

  Δvq=−dxdtdxdtΔt+−dydtdydtΔt=−dxdt2+dxdt2Δt. 

Δv
q
 has been formulated in such a way that, for positive time increments
Δt, Δv
q
 is always negative along the unfolding trajectory and is, in effect, a
lyapunov function of the two-gene dynamical system  <cit> . this ensures that trajectories will always “roll” downhill on
the quasi-potential surface. just as in the case of closed-form potential, the steady
states of the system  correspond to the local minima on the quasi-potential surface
since Δv
q
= <dig> 

we apply the numerical approximation method described above to trajectories with
various initial points on the x-y plane. this yields a sampled
collection of trajectories with quasi-potential values associated to every one of
their points. next, we apply the following two assumptions, in order to construct a
continuous quasi-potential surface from this sample of discrete trajectories  <cit> : 

 <dig>  two trajectories with different initial conditions that converge to the
same steady state must also converge to the same final quasi-potential level
.

 <dig>  two adjacent trajectories that converge to different steady states will
be taken to start from the same initial quasi-potential level .

finally, interpolation of all the normalised trajectories results in a continuous
quasi-potential landscape. bhattacharya et al. <cit>  validated this approach by demonstrating that the quasi-potential values
of the steady states were inversely correlated with their probability of occurrence
using a stochastic version of the toggle switch dynamical system.

approximating non-autonomous trajectories
as we have argued in the background section, we cannot generally assume that
parameter values remain constant over time when modelling biological processes. we
take a step-wise approximation approach to the change in parameter values to address
this problem . we chose a time increment 
as small as possible. parameter values are kept constant for the duration of each
time step. as a consequence, the associated phase portrait will also remain constant
during this time interval, and is visualised for each step by calculating a
quasi-potential landscape as described in the previous section .
switch network. red arrows representing auto-activation indicate
time-dependence of threshold parameters ax and
ay .  values of
auto-activation thresholds ax and
ay are altered simultaneously and linearly
over time. the graph shows the step-wise approximation of a continuous change,
in this case, an increase in parameter values. step size is taken as small as
computational efficiency allows.  during every time step, parameters
can be considered constant, and the phase portrait and potential
landscape are calculated for the current set of parameter values. trajectories
are then integrated over the duration of the time step using the previous end
point as the current initial condition. the result is mapped onto the potential
surface. the four panels in  show examples of potential landscapes  calculated based on sets of parameter values at time points indicated
by dashed arrows from . important events altering the geometry of the
trajectory are indicated. lower panels show the corresponding instantaneous
phase portraits with the integrated progression of the trajectory across time
steps. see model and methods for details.

the smaller the time increments considered, the better we are able to approximate
continuous changes in parameter values, and the consequent changes to the associated
phase portrait and quasi-potential landscape. such accurate approximation allows us
to faithfully reproduce non-autonomous trajectories produced by models with
continuously time-variable parameters. this is done by integrating trajectories using
constant parameters during each time step, and then using the resulting end position
in phase space as the initial condition for the next time step. the resulting
integrated trajectories can then be visualised by mapping them from the underlying
phase plane onto the associated quasi-potential landscape as described above. this
allows us to track and analyse in detail how changes in the phase portrait and
quasi-potential landscape shape the trajectories as the values of the parameters are
changing.

RESULTS
using the toggle switch defined in  as a conceptual model, we have set out to
identify and catalogue mechanisms that affect the shape of trajectories in
non-autonomous systems. in contrast to previous studies , we do not assume asymptotic behaviour of the system, but focus on transient
dynamics—that is, the entire trajectory from initial to steady state.

in this context, we use the term ‘mechanism’ in an unusual, but precisely
defined way. we do not mean it to imply any specific biochemical interactions—this
is how most experimental biologists would use the term. nor does our notion of
‘mechanism’ depend on any specific regulatory structure, such as network
motifs , or the different stripe-forming mechanisms studied in  <cit> . instead, we use the term ‘mechanism’ in a broader, more abstract
sense: a mechanism is a causal explanation of dynamics in terms of the dependence of the
flow on parameter changes, and how these affect the trajectories of the system. we will
illustrate this very abstract definition using a number of concrete examples below.

changing parameter values in non-autonomous systems can change the underlying phase
portrait in two main ways: it can alter the geometry or the topology
of phase space   <cit> . on one hand, a change in geometry means that the phase portrait is still
composed of the same basic elements—the same number, kind and relative placement
of attractors and their associated basins, saddle points, and separatrices—but
that the exact position, shape, and/or size of these elements has been altered. on the
other hand, a topological alteration of phase space occurs when a change in parameter
values cause the number or stability of steady states to change. for example, small
changes in a parameter value can cause a pair of attractor and saddle points to appear
or disappear through a saddle-node or fold bifurcation, or an attractor can be turned
into a saddle point through a transcritical bifurcation. topological changes to the
phase portrait are therefore associated with bifurcations as studied in the context of
autonomous dynamical systems  <cit> .

in what follows, we examine how both geometrical and topological changes in phase space
affect transient trajectories in non-autonomous systems. for this purpose, we use a
numerical simulation approach with three-dimensional visualisation of the
quasi-potential landscape associated with the phase portrait of our toggle switch model
. we identify four different basic types
of non-autonomous mechanisms affecting dynamical behaviour: transitions, pursuits and
two kinds of captures.

transitions
out of the four trajectory-shaping mechanisms that we have identified in this study,
transitions are the most familiar. they have been found and described in previous
approaches to the study of non-autonomous biological systems  <cit> . transitions in our context are equivalent to thom’s
‘catastrophes’  <cit> , and to what scheffer has termed ‘critical transitions’,
defined as a shift of the system from one attractor to another when it passes a given
critical point in parameter space  <cit> . while thom’s and scheffer’s analyses focus on the resulting
steady state behaviour of the system, we also consider the transient dynamics during
a transition.

an example of a transition in the toggle switch model—occurring from the
bistable via the tristable to the monostable regime—is shown in figure  <dig> . this transition is driven by an increase in the value of the
auto-activation thresholds . changes in
auto-activation have been previously used to explain the dynamics of stem cell
differentiation  <cit> , and patterning by lateral inhibition  <cit> .
from one attractor state to another. upper panels show potential
surfaces, lower panels phase portraits as in figure 3c.
the progress of time is shown through increasingly dark shading, and by the
arrow at the bottom of the figure.  the system starts off in the
bistable regime. the trajectory’s initial conditions coincide with the
attractor at high x, low y . the trajectory is
therefore at steady state at the outset.  changes in auto-activation
thresholds a and c  over time cause the system to
undergo a subcritical pitchfork bifurcation and enter the tristable regime .  the trajectory does not
switch attractors immediately after the bifurcation occurs. however, it does
not remain anchored to its current attractor either. instead, it is left behind
by the moving attractor, which it starts to pursue .  the system enters
the monostable regime as the two bistable attractors disappear via two
simultaneous saddle-node  bifurcations. the trajectory suddenly finds
itself in an alternative basin of attraction, and eventually converges to the
new, monostable attractor with low x and y. this change in
basins of attraction is represented by a change in colour of the trajectory
shown in . see also additional file  <dig>  supporting
movie s <dig> 
results from the movement of an attractor. in this case, both attractor and
trajectory progress in the same direction, which is therefore stabilised even
before the system enters any asymptotic regime. upper panels show
potential surfaces, lower panels phase portraits as in figure 3c. the progress of time is shown through increasingly dark
shading, and by the arrow at the bottom of the figure.  pursuit
behaviour shows similarities to autonomous dynamics, since the location of the
initial condition determines the attractor towards which the system will
converge. in this example, parameter changes do not alter the position of the
separatrix.  however, the approach of the system towards the
attractor is very different than in the autonomous case, since both attractors
move away from the origin as activation strength  is increased over time.
this leads to an enduring pursuit by the trajectory of its moving attractor
target. see also additional file  <dig>  supporting movie
s <dig> 
results from the movement of an attractor. in this case, the direction of the
trajectory is altered since the attractor moves against the flow. upper panels
show potential surfaces, lower panels phase portraits as in figure
3c. the progress of time is shown through increasingly
dark shading, and by the arrow at the bottom of the figure. 
panels show the movement of the attractors towards the origin as activation
strength  is decreased over time.
as the attractor ‘overtakes’ the trajectory , the angle of the flow changes drastically, leading
to a reversal in the direction of the trajectory .
see also additional file  <dig>  supporting movie s <dig> 

in this case, we consider that the system is already at steady state at the outset,
in its bistable regime with high x and low y . in other words, we assume that the system has had time to converge,
or that the initial condition coincides with the neighbourhood of this attractor.
during the transition, two bifurcation events take place—a subcritical
pitchfork bifurcation , and two simultaneous
saddle-node bifurcations —which make the
initial steady state and its associated basin of attraction disappear while creating
a new attractor at which both factors x and y are present at low
concentrations .

examining transient dynamics during the transition reveals important details that
shape the trajectory and hence the behaviour of the system. first, we note that the
trajectory initially at steady state does not necessarily remain anchored to its
attractor . as the change in parameter values
causes the attractor state to move, the trajectory’s current state falls behind
and reacts by travelling towards the moving attractor . since the
flow rate along the trajectory is smaller than the velocity of attractor movement,
the system is not able to catch up with the moving steady state. hence, it temporally
reverts from asymptotic to transient behaviour. obviously, such a reversal can never
be observed if we only focus on steady state behaviour.

second, we observe a delay between the subcritical pitchfork bifurcation creating the
new attractor state  and the
system switching into that basin of attraction .
this delay effect was already noted and described by thom in his analysis  <cit> . the change from one basin to another  only occurs
once the tristable system undergoes two simultaneous saddle-node bifurcations, where
the two saddles on the separatrices collide against the two outer attractors and
annihilate each other . a monostable system results from these bifurcations. the trajectory suddenly
finds itself in a different basin, and eventually it will converge to this new
attractor state .

in this particular example, the shape of the observed transient trajectory does not
differ much from its equivalent in an autonomous monostable system. this is because
for most of the time the trajectory is in the basin of attraction of the attractor at
low x and y concentrations . nevertheless, most developmental processes require tightly
controlled timing and therefore the observed temporary reversal to transient
behaviour and consequent delay in attractor switch can be significant. these aspects
are therefore not negligible if we want to achieve a full understanding of the
dynamics of the system. steady state analyses, where more or less instant convergence
to the new attractor state is assumed, will be limited in this regard since they are
not able to address the question of developmental timing.

in addition to its effect on timing, the delay in switching basins of attraction also
provides an explanation for the irreversibility of developmental pathways. this
phenomenon has been studied in detail in the context of stem cell differentiation.
wang and colleagues  <cit>  use a non-autonomous toggle switch model similar to ours to study the
transition from monostable  to bistable behaviour .
the authors simulate this transition in both directions , and show that two different delay effects occur
depending on the direction of the process. in other words, forward and backward
pathways are very different, thus explaining why the system is unable to retrace its
original differentiation pathway when the process is reversed.

pursuit
transient phenomena need to be taken into account to be able to fully understand the
dynamical repertoire of a system. this becomes especially relevant when considering
what we call pursuit mechanisms. we now consider what happens if the external
activation on genes x and y in our toggle switch model
 are altered over time. in biological terms, this could represent the
system’s response to a changing external signal. this particular parameter
change affects the geometry but not the topology of the phase portrait. the system
remains in the bistable dynamical regime throughout the whole parameter range that we
explored.

let us first consider an increase in activation strength. as external production
rates increase over time, the attractors move away from the origin along the
direction of the x and y axes respectively . this outward movement of the attractors leaves the position of the separatrix
unchanged throughout the simulation, keeping the location and area of the basins of
attraction constant over time . since the separatrix
does not move, trajectories are not able to change basins. therefore, the initial
conditions determine which basin of attraction the system will remain in, as they do
in autonomous systems. however, the approach to the attractor is very different in
this non-autonomous case, since trajectories are drawn towards a moving target. it is
this continued pursuit that plays the main role in shaping them . even though its associated attractor keeps moving over time,
this sort of pursuit shows how the general direction of a trajectory can be stably
maintained in a non-autonomous system.

two specific pursuit scenarios can be distinguished. in the first, the trajectory
eventually reaches the moving attractor. this occurs if the change in parameter
values increases the flux around the attractor faster than it moves its position, or
if further change in parameter values no longer alters the position of an
attractor—in other words, the position of an attractor itself converges to a
given location over time. under these conditions, the trajectories of a
non-autonomous system can show asymptotic behaviour and come to rest at steady state.
however, it is not guaranteed that this should take place. there are many imaginable
scenarios in which attractors will keep moving as parameters change and trajectories
governed by pursuit mechanisms may never come to rest. it is probable that many
developmental processes—at least to a certain degree—work in this regime,
as external conditions and the cellular environment  constantly keep changing over time.

just as in the case of transitions, it is obvious that pursuit mechanisms have a
great impact on the timing of developmental dynamics. they can delay or even prevent
the system from reaching steady state. in addition, attractor movements can also
drastically influence and alter the shape of a trajectory. this becomes evident if we
consider an alternative scenario, in which activating inputs decrease over time
. in this case, the attractors move towards the
origin over time. this causes the attractor to ‘overtake’ the trajectory
at a given point in time , which induces a rather
drastic change in the trajectory’s direction: initially it is travelling toward
high x , but later comes to approach the
origin  while pursuing the moving attractor .

in summary, we have illustrated how pursuit mechanisms in non-autonomous systems can
either lead to the stable maintenance of a transient trajectory , or to a drastic change in its direction  depending on the geometric arrangement of the attractor with
regard to the converging trajectory. we have argued that pursuit mechanisms are
likely to be almost ubiquitous in systems that are exposed to a changing environment
or variable tissue context . one specific example for pattern formation by pursuit are the transient
gap domain shifts examined by manu and colleagues  <cit> . in this particular case, spatial shifts in domain position are caused by
the timed up- and later down-regulation of a specific sequence of gap genes in nuclei
located within the posterior region of the drosophila blastoderm embryo . basically, each nucleus goes through a stereotypical series
of expression pulses of different gap genes. such pulses can easily be explained by
the sort of trajectory observed in figure  <dig>  where an initial
expression trend  is later smoothly reversed .

capture
in autonomous dynamical systems, trajectories never cross a separatrix  <cit> . depending on the position of its initial conditions, a trajectory will
find itself in a particular basin of attraction, that is, in the dynamical regime of
a particular attractor. the trajectory will always remain in this basin and, given
enough time, will eventually converge to the attractor.

the same is not true for non-autonomous systems. we know that the phase portrait is
changing as the parameters change. this means that the position and number of steady
states need not remain constant over time. we have seen how saddles and attractors
can be created and annihilated by bifurcations, and how they can move through phase
space in such systems. in particular, when saddle points change their position, they
cause their associated separatrices to shift with them. separatrices mark the
boundaries between basins of attraction, and their movement will cause the size,
shape and/or relative placement of these basins with regard to each other to
change.

as trajectories progress on the changing phase portrait, it is possible for a moving
separatrix to overtake them. we will call this event a ‘capture’. when a
capture occurs, the affected trajectory is deviated, and often exhibits a sudden
change in direction, since it is now attracted towards a different attractor at a
different position of the phase plane than it was before. captures will happen when
the flow along the trajectory is smaller than the rate of change in separatrix
position. the separatrix is recruiting points from one basin of attraction into
another at a faster rate than the trajectory is travelling away from it. therefore,
the velocities of the trajectory and the separatrix relative to each other are
determining whether a capture event is going to take place or not.

we identified two main ways by which capture events are brought about in the
non-autonomous toggle switch model. in both cases, the mechanism shaping the
trajectory is essentially the same: the trajectory suddenly finds itself converging
towards a different attractor as a result of an abrupt change to the flow at its
current position. the main difference between the two capture mechanisms resides in
how the movement of the separatrix is caused.

in the first situation, the trajectory gets captured after a bifurcation event has
lead to the creation of a new attractor state. this increases the number of attractor
basins and, in this way, introduces new separatrices into the phase portrait. we
simulate this situation using the bistable-to-tristable transition caused by an
increase in the auto-activation threshold as described above . in this example, a subcritical pitchfork bifurcation creates a new attractor and
two associated saddles from a pre-existing saddle point . this results in a change in phase space topology. what used to be a
single separatrix now ‘opens up’, giving rise to two different forked
separatrices . further parameter changes then
cause the new separatrices to move outward through phase space, catching up with, and
overtaking, trajectories as they recruit points into the newly created and expanding
basin of attraction .
results from a trajectory being recruited into a new basin of attraction due to
the movement of a separatrix. in this example, the relevant separatrix is
created and caused to move by a preceding bifurcation event, which leads to the
appearance of a new attractor state, resulting in a change of phase space
topology. upper panels show potential surfaces, lower panels phase
portraits as in figure 3c. the progress of time is shown
through increasingly dark shading, and by the arrow at the bottom of the
figure.  the system starts off in the bistable regime and the initial
conditions place the trajectory in the basin of the high x, low
y attractor .  changes in the values of the
auto-activation thresholds  cause
the system to undergo a subcritical pitchfork bifurcation and enter the
tristable regime . at the time of the
bifurcation, the trajectory is still attracted towards the dark blue attractor.
 as auto-activation thresholds are further increased, the two
separatrices surrounding the new attractor state  separate
from each other, enlarging the corresponding basin of attraction. a capture
event takes place as the separatrix ‘overtakes’ the trajectory,
recruiting it into the new basin of attraction. the system will now converge
towards the light blue attractor. this change in basins of attraction is
represented by the colour coding of the trajectory on the phase portrait.
 as auto-activation thresholds are further increased, the system
will transition from the tristable into the monostable regime . this causes the dark
blue attractors and their basins to disappear altogether, but does not
influence the direction of the trajectory anymore, which will eventually
converge to the light blue attractor at low x and y. see also
additional file  <dig>  supporting movie s <dig> 

as with the transition mechanism, we notice a sometimes considerable time delay
between the bifurcation and the capture event. the extent of this delay depends on
how close a trajectory is to the new attractor at the time of bifurcation, and on the
rate of change in separatrix position due to further parameter change. in our
example, the delay effect can be clearly seen, as the trajectory first veers to the
left, towards its original attractor, before being steered back towards the center of
the phase portrait, where the new attractor lies. this introduces a marked bend into
the trajectory , which affects both time to
convergence and the identity of transient states.

in the second scenario, we consider a situation where the capture event is not
preceded by a bifurcation. in this case, a pre-existing separatrix is moving through
phase space due to parameter changes. this movement of the separatrix reconfigures
the geometry of the basins of attraction without changing the topology of the phase
portrait. we simulate this event in our toggle switch model by introducing asymmetric
changes in the values of the thresholds determining the two mutually repressing
regulatory interactions  . this shifts the position of the separatrix in the bistable
regime towards one of the two attractors without creating or annihilating any steady
states.
results from a trajectory being recruited into a new basin of attraction due to
the movement of a separatrix. in this example, the relevant separatrix is
caused to move by a break in the symmetry of the repressive interactions
between x and y. no new attractor states or separatrices are
created. therefore, the change in landscape topography is purely geometrical
and does not affect the topology of phase space. upper panels show
potential surfaces, lower panels phase portraits as in figure 3c. the progress of time is shown through increasingly dark
shading, and by the arrow at the bottom of the figure.  the system
starts off in the bistable regime and the initial conditions place the
trajectory in the basin of the low x, high y attractor .  changing the threshold of one of the repressive interactions
only  shrinks the basin of attraction of the low
x, high y attractor  causing the separatrix to
move towards the upper left corner of the phase portrait.  the
shifting separatrix catches up with the converging trajectory, recruiting it
into the basin of the high x, low y attractor . a
capture event has taken place without any preceding bifurcation. this change in
basins of attraction is represented by the colour coding of the trajectory on
the phase portrait.  after the capture, the system converges to its
new attractor . interestingly, the geometry of this capture has made
the trajectory loop over itself. such self-crossing trajectories are never
observed in autonomous dynamical systems. the subsequent saddle-node
bifurcation by which the saddle  and the light blue attractor annihilate
each other does not affect the trajectory any further. see also additional file
 <dig>  supporting movie s <dig> 

as in the case of capture with preceding bifurcation, the separatrix moves and
recruits points from one basin into the other, thereby shrinking one basin of
attraction while enlarging the other . if
the moving separatrix encounters a trajectory at one of the points that are being
recruited into a different basin of attraction, a capture event will take place
. the affected trajectory will change direction as
it now converges towards a different attractor than before the capture .

capture mechanisms illustrate how dramatic changes in direction and velocity of
trajectories do not always require changes to the topology of the underlying phase
portraits. in other words, they do not necessarily have to be associated with
bifurcations, and even if they are, the observed sudden change in direction does not
usually coincide with the bifurcation. instead, it can be significantly delayed. this
kind of phenomenon cannot be observed if only asymptotic behaviours are considered.
in that case, only transition-like events can occur since captures and pursuits
crucially depend on transient dynamics.

there are several examples which illustrate how this might be important in practice.
corson and siggia  <cit>  considered an explicitly non-autonomous mechanism for determining vulval
cell fates in their model. in their study, shifts in separatrices and captures happen
instantaneously at the outset of the simulation. in other words, the initial
condition of cells that are captured completely determines which basin of attraction
they will find themselves in for the rest of the simulation. while this does not
affect the analysis of the resulting differentiated  states—as
evidenced by the tight match between the model and the measured proportions of
differentiated cells  <cit> —it could limit the model’s ability to reproduce the transient
dynamics of cellular differentiation.

this becomes crucial when analysing more dynamic examples of gene expression, such as
pattern formation driven by the gap gene system. in this example, it will be
essential to study the interplay between changing maternal gradients and moving gap
target domains. this was not really possible in the study of manu and colleagues  <cit>  since their model assumed the maternal gradients to remain constant. our
classification scheme of transient behaviour in non-autonomous systems should be
useful to analyse such questions in more detail. for instance, capture events
occurring at different times in different nuclei could explain how stable expression
boundaries can be maintained in the presence of changing regulatory inputs. in
contrast, moving domain boundaries in the posterior of the embryo are more likely to
involve some type of pursuit mechanism . without doubt, the concepts
developed in this paper will be useful to classify and characterise the
boundary-forming and -shifting mechanisms in a fully non-autonomous model of this
system.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have argued that considering both transient dynamics and explicit
time-dependence  of dynamical systems is essential for an accurate and
complete quantitative understanding of many biological processes. in particular, we have
argued that these two features are important if we are to fully capture the richness and
explanatory power of waddington’s metaphor of the epigenetic landscape  <cit> . waddington’s concepts of developmental chreodes, and their canalised
nature due to the regulatory process of homeorhesis, apply to transient or
non-autonomous behaviour, not stable steady states of a system. moreover,
waddington’s landscape changes its shape due to genetic or environmental signals
as represented by the pegs and ropes in figure 1a.

however, it remains difficult to analyse transient dynamics in non-autonomous systems.
where rigorous analysis is possible, it is mostly limited to special cases . no general theory or toolkit exists to deal with more complex
non-autonomous systems, or the transient phenomena they exhibit.

in this paper, we have taken a first step towards overcoming this limitation. we have
used a pragmatic simulation-based approach to classify different mechanisms that affect
transient trajectories in non-autonomous systems. our study is based on a simple
conceptual model—a toggle switch with time-dependent parameter values—to
visualise the changing potential landscape which determines the dynamical repertoire of
a regulatory circuit. we found four distinct mechanisms that affect trajectories on
time-variable potential surfaces: transitions, pursuits and two kinds of captures. at
this point it is impossible to say whether this list is complete. other types of
behaviour may be possible in higher-dimensional phase spaces.

despite its potential incompleteness, we believe that our preliminary classification
scheme is useful, since it makes transient dynamics in non-autonomous systems more
tractable in practice. the advantages of our framework are twofold: first, it allows us
to describe and categorise patterning mechanisms. each one of the mechanisms described
above has its own characteristics, both in terms of their effect on the short-term
dynamics, as well as the longer-term evolutionary potential of the system. we have
described specific examples of such characteristics in the 
