BACKGROUND
cadmium  has an important impact on agriculture, as the excessive consumption of cd from contaminated food crops can lead to toxicity in humans. high-dose cd exposure is particularly toxic to the kidney and leads to renal proximal tubular dysfunction  <cit> . in japan, itai-itai disease , which is characterized by complaints of spinal and leg bone pain, was recognized as a type of chronic toxicity induced by excess cd contamination of drinking water and cereals . since then, the contamination of rice by cd has been monitored to prevent it from being distributed to consumers in japan, in accordance with the food sanitation act established in  <dig> in japan. nevertheless, the cd contamination of rice is still a serious threat to japanese people and other populations in the world that consume rice as a staple food, because rice is a major source of dietary intake of cd. understanding how cd is taken up by rice roots and subsequently transported to rice grains is necessary for reducing cd concentrations in rice as much as possible, thus diminishing the risk that cd poses to human health.

plant roots are the first entry point for cd uptake from soil solutions, and the transport processes of cd into the roots have been well reviewed from the viewpoints of physiological and genetic studies  <cit> . a dose-dependent process exhibiting saturable kinetics has been shown in the roots of several graminaceous crops, including rice  <cit> . the saturable characteristics of cd uptake could be controlled by a carrier-mediated system, and genetic studies in rice have indicated that the iron  transporters osirt <dig> and osirt <dig> and the zinc  transporter oszip <dig> can mediate cd uptake by roots  <cit> . once cd enters into the root cells, its movement through the root symplasm to the xylem can be restricted by its sequestration in the vacuoles  <cit> . in tandem, apoplastic movement of cd to the xylem can also be restricted by development of the endodermal suberin lamellae in the roots exposed to cd  <cit> . recently, it has been found that among rice cultivars varying in grain cd concentrations, the differences in root-to-shoot cd translocation rates via the xylem are affected by the p1b-atpase transporter oshma <dig>  which is involved in cd sequestration in root vacuoles  <cit> . xylem loading of cd has been shown to be mediated by athma <dig> and athma <dig> in arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> . in rice, functional assays by heterologous expression of oshma <dig> in yeast have suggested that this gene is a good candidate for the control of cd xylem loading in rice  <cit> . the process of cd unloading from the phloem is also recognized as a key factor for determining cd levels in grains, because cd moves to developing grains via the phloem  <cit> . tanaka et al.  <cit>  estimated that 91-100% of cd in rice grains was deposited from the phloem when rice plants were treated with a relatively high cd level with  <dig> μm cd in hydroponics. using an insect-laser method, kato et al.  <cit>  collected the phloem sap from the sheaths of the most expanded leaves of three rice cultivars differing in grain cd concentrations, and found that the cd concentrations of the phloem sap from these cultivars correlated well with their grain cd concentrations. as described above, chemical and genetic analyses have provided many suggestions for every process in cd transport in plants. now, comprehensive information provided by whole-body and real-time observation of cd movement in intact plants during vegetative and reproductive stages are needed for understanding the total plant system that leads to the difference of cd concentrations between various cultivars.

in general, radioisotope tracers are useful tools for analysing the spatial distribution or temporal change in the amount of a substance in the plant body.109cd has been widely used to visualize cd distribution within plant tissues  <cit> . for example, chino  <cit>  observed that most cd accumulated in the roots after isotope cd  supplementation at the early ripening stage, and lesser amounts of cd were distributed to grains, whereas the lowest levels of cd were present in the leaves. however, only the static distribution of cd at a given moment can be obtained by autoradiography. in recent years, the positron-emitting tracer imaging system  has been employed to study various physiological functions in intact, living plants  <cit> . this system enables not only monitoring of the real-time movement of the tracer in living plants as a video camera might, but also quantitative analyses of the movement of the substance of interest by freely selecting a region of interest  on the image data obtained. by applying this system to several graminaceous crops, the uptake and translocation of metals was investigated using positron-emitting tracers52fe  <cit> ,52mn  <cit> , and62zn  <cit> . recently, fujimaki et al.  <cit>  established a real-time imaging system for cd using positron-emitting107cd tracer and petis. the movement of cd in the aerial part of rice  in the vegetative and reproductive stages was captured as serial images, and various parameters  were analysed quantitatively. however, a method for direct imaging of the underground parts, which should provide valuable information about the root uptake, remained to be developed because of interference by the highly radioactive culture solution.

in this study, we employed petis in our two objectives: to realize direct observation of cd uptake by the roots in the culture solution, and to characterize clearly the differences in cd dynamics from the culture to the grains between the high- and low-cd accumulating cultivars.

RESULTS
root107cd uptake in different rice cultivars
imaging of107cd transfer to shoots in different rice cultivars
after the petis experiment, autoradiography was performed to obtain static distributions of cd for each plant part at the vegetative stage , and the distribution ratios of total cd in their parts were calculated . approximately 90% of the cd absorbed by the japonica rice cultivars accumulated in their roots, whereas only 60-70% of the cd in the indica rice cultivars was distributed in their roots. in the shoot parts, cd accumulated at the shoot base in the highest proportions; this accounted for approximately 15-20% of the total cd in the plant body for the high-cd indica cultivars, whereas it was less than 10% for the low-cd japonica cultivars. on the other hand, the proportions of cd in the shoot base were approximately 50% of those in the total shoot and did not differ greatly between cultivars. in the leaves , cd was mostly distributed in the younger leaves, that is, the 4th and 5th leaves, suggesting that cd moves preferentially to new leaves after moving from the roots to the shoot bases.

imaging of107cd transfer to panicle in different rice cultivars
both plants were subjected to autoradiography after the petis experiment . a strong accumulation of cd was observed in each node from the base to the top in both plants. in addition, cd was present in the culms, rachises, and panicles in both plants. the cd signals in these plant parts were remarkably stronger in bil <dig> than in koshihikari. the middle part of each glume in bil <dig>  where the ovary should be developing, showed a significantly strong cd signal. in contrast, either no signal or a weak signal of cd was detected in the leaf blades, even in the high-cd accumulator bil <dig> 

discussion
improvement of the petis applicable to direct imaging of roots
it has long been considered technically impossible to observe the radiotracer-treated culture and the roots directly and simultaneously, because traditional imaging methods do not have a sufficiently broad range of detection that can accept such contrast. in this study, we principally improved three areas: 1) use of a root box with flat, shallow compartments, allowing detectors to focus on the roots; 2) use of a simple nutrient solution to avoid competition between cd and other minerals at adsorptive sites in roots; and 3) ensuring application of adequate radioisotope activity for the quantitative measurements by taking into consideration the dynamic range of the petis. these technical improvements first enabled direct visualization of real-time cd dynamics in the whole plant body, that is, from roots to grains.

we applied the improved system to analyse the time-varying distribution of cd to characterize the differences in cd dynamics in rice cultivars varying in grain cd concentrations.

dynamic characterization of root cd uptake and root-to-shoot translocation in rice cultivars differing in grain cd concentration
the time courses of cd amount in the root regions  showed similar curves at the first  <dig> min as a rapid increase in all the cultivars tested, but were then followed by very different patterns between the cultivars. three low-cd japonica cultivars showed gentle saturation curves, whereas three high-cd indica cultivars showed a drastic drop . we consider that the curves in figure 1c reflect the combination of the four successive functions of the root: adsorption to the outer root apoplast, absorption into the root symplast, retention within the cytoplasm or vacuole, and xylem loading. the very rapid increase at the first  <dig> min may reflect adsorption to the outer root apoplast, suggesting that this process was similar in all six cultivars. the subsequent drastic drop after  <dig> min in the high-cd indica cultivars should be attributed to the simultaneous occurrence of two phenomena. one is depletion of cd supply from the culture into the root as shown in figure 1d, and the other is vigorous transfer of cd from the root to the xylem. in contrast, the gentle saturation curves in the low-cd japonica cultivars should indicate very low transfer from the root, because depletion of cd supply from the culture was also the case in these cultivars . therefore, the different abilities between the low-cd japonica cultivars and the high-cd indica cultivars to transfer cd from the root tissue into the xylem may have caused the most significant feature of cd dynamics observed in the underground part.

this difference most probably depends on whether the rice plant inherently conserves the functional oshma <dig>  which is a membrane transporter protein involved in cd storage in root vacuoles. all high-cd indica cultivars used in this study showed a loss of function of oshma <dig>  resulting in failure to sequester cd in their root vacuoles  <cit> . our results indicate that loss of the sequestrating function of oshma <dig> into root vacuoles triggered transfer of cd from the root tissue into the xylem within  <dig> min of contact between the root and cd . this result accords with a previous study that the radial transport of cd in rice root from the culture to the xylem requires less than  <dig> min  <cit> . this transfer process was completed within  <dig> h , which suggests that a concerted transport by absorption from the outer root apoplast into the symplast, and xylem loading from the symplast, takes place after very fast adsorption to the outer root apoplast. moreover, the lack of drop after  <dig> min in the low-cd japonica cultivars  suggests that the sequestration function into root vacuoles is much more efficient than the xylem loading. these rapid dynamics seem to be specific to rice, because a previous study  <cit>  showed that differences in root cd concentrations between near-isogenic lines of durum wheat that differ in grain cd concentrations were not observed until at least  <dig> days after cd exposure. it should be noted that the kinetic curves in root cd uptake were obtained with limited cd  supply in this study, and this could be considered as a kind of pulse feed experiment. the curves obtained would naturally be different from those of roots with continuous cd supply. the point is that the pulse feed experiments provide snapshots  of dynamics and the result with continuous feed could be described as their integration. in fact, the results from this study agreed well with our previous results obtained from the rice genotypes grown continuously in the cd-polluted soil  <cit> ; root cd concentrations were higher in the low-cd japonica cultivars than in the high-cd indica cultivars.

in aerial parts,107cd had a strong presence in the non-elongated stems at the shoot bases  that contained densely packed nodes with complicated vascular bundle structures  <cit> . other metals, such as fe, mn, and zn, have also been shown to accumulate preferentially in this region in graminaceous crops  <cit> , designated as the "traffic control centre"  <cit>  or "discrimination centre"  <cit> , and which plays important roles in distributing solutes taken up by the roots to each aerial tissue. the quantitative differences in cd amounts in the shoot bases between low-cd and high-cd rice cultivars were apparent in the time course data , and these were clearly in accord with the differing abilities of the cultivars to transfer cd into the xylem. in addition, the slight decrease after the peak  in the high-cd cultivars  indicates the relatively higher mobility of cd from the shoot base  to the upper shoot parts . this tendency also seemed to be influenced by oshma <dig> gene expression in the shoot base, although the expression levels in the shoots are reported to be considerably lower than those in the roots  <cit> . the xylem parenchyma cells, having large vacuoles, are located in the centre of the enlarged xylem in the enlarged elliptical bundle of the node  <cit> . xylem parenchyma and transfer cells play important roles in the selective absorption of solutes from the transpiration stream and their transport to the shoot apex  <cit> . if oshma <dig> function is defective in the xylem parenchyma cells in the high-cd indica cultivars, cd might move up to the upper leaf sheaths and leaf blades more easily through the transpiration stream, with reduced interception by the xylem parenchyma cells. however, in general, the proportions of cd that finally accumulated in the shoot base after  <dig> h were approximately 50% of those in the total shoot, and did not differ greatly between the cultivars . this might suggest that the xylem unloading function was barely influenced by the genetic difference between the cultivars tested even though the cd amounts loaded into the xylem were largely varied. cd deposited temporarily in the shoot base seems to be translocated preferentially into the youngest developing leaves . the preferential translocation of zn  <cit>  and fe  <cit>  into the youngest leaves in graminaceous crops has also been reported. in a previous study, it was found that52fe translocation to the youngest leaves of barley seedlings can be severely suppressed by a steam-girding treatment of the leaves, which inactivates phloem but not xylem transport, suggesting that fe is mainly translocated to the youngest leaves via the phloem  <cit> . fujimaki et al.  <cit>  showed that cd moved from the shoot base into the crown roots, which were split and kept away from direct contact with the cd solution, suggesting that cd was transferred from the xylem to the phloem at the nodes in the shoot base. these findings suggest that preferential and high cd accumulation in the youngest leaves, especially for the high-cd cultivars, could be partially explained by high levels of cd in the phloem after the xylem-to-phloem transfer of cd at the shoot base, where the high cd signals were observed for the high-cd cultivars.

dynamic characterization of cd accumulation in panicles of rice cultivars that differ in grain cd concentration
the cd accumulation pattern of the neck node for the high-cd accumulator bil <dig> plants corresponded well to that of the node at the shoot base, showing the characteristic steep and linear increase, and subsequent plateau pattern of cd accumulation . therefore, the neck node of the panicle may participate in the traffic control centre that distributes cd to each spikelet. the linear accumulation pattern of cd in the panicle was observed in both rice plants after107cd reached the respective panicle, although the accumulated levels differed substantially between plants . fujimaki et al.  <cit>  quantified the velocity of the long-distance transport of cd through the shoot at the grain-filling stage to be  <dig>  ±  <dig>  cm h- <dig> in the low-cd cultivar nipponbare. in this study, it was estimated to be  <dig>  cm h- <dig> for the low-cd cultivar koshihikari, and the value seemed to be similar. the transport velocity of cd for the cd accumulator bil <dig>  was found to be slightly faster than that for koshihikari. however, the differences in the cd transport velocity between genotypes were likely to be small. instead, a remarkable difference  was observed in the slopes of cd accumulation to panicles. therefore, this result indicates that the differences in root cd dynamics also influence the cd concentration of the long-distance cd transport to panicles in rice cultivars.

interestingly, at  <dig> h no cd was found to be distributed in the flag leaves of either plant in the petis experiment, in which107cd was supplied to the genotypes with emerged ears . in contrast, significant cd accumulation was seen in all nodes of the elongated stems of both plants, especially at the uppermost node i, which is connected to the flag leaf and panicle. node i functions in the distribution of solutes from the roots to the flag leaf or panicle  <cit> . the autoradiography results suggest that the cd at node i translocated preferentially to the developing panicle and not to the developed flag leaf, but the method by which node i determines the destination of cd is unknown. silicon transport to rice grains has been proposed to be involved in the inter-vascular transfer from the enlarged vascular bundles to the diffuse vascular bundles, passing through the xylem transfer cells present in the parenchyma cell bridge at node i, and a transporter related to inter-vascular transfer has been identified  <cit> . the diffuse vascular bundles of node i are assembled in internode i to form large vascular bundles that connect toward the panicle tissues  <cit> . using a synchrotron micro x-ray fluorescence spectrometer and electron probe micro analyser, cd was detected in the phloem of large vascular bundles at node i . in addition, it has been reported that the xylem-to-phloem transfer of cd takes place in the nodes of rice  <cit> , and the dominant route of cd transport in brown rice is the phloem  <cit> . our findings and these reports largely indicate that cd passes through the phloem of the large vascular bundles in internode i after the xylem-to-phloem transfer at node i, and the cd concentrations in the phloem may affect the genotypic differences in cd accumulation in rice grains.

in paddy fields, rice is mostly grown under submerged conditions in which bioavailable cd is limited because of the rise in soil ph and decrease in the redox potential. midseason drainage in japanese paddy fields is widely recommended at the vegetative stage to avoid the root rot induced by continuous soil reduction. in addition, early drainage after panicle emergence is often practised in paddy fields to facilitate machine harvesting. thus, rice is not continuously exposed to high bioavailable cd in the soil, and the petis data obtained by a limited cd  supply might be a description of the cd dynamics in rice at the vegetative and heading stages after water drainage in the paddy fields.

thus, the petis is a very effective tool for comprehensively evaluating cd dynamics from roots to grains, and for predicting the physiological processes of cd transport in intact plants. the imaging and kinetics data have clearly demonstrated the differential cd dynamics in the living plants of rice cultivars. the dynamics could be influenced by many physiological and biochemical steps, in which multiple genes controlling cd dynamics are involved. for instance, using the various mapping populations, the major qtls responsible for cd accumulation in rice were detected on chromosomes  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> <cit> , suggesting that the genotypic variation in cd transport in rice is controlled by multiple genes. in this study, we happened to select three high-cd indica cultivars that carry the non-functional alleles of oshma <dig>  based on previously screened data relating to cd accumulation in many rice cultivars <cit> . in the near future, we intend to analyse the cd dynamics in high-cd cultivars carrying alterations in responsible genes other than oshma <dig>  this experimental system would be appropriate for detailed functional analyses of the various genes responsible for cd transport.

CONCLUSIONS
using the petis, we made the first direct observation of cd uptake by the roots in the culture solution, characterized the successive transport processes in the root tissues, and described the differences in real-time cd dynamics from the roots to the grains between the high- and low-cd accumulating rice cultivars. the apparent differences were clearly shown as cd retention in the roots, the rates of cd translocation from the roots to the shoots, and the long-distance cd transport to the panicles. our studies have clearly connected the difference in gene function in the rice cultivars with in vivo movement of cd from the culture through the root to the shoot in rice plants.

