BACKGROUND
the typical antbirds  is a speciose family within the furnariid radiation  of the new world suboscine clade. the family includes fully  <dig> species  <cit>  that all are restricted to neotropical forests. most species are arboreal or undergrowth inhabitants, while only a few members are clearly terrestrially adapted, which otherwise seems to be the commonest lifestyle for most members in closely related clades . the highest diversity of typical antbirds is found in the amazonian basin, and differences in ecological specializations make it possible to find as many as  <dig> species in the same area  <cit> . morphologically typical antbirds shows considerable variation in size and patterns and colors of the plumage , while the variation in shape is more restricted. many insectivorous niches are occupied, but the specialization of some species to follow army ants  is perhaps the most well known. this habit has also given raise to the vernacular family name.

in traditional classifications, the antpittas  and antthrushes  were grouped together with typical antbirds in an even larger family. however, the support for the expanded antbird family was indeed weak, and both morphological  <cit>  and molecular  <cit>  evidence suggests that antpittas and antthrushes are distantly related to typical antbirds. dna sequence data  <cit>  suggests that gnateaters  forms the sister clade to typical antbirds, while antpittas and antthrushes are more closely related to tapaculos , woodcreepers and ovenbirds .

even though the monophyly of typical antbirds seems to be well supported by both syrinx morphology  <cit>  and molecular data  <cit>  the phylogenetic relationships within this assemblage are poorly understood, and the confusion extending to all taxonomic levels. both the monophyly of several genera of typical antbirds has been questioned  <cit> , as well as the delimitation of certain species  <cit> . some species have also been moved from one genus to another . the current knowledge of the phylogenetic relationships among typical antbirds rests mainly on interpretations drawn from external features, mostly of bill and feet, and has remained essentially the same for  <dig> years  <cit> .

as typical antbirds are morphologically and ecologically diverse, they form a challenging group for studies of, e.g. adaptive evolution. however, such studies, as well as biogeographic interpretations, are difficult to make as long as there is no phylogenetic hypothesis. the aim of this study is therefore to create a hypothesis of generic relationships of typical antbirds that could be used as a framework for more detailed studies of the evolution of the group. two nuclear introns, intron  <dig> in myoglobin and intron  <dig> in the glyceraldehyde-3-phosphodehydrogenase gene , and the mitochondrial cytochrome b gene, have been sequenced for  <dig> typical antbird taxa representing  <dig> out of the  <dig> genera recognized by ridgely and tudor  <cit> . we have used bayesian inference and markov chain monte carlo  to estimate the phylogenetic relationships.

a common assumption made by molecular systematists is that gene trees accurately reflect species trees. nevertheless, different data partitions may have different phylogenies due to processes as lineage sorting, gene duplication followed by extinction, and lateral transfer by hybridization and introgression .

primarily, there are two contradictory strategies utilized to handle data sets with significant phylogenetic incongruence between independent data partitions. advocates for a "total evidence approach"  suggest that available data always should be combined, even though individual data partitions might be partly incongruent. the arguments are that a combination of different data partitions might improve the total resolution as different data partitions might be useful to resolve different areas of the tree, and that additive data sets might enhance phylogenetic informative characters that have been hidden by noise in the individual partitions. opponents to this view  advice that data partitions with a significant level of incongruence should not be combined, as reliable characters might be obscured by random or systematic errors and in the worse case result in an erroneous topology .

however, when independent evidence is lacking and incongruence occurs between individual data partitions, it may be difficult to determine whether particular partitions are better estimates of the species tree than others. researchers might favor the "total evidence approach" for this particular reason . however, the degree of incongruence between individual gene trees could be used to determine whether the phylogenetic conclusions should be based on the combined data set, or only those parts that are similar among the different partitions. a commonly used approach for analysing combined data with maximum likelihood is to assume a single  substitution model for all of the combined genes . a significant result of incongruence between the combined result and the individual genes can then be hard to explain, since the incongruence could be due to both true difference in gene phylogeny and a misfit in the assumed model of evolution for the combined data  <cit> . this misfit could, for example, be a result of not allowing a heterogeneous model, that is, not allowing the different genes to have separate substitution models in the combined analysis  <cit> . we have thus explored our data partitions  by the congruence test described by nylander et al.  <cit> , which utilizes bayes factors. the test is not an explicit significance test but compares the strength of evidence between two models of character evolution.

although nuclear genes  may be considered as members of different linkage groups, the maternally inherited mitochondrial genome is effectively independent from the nuclear genome. organelle genomes have also been suggested to more susceptible to "flow" between taxa during hybridization . in birds degnan and moritz  <cit>  and degnan  <cit> , for example, have demonstrated that the mitochondrial tree in australian white-eyes misrepresented the tree of nuclear loci and the expected species tree, possibly due to previous hybridization events. we have thus primarily been interested in the potential incongruence between the mitochondrial cytochrome b and the two nuclear genes , but all combinations of the three genes were examined. however, limitations in the substitution models might be the most important explanation to observed incongruence between data partitions, rather than an intrinsic phylogenetic incongruence  <cit> . we also explored how changes in substitution models affected the observed incongruence in our data set.

RESULTS
molecular variation and sequence distances
after alignment, the concatenated sequences become  <dig> bp long. a total of between  <dig> bp  and  <dig> bp  was obtained from myoglobin intron  <dig>  between  <dig> bp  and  <dig> bp  from g3pdh intron  <dig>  and  <dig> bp from cytochrome b. the observed, pairwise distances between ingroup taxa range between  <dig>  7% and  <dig>  7% in myoglobin, between  <dig>  3% and  <dig>  3% in g3pdh and between  <dig>  5% and  <dig>  9% in cytochrome b. indels were found both in the myoglobin intron  <dig> and in the g3pdh intron  <dig>  in most cases these are autapomorphic indels or occur in especially variable and repeatable regions. given the tree topologies obtained from the bayesian analyses, some synapomorphic indels were observed. for example, all thamnophilus representatives share with sakesphorus bernardi an insertion in the g3pdh intron, and, together with dysithamnus mentalis and herpsilochmus atricapillus, an insertion in the myoglobin intron.

phylogenetic inference and molecular models
a priori selection of substitution models showed that fairly parameter rich models were the best fit for all data partitions. importantly, modeling rate variation seemed to be an important component. for the cytochrome b partition the gtr+i+Γ was the best fit, and for myoglobin intron  <dig>  it was the gtr+ Γ. for the g3pdh intron  <dig> the somewhat simpler hky+ Γ model was chosen. these models were used in the consecutive mcmc of the individual genes as well in the combined analysis. the parameter estimates from the two separate mcmc runs for each data set were found to be very similar , thus allowing an inference from the concatenated output. after discarding the burn-in phase the inference for the cytochrome b was based on a total of  <dig>   <dig> samples from the posterior, for myoglobin the inference was based on  <dig>   <dig> samples, and for g3pdh and the combined data, inference were based on  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>   <dig> samples, respectively. for the phylogenetic inference, the mode of the posterior distribution of topologies was presented as a majority-rule consensus tree from each analysis .

the trees obtained from the bayesian analyses of the individual genes  and the combined data set all differ in topology and degree of resolution. the g3pdh gene produced the poorest resolved tree  and also contains the smallest number of nodes with posterior probability values above  <dig> . the myoglobin  and cytochrome b  genes produced trees with similar degree of resolution and nodal supports, but there is a weak tendency for cytochrome b giving better resolution and support at terminal nodes. the combined data set  produced the most resolved tree  with the highest number of strongly supported nodes . overall, the myoglobin, the cytochrome b and the combined trees are topologically rather similar, while the g3pdh tree is the most deviant. a common pattern in all trees is that several nodes are unresolved, or short with low or intermediate posterior probabilities support values . the observed topological conflicts between the obtained trees generally occur at these short nodes, and there are only a few nodes with posterior probabilities values above  <dig>  that are in conflict between the trees. of these, one concerns the outgroup relationships . the other two conflicts concern internal relationships within well supported sub-clades: the cytochrome b tree places with  <dig>  posterior probability myrmotherula menetriesii basal to a clade consisting of myrmotherula axillaris, myrmotherula behni and formicivora rufa. in the combined tree myrmotherula menetriesii instead is nested within this clade with  <dig>  posterior probability. the myoglobin tree suggests with  <dig>  posterior probability that taraba major is basal to batara cinerea and hypoedaleus guttatus, while taraba major is basal also to mackenziaena severa and frederickena unduligera with  <dig>  posterior probability in both the combined and the cytochrome b trees.

however, most suggested relationships are congruently supported by more than one of the trees obtained from the individual genes and by the combined data set. several clades are also supported by all three genes trees as well as by the combined data set, including the recognition of a monophyletic origins of 1) the "large antshrikes" , 2) the "professional" ant-following antbirds , 3) a sakesphorus-thamnophilus antshrike lineage , and 4) a clade consisting of the wing-banded antbirds , the spot-winged antshrike  and the russet antshrike . sistergroup relationships between antvireos  and herpsilochmus antwrens , as well as between myrmotherula obscura and myrmochanes hemileucus are also recognized by all trees.

based on the tree obtained from the bayesian analysis of the combined data set, typical antbirds could also be divided into three major clades . the first clade  includes four genera that are suggested to have a basal position in relation to all other typical antbirds . this basal group  includes the representative of terenura antwrens , the wing-banded antbird , the spot-winged antshrike  and the russet antshrike .

the second clade  is supported by  <dig>  posterior probability in the combined tree and includes all antshrike genera , antvireos , herpsilochmus antwrens and the banded antbird . within this large clade several lineages occur that receives more than  <dig>  posterior probability. noticeable within this clade is that neither the analyses of the individual genes nor the combined data set conclusively support that the representative of the antshrike genus sakesphorus  is phylogenetically separated from the thamnophilus antshrikes.

the last clade , including the myrmeciza antbirds, most antwren genera , the "professional" ant-following antbirds, and some allied species, is supported by a  <dig>  posterior probability value. also within this clade several lineages are supported by posterior probability values above  <dig> . however, the most interesting observation is the strong support for a polyphyletic origin of the myrmeciza antbirds and the myrmotherula antwrens.

tests of incongruence
the bayes factor tests showed extensive incongruence between partitions, at least in the sense that relaxing the assumption of a common topology parameter always gave a better model likelihood . for example, allowing the cytochrome b partition to have a separate topology from the two nuclear partitions myoglobin and g3pdh, gave a 2logb <dig> of  <dig> . this value strongly suggests that an unlinked model is superior to the model assuming a common topology parameter for all partitions. this would also suggest that there is strong conflict between the mitochondrial and the nuclear partitions. however, this conclusion is far from conclusive when we consider the linking of the topology parameter for other combinations of the data. combining the topology parameter for either one of the nuclear partitions with the mitochondrial, actually gives a better model  than considering the mitochondrial vs. the nuclear partition . for example, compared to the model that assumes a common topology parameter, unlinking the myoglobin partition from the other gave a 2logb of  <dig> . unlinking the g3pdh partition gave an even better model, with a 2logb of  <dig> . furthermore, if we would have to choose the one partitioning scheme that had the highest model likelihood, the model allowing a separate topology parameter for all partitions would be the clear choice . 

the parsimony based ild-test did not find a significant incongruence between the three gene partitions .

discussion
phylogenetic incongruence between gene partitions
allowing the gene partitions to have separate topology parameters clearly increased the model likelihood. that is, the unlinked models clearly had a better fit to the data than the linked models. judging from the absolute value of the 2logb , we are inclined to conclude that we should treat each partition as having its own posterior distribution of trees. however, the question is if we from these results really can say that the gene partitions evolved on different phylogenies? there are several reasons why different data partitions may have different phylogenies, although being sampled from the same taxa, or even the same individuals . we cannot completely rule out the occurrence of any of these processes in our data. however, we believe that the interpretation based solely on bayes factors might be hazardous. for instance, is it plausible that all three gene partitions had evolved on three different phylogenies, or that the linking of cytochrome b and myoglobin is a more reasonable partition of the data, instead of the mitochondrial versus the nuclear partitions? nylander et al.  <cit> , speculate that limitations in the substitution models might be more reasonable explanations to the high bayes factors observed when comparing unlinked and linked models. changing a component of the nucleotide substitution model, e.g. adding parameters to model rate variation, had much higher impact on the model likelihood than unlinking parameters among data partition. to illustrate the impact of changing the substitution model in our data, we run additional mcmc analyses under a different set of models, and compared them with the previous analyses using bayes factors. the results were striking . for example, we compared two models without rate variation, one with linked and the other with unlinked topologies . the 2logb was  <dig>  in favor for the unlinked model. however, adding parameters for modeling rate variation to either of the two models increased the model likelihood tremendously. the 2logb in favor of a model having parameters for rate variation , varied between  <dig>  and  <dig> , depending on the model being compared . similar observations of magnitude changes in bayes factors were made by nylander et al.  <cit> , when allowing rate variation. another striking feature was that once parameters for modeling rate variation had been incorporated into the model, unlinking topologies did not seem to have as pronounced effect on the model likelihood , compared to the models without rate variation. this observation is in concordance with previous findings that many functional genes have a strong among-site rate variation and that adding the relevant parameters to the model is likely to have a large effect on the likelihood  <cit> .

it is worth noting that the parsimony based ild-test did not find a significant incongruence between the three gene partitions. the value of this observation is uncertain, however, as the ild test is based on another optimality criterion . furthermore, the strength of the test and interpretation of the results have also been questioned 

in conclusion, allowing partitions to have separate topology parameters put fewer restrictions on the data. hence, we should expect to find a better fit of the model to the data. bayes factors seem promising for evaluating the relative contribution of components to an evolutionary model. however, judging from the relative increase in model likelihood when unlinking topologies compared to e.g., adding parameters for rate variation, we would anticipate components in the substitution model  to have more effects on accommodating incongruence in the data. that is, even if we find strong evidence for a model allowing separate topology parameters, this might not mean strong evidence for separate gene phylogenies, as long as vital components of the substitution model are still missing. for further discussions on bayesian approaches to combined data issues see e.g.,  <cit> .

phylogeny and morphological variation in typical antbirds
even though we are unable to conclusively tell whether the observed phylogenetic incongruence between the individual gene partitions is due to genuine differences in phylogeny, or to limitations in the models used, we believe that the tree obtained from the combined data set represents the best estimate of the true relationships within the typical antbird assemblage. obviously, several relationships are strongly supported, by congruent recognition by the individual gene trees and/or by high nodal support values. nevertheless, other relationships have to be regarded as tentative, and especially those where any of the individual gene trees gives a strong nodal support for an alternative topology.

it is noticeable that, although the individual genes congruently support several terminal groups, basal relationships are generally less well resolved and more often in conflict. even though this observation might be biased due to the use of improper molecular models when calculating the trees, biased mutation rate in studied genes, or a biased taxon sampling, it could indicate that the diversifications of typical antbirds was characterized by some rapid speciation bursts. there are only a few recent studies of typical antbirds with taxon samplings that includes representatives from several genera, but these studies show similar difficulties in resolving generic relationships. for example, in a study of phylogenetic relationships of myrmotherula antwrens that included representatives from several other typical antbird genera, hackett and rosenberg  <cit>  obtained considerably different topologies from plumage characters, allozyme and morphometric data, respectively. in addition, the phylogenetic relationships suggested from mitochondrial dna sequence data within a partly comparable taxon sampling  <cit> , have little resemblance to those in hackett and rosenberg  <cit> . the nodes between typical antbirds in the dna-dna hybridization "tapestry" by sibley and ahlquist  also contain a high degree of short branches.

it is also apparent that earlier antbird taxonomists, using external morphology, had difficulties in their taxonomic decisions and interpretations of higher-level relationships. ridgway  expressed that "the classification of this group is very difficult, more so probably than in the case of any american family of birds". hackett and rosenberg  <cit>  concluded that antwren speciation mainly has been followed by plumage differentiation  rather than changes in body proportions. overall, this evolutionary pattern, with great changes in plumage and more limited changes in body proportions, seems to characterize the entire typical antbird assemblage . however, hackett and rosenberg  <cit>  suggested that neither plumage nor morphometric data correctly predicted the genetic relationships among the studied taxa. our results seem to support their assumption as the traditionally used plumage characters in typical antbirds, as stripes, wingbars, and general coloration; seem to be irregularly distributed in the phylogenetic tree. it is reasonable to assume that plumage characters in typical antbirds are variable to such a degree that they are of limited use in studies of higher-level relationships. high levels of homoplasy  in plumage characters have also been reported in other passerine birds e.g., in australian scrubwrens  <cit>  brush-finches  <cit> , and in new world orioles  <cit> .

however, if excluding members in the "basal" group  and a few other aberrant taxa, the division of typical antbirds into the two main lineages in our phylogeny  is overall in good agreement with their body proportions . the antshrikes , antvireos and herpsilochmus antwrens in clade b  are all more or less robust birds with heavy and prominently hooked bills, and many of them have a barred plumage pattern. the taxa in clade c , which includes most antwren genera, the myrmeciza antbirds, the "professional" ant-following antbirds and some allied species, are generally slimmer birds with longer, thinner bills that have a less prominent hook. most suggested relationships within clade b and c are in good agreement with traditional classifications. the recognition of monophyletic origins of most of the "professional" ant-following taxa  and the "large" antshrikes  are two examples where our results are congruent with traditional classifications. the suggested relationships between the hypocnemis and drymophila antbirds, and the herpsilochmus antwrens and the antvireos , respectively, have also been proposed previously based on molecular data  <cit> . unfortunately, the genera biatas, clytoctantes, percnostola, rhopornis, stymphalornis and xenornis were lacking in our study; while most of these should probably be referred to clade c, biatas is difficult to place.

some novel relationships and the phylogenetic positions of some aberrant taxa
for certain taxa the position in our combined phylogeny is unexpected considering the external morphology and traditional classification. most noticeable are the position of the banded antbird , which is nested within the clade with antshrikes, antvireos and herpsilochmus antwrens , and the position of the wing-banded antbird  as sister to the russet antshrike  and the spot-winged antshrike  . however, the increased number of molecular based phylogenies in recent years have led to discoveries of several examples, at different phylogenetic levels, were birds have been misclassified due to significant morphological differences from the taxa to which they are most closely related  <cit> .

the phylogenetic position of the wing-banded antbird  has long been obscured and it was long placed with the typical army-ant followers . the wing-banded antbird has also been suspected to be related to ground antbirds  based on similarities in morphology and general appearance  <cit> . our results confidently place it within typical antbirds, a conclusion further supported by its vocalization  <cit>  and choice of nest site and its white egg  <cit> . the well supported relationship to the arboreal russet antshrike  and spot-winged antshrike , suggested by our data, has apparently been obscured by structural differences caused by its adaptation to a terrestrial life-style shared with for example the antthrushes. a similar explanation may apply to the peculiar position of the banded antbird  in the combined phylogeny, as this taxon is also a mainly terrestrial bird, unlike the other members in the "antshrike" clade . the fact that the banded antbird has a rather long branch in the combined tree and that its phylogenetic position alter between the individual gene trees, leads us to consider the phylogenetic position of the banded antbird  as preliminary. however, it is obvious that it is not closely related to the hylophylax antbirds with which it has traditionally been grouped . it should be noted that, due to the peculiar position of dichrozona cincta, a second individual  have been sequenced for all three genes. there were no variation at all found between the two individuals in g3pdh, in myoglobin  <dig> ambiguous position were found, and in cytochrome b  <dig> base pairs  that differed as well as  <dig> ambiguous positions were found. overall, this variation is within the variation that could be suspected between individuals within a species. thus, the strange position of dichrozona cincta in our analyses is unlikely to be due to sample or sequence mix-up.

there are several other, less striking examples where the position of taxa in our phylogeny conflicts with relationships suggested in classifications based on external morphology. the herpsilochmus antwrens for example , are quite different in appearance from their sister group dysithamnus in being rather slim, lacking a particularly hook-bill, and in having a distinctly patterned plumage . other examples are the positions of myrmorchilus and neoctantes, respectively . in these cases their true affinities may have been obscured by morphological adaptations to habitats or food sources that differ from those preferred by their closest relatives.

the strong support in the combined tree for basal positions of myrmornis, pygiptila, thamnistes and terenura relative to all other typical antbirds is maybe the most unexpected result of our study. in a majority of classifications terenura is placed close to other antwrens, but with no strong data support. although the precise position of the terenura antwrens is partly ambiguous in our analysis, they obviously belong to an ancient radiation that is only distantly related to the other "antwrens". the terenura antwrens differ from other "antwrens" in plumage pattern and in being more slender and warbler-like with a thinner bill and longer tail. in a study based on mitochondrial dna the position of terenura was ambiguous depending on how the data set was analyzed  <cit>  but clearly it was not closely related to the other taxa included in that study .

the well-supported phylogenetic position of pygiptila and thamnistes as the sistergroup to myrmornis , is novel. however, pygiptila and thamnistes resemble each other in their ways of feeding in the sub-canopy, thamnistes also resembling the pygiptila female in appearance, and differing from most antshrikes in feeding behavior. dna-dna hybridization data  <cit>  and protein electrophoresis  <cit>  have previously shown pygiptila to be genetically distant from the thamnophilus antshrikes. the general external resemblance of pygiptila and thamnistes to other antshrikes is therefore best explained, as being plesiomorphic, and this may also be the case with their suspended nest-type.

the polyphyly of myrmotherula antwrens and myrmeciza antbirds
our results confirm both previous molecular studies that suggest the myrmotherula antwrens are polyphyletic  <cit> , and the suspicion based on morphology that also the rather diverse genus myrmeciza constitutes an unnatural taxon  <cit> . nevetheless, most myrmeciza antbirds studied herein belong to the same clade, although they are not monophyletic as several other genera  are nested among them. however, the chestnut-tailed antbird , which represents a group of small and slim myrmeciza antbirds with prominent wing spots in both sexes, groups with the drymophila, hypocnemis and cercomacra antbirds. the small and slim myrmeciza antbirds resembles morphologically the hypocnemis antbirds in having similar wing spots as well as a rather short and rufous-brown tail.

the clade that includes the remaining myrmeciza antbirds consists of three unresolved lineage. the first includes a group of large and heavily built myrmeciza antbirds . next outside this group is the fire-eye , followed by the bare-crowned antbird  and the myrmoborus antbird representative . these taxa have rather stout bodies and in most cases red eyes. both the fire-eyes and the bare-crowned antbird were previously assumed to be related to the large, heavy-billed myrmeciza antbirds . the second lineage consists of the silvered antbird  and the schistocichla antbird representative . these relationships are in good agreement with the overall plumage characters in these taxa  <cit> , with the males being rather uniform gray while the females are rufous. such a plumage is also found in the genus percnostola, with which the schistocichla antbirds are considered to be most closely related .

in the third lineage, myrmeciza griseiceps and myrmeciza berlepschi form the sister clade to myrmeciza loricata, hypocnemoides maculicauda and hylophylax naevia . this group consists of rather typical shaped and sized "myrmeciza" antbirds. although it has a shorter tail, hylophylax naevia shares plumage pattern with myrmeciza loricata , while myrmeciza griseiceps and myrmeciza berleschi, on the other hand, are more uniformly colored birds.

a non-monophyletic origin of myrmotherula antwrens, suggested by our data, agrees with the results of previous molecular studies  <cit> . the results also support hackett and rosenberg's  <cit>  protein electrophoresis data suggesting that the "gray" and "streaked" forms of myrmotherula antwrens are more closely related to each other than either is to the "checker-throated" forms. the combined tree  suggests that the myrmotherula antwrens evolved along two separate phylogenetic lineages. in the first, the "checker-throated" forms  group with the black bushbird  and constitute the sister to the dot-winged antwren  and the stripe-backed antbird . based on the external morphology these taxa indeed constitute a rather heterogeneous group. for example, the stripe-backed antbird has previously been suggested to be related to formicivora and drymophila antwrens  <cit> , which are distantly related according to our results. however, neoctantes, microrhopias and myrmorchilus are monotypic genera that lack obvious close relatives. myrmorchilus is essentially a terrestrial bird, living in chaco scrub, thus differing in habits and habitat from the "typical" antwren lifestyle. neoctantes lives in humid forest like most myrmotherula antwrens, but its bill is modified to hammers on stems, vines etc., and to be used as a wedge to pry off strips of bark  <cit> . the morphological differences between neoctantes and myrmorchilus on one hand, and the "checker-throated" myrmotherula antwrens on the other, could thus be the result of adaptive specializations in the former taxa.

in the second lineage of myrmotherula antwrens, the "streaked" forms represented by the short-billed antwren  and the black-and-white antbird  form the sister group to the "gray" forms  and formicivora rufa. although the support for nesting formicivora rufa among the "gray" forms of myrmotherula is rather weak, it suggests that the generic boundary between formicivora and "gray" myrmotherula antwren is far from unambiguously settled. this is also indicated by the recent transfer of the black-hooded antwren from the genus myrmotherula to formicivora  <cit> . bates et al.  <cit>  also found a close relationship between myrmotherula longipennis  and the genus formicivora .

CONCLUSIONS
the phylogenetic results support that most antbirds could be divided into two major clades that are in broad agreement with traditional classifications. the first clade includes most antshrike genera, antvireos and the herpsilochmus antwrens, while the second clade consists of the myrmeciza antbirds, the "professional" ant-following antbirds, and allied. however, some relationships within these clades, as well as the support for that terenura antwrens, the wing-banded antbird , the spot-winged antshrike  and the russet antshrike  are basal to all other typical antbirds, are unexpected based on external morphology. possibly the true affinities of these taxa have been obscured by morphological convergence due to adaptations to new habitats or food sources. our results also strongly support that both the myrmeciza antbirds and the myrmotherula antwrens are unnatural groupings in need for taxonomic revisions. also certain other taxa may be unnatural units, but definitive conclusions must await future analyses involving more taxa. 

bayes factors seem promising for evaluating the relative contribution of components to an evolutionary model. however, changing a component of the nucleotide substitution model, e.g. adding parameters to model rate variation, had much higher impact on the model likelihood than unlinking parameters among data partition. thus, even though strong evidence for a model allowing separate topology parameters is found, this might not mean strong evidence for separate gene phylogenies, as long as vital components of the substitution model are still missing.

