BACKGROUND
cyclodipeptides and their derivatives constitute a large class of secondary metabolites that are mainly synthesized by microorganisms. the biological role of theses peptide natural products is mostly unknown but such compounds are of interest due to their potential antibacterial, antifungal, antitumoral or antiinflammatory activities. cyclodipeptides from pseudomonas aeruginosa exhibit cytotoxic properties towards human tumor cells  <cit> , albonoursin produced by actinomyces tumemacerans present antibacterial activities  whereas mycocyclosin may be essential for mycobacterium tuberculosis viability  <cit> . some yeasts and bacterial bacillus species synthesize pulcherriminic acid that is derived from cyclo-l-leucyl-l-leucyl  . pulcherriminic acid is secreted in the growth medium and chelates ferric ions by a non-enzymatic reaction to form an extracellular red pigment, the pulcherrimin. in metschnikowia pulcherrimina strains, pulcherrimin appears to be involved in their antagonistic effects on the other microorganisms by depletion of iron in the growth medium . in bacillus subtilis, the enzymes involved in pulcherriminic acid synthesis were more recently identified. the cyclodipeptide synthase yvmc utilizes charged leucyl trnas as substrate to catalyze the formation of cll  <cit> . the gene downstream of yvmc, cypx, encodes a cytochrome p <dig>  which is implicated in transformation of cll into pulcherriminic acid  <cit> .

the extended bacterial marr family of transcriptional regulators is involved in the regulation of various cellular processes such as regulation of response to antibiotics, aromatic compounds and oxidative stress agents . they can also play a crucial role in virulence factor production, enabling the pathogenic bacteria to adapt to host environments . the majority of marr family members have been characterized as transcriptional repressors although a few examples of transcriptional activators have also been reported . they function as homodimers and bind inverted repeat nucleic sequence . a genomic locus generally consists of divergently oriented genes encoding the marr homolog and the gene under its control. by binding to a specific site in the intergenic regions between divergently transcribed genes, the marr homolog represses transcription of both  <cit> . another defining feature of marr homologs is their response to specific ligands. in absence of ligand, specific dna binding occurs, most often resulting in repression of the transcription, while binding of the ligand results in attenuated dna binding and hence de-repressed gene expression  <cit> . for many marr-type homologues, as well as for many transcription factors, the natural ligand is still unknown.

the objective of this study was to identify the mechanisms of regulation of the pulcherriminic acid biosynthetic pathway in the soil bacterium b. subtilis. we demonstrated that the uncharacterized b. subtilis yvmb marr-type regulator is the major regulator controlling expression of the yvmccypx operon. in combination with genetic approaches, gel mobility shift assays allowed us to define a palindromic motif that constitutes the yvmb-binding site. we also characterized the yvmb regulon, which is composed of four transcriptional units. in addition, a comprehensive quantitative proteomic analysis showed significant repercussions of yvmb deletion for proteins associated to various cellular processes such as metabolism, translation, stress response and biosynthesis of cell wall.

RESULTS
identification of yvmb as repressor of yvmc-cypx and yvmba
pairwise alignment of the amino acid sequence of yvmb with proteins from databases, reveals similarity in the secondary structures between yvmb and other characterized marr regulators .

the yvmb gene is divergently transcribed from the yvmc-cypx operon   <cit> . we observed that cells carrying a yvmb deletion overproduced a red pigment after entry into the stationary growth phase, in the iron-rich ms medium . to test whether yvmb controls yvmc-cypx expression, a transcriptional fusion between cypx and the lacz reporter gene was constructed and studied in the wild-type and Δyvmb cells . in the wild-type, measurement of β-galactosidase activity revealed a slight increased of cypx expression during entry into stationary phase . in the Δyvmb deletion mutant, cypx::lacz was 100-fold up-regulated , suggesting that yvmb is the transcriptional repressor of yvmc-cypx operon expression. in addition, inactivation of the cypx gene in Δyvmb cells abolished red pigment production confirming that the observed red color was probably due to the presence of pulcherrimin .fig.  <dig> involvement of the yvmc-cypx operon in pulcherriminic acid biosynthesis. a genetic organisation of the yvnb, yvna, yvmc-cypx and yvmba genes in the b. subtilis genome. the function of the corresponding encoded proteins is indicated. b scheme of the pulcherriminic acid biosynthetic pathway in b. subtilis. the cyclodipeptide synthase yvmc utilizes charged leucyl trnas as substrate to catalyze the formation of cyclo-l-leucyl-l-leucyl . the cytochrome p <dig> cypx is implicated in the transformation of cll into pulcherriminic acid. pulcherriminic acid is excreted from the cells by an unknown mechanism and chelates free fe by a non-enzymatic reaction to form an extracellular red pigment, the pulcherrimin

fig.  <dig> involvement of yvmb as repressor in the control of yvmc-cypx expression. a the strains were cultivated in ms medium containing 100 μm fecl <dig> for 16 h. at 37 °c in flasks with continuous agitation at 200 rpm. bsb <dig> wild-type strain; bsas <dig> Δyvmb::apha3; bsas <dig> Δyvmb::apha <dig> cypx::lacz. cultures were transferred in tubes for the pictures. b and c expression of a cypx::lacz transcriptional fusion was compared in wild-type and Δyvmb cells. strains were grown in lb medium. growth was monitored by measuring od600: grey curves. β-galactosidase activity of the cypx::lacz fusion is indicated: black circles, in the wild-type ; red squares, in Δyvmb cells . values are the means from at least four independent experiments
bacillus subtilis strains used in this study

trp
+
bfs815b
trpc <dig> cypx’::lacz erm
amye::pyvmb’-lacz cat
amye::pyvmb’-lacz cat Δyvmb::apha3
amye::pyvmb’-lacz cat Δccpa::spc
amye::payvmc’-lacz cat
amye::payvmc’-lacz cat Δyvmb::apha3
trpc <dig> cypx’::lacz erm Δyvmb::apha3
amye::pa*yvmc’-lacz cat Δyvmb::apha3
amye::pa*yvmc’-lacz cat
amye::pcyvmc’-lacz cat
amye::pbyvmc’-lacz cat
amye::pcyvmc’-lacz cat Δyvmb::apha3
amye::pbyvmc’-lacz cat Δyvmb::apha3
amye::payvmb’-luc cat
amye::pbyvmb’-luc cat
amye::pcyvmb’-luc cat
amye::peyvmb’-luc cat
amye::pdyvmb’-luc cat
amye::pfyvmb’-luc cat
yvnb’-luc cat
yvnb’-luc cat Δyvmb::apha3
yisi’-luc cat
yisi’-luc cat Δyvmb::apha3

a
cat pc <dig> chloramphenicol acetyl-transferase gene, apha <dig> enterococcus faecalis kanamycin-resistance gene, erm erythromycin-resistance gene, spc staphylococcus aureus spectinomycin-resistance gene

*strain constructed as part of the ec project for the functional characterization of the b. subtilis genome



the yvmb gene is coexpressed with yvma leading to a yvmba transcript  <cit> . to ask whether yvmb might be subject to autoregulation like other marr-type repressors, transcription analyses were performed. a transcriptional fusion between the yvmb promoter region  and the lacz reporter gene was constructed and integrated into the amye locus of the wild-type and Δyvmb cells. analysis of the β-galactosidase activity revealed that expression of yvmb increased during entry into stationary phase . the 30-fold up-regulation of yvmb-promoter-lacz acitivity in Δyvmb cells indicated that yvmb is subject to autorepression .fig.  <dig> involvement of yvmb ccpa as repressors in the control of yvmb expression. a, b and c) expression of a pyvmb’-lacz transcriptional fusion was compared in wild-type , Δyvmb cells  and Δccpa cells . strains were grown in lb medium. growth was monitored by measuring od600: grey curves. β-galactosidase activity of the pyvmb’-lacz fusion is indicated: black circles, in the wild-type; red squares, in Δyvmb cells; blue triangles, in Δccpa cells. values are the means from at least four independent experiments



expression of yvmb is repressed by ccpa in stationary growth phase
expression of yvmb was proposed to be subject to repression by glucose by direct binding of the carbon metabolism regulator ccpa to a cre site, which overlaps the − <dig> region  <cit> . therefore, we investigated expression of the yvmb-promoter-lacz fusion in a ccpa mutant. expression of yvmb was up-regulated in Δccpa cells upon the stationary growth phase . this result confirmed that ccpa acts as negative regulator of yvmb expression. therefore, yvmb expression undergoes a dual regulation by yvmb and ccpa depending on growth phase.

transcription of yvmb is induced by iron starvation
pulcherriminic acid is known to be secreted in the growth medium and to chelate ferric ions. here, we examined the effect of iron starvation on cypx::lacz expression. the bfs <dig> strain  was cultivated in lb medium and a sample was spread onto solid medium containing x-gal. a drop of 10 mm bipyridyl, a specific iron chelator, was deposited at the center of the plate. after incubation, a white ring was observed around the bipyridyl drop  which indicates that iron starvation does not induce yvmc-cypx expression. we further tested the effect of iron starvation on the yvmb-promoter-lacz fusion  using the same experimental procedure. remarkably, a characteristic blue ring was observed around the bipyridyl drop  indicating that iron deficiency induces yvmb expression.

effect of yvmb deletion on b. subtilis proteome
to understand the physiological state of cells overproducing pulcherriminic acid, we performed a comparative analysis of the cytosolic and membrane proteome of the wild-type and Δyvmb cells. the optimized analyses of four technical replicates resolved more than  <dig> proteins . only the statistically significant  differentially expressed proteins were considered . among the  <dig> differentially abundant proteins ,  <dig> were common between the membrane and the cytosolic fractions. the results are summarized in the table  <dig> table  <dig> proteins up- or down-regulated in a b. subtilis yvmb mutant


aexperiment was performed in four replicates

*proteins with an asterisk were identified both in the cytosolic and membrane fractions



proteomic analysis of a yvmb mutant confirmed a 24- and 13-fold enhanced production of the yvmb primary targets, cypx and yvma. it also revealed a wide and prominent effect on proteins associated with carbon metabolism, translation, stress response and biosynthesis of cell wall. remarkably, several of these proteins have a function related to metal ions metabolism. shifts in metabolic pathways particularly occur in response to iron availability  <cit> . citb and citz are down-regulated in a yvmb mutant. both proteins are known to be less synthesized under conditions of iron limitation . moreover, the down-regulated ribosomal proteins rpll and rpsh belong to the stringent response, which could be initiated by iron limitation  <cit> . iron participates in many metabolic processes related to electron transfer and redox state of the cell, as well as to ph homeostasis  <cit> . interestingly, proteins involved in fes cluster assembly and in respiration, like sufd and ndh, respectively, are more abundant in a yvmb mutant. in the same line, a yvmb mutant shows increased level of the ferredoxin-dependent reductase yumc, which is involved in electron transport. the up-regulated protein kata is part of the iron-dependent peroxide stress response mediated by perr, which is activated when aerobically growing cells enter the stationary phase  <cit> . most of the perr regulon was shown to be repressed when cells are exposed to high levels of iron  <cit> . up-regulated muraa, ykuq and pgca are related to cell wall synthesis and lipid biosynthesis. membrane structure remodeling can result from interaction of ferric ion with external membrane phospholipids bilayer . therefore, deletion of yvmb induces disruptions of proteins involved in cellular processes that depend on iron availability.

determination of the yvmb recognition site in the yvmc promoter
in order to identify genes directly regulated by yvmb, we first attempted to identify the yvmb dna-binding site. the dna sequence of the yvmc promoter region is presented in fig.  <dig>  the − <dig>  and − <dig>  σa-dependent regions are indicated according to the genome reannotation data  <cit> . to identify the dna regions involved in yvmc regulation, four different parts of the promoter region of the yvmc gene were each fused with the lacz reporter gene and integrated at the amye locus of the wild-type strain  . β-galactosidase activities were measured during growth in lb medium . the payvmc and pcyvmc fusions were 4-fold more expressed in Δyvmb cells than in the wild-type. the absence of pbyvmc expression was consistent with the position of the − <dig> and − <dig> σa-dependent regions. remarkably, a 42-bp palindromic sequence lies between nucleotides − <dig> to − <dig> relative to the yvmc translational start site  and was called palindrome i. three point mutations were introduced in this palindromic sequence. the a, c and a nucleotides at position − <dig>  − <dig> and − <dig> were replaced by three nucleotides g . the resulting pa* fusion was constitutively expressed in the wild-type strain , indicating that palindrome i is the major cis-regulatory sequence involved in yvmc repression by yvmb.fig.  <dig> promoter region of the yvmc-yvmb divergent genes. the − <dig> and − <dig> regions of yvmc  and the − <dig> and − <dig> regions of yvmb  are indicated according to nicolas et al.  <cit> . the potential rbs  of the yvmb gene is indicated. the bold letters correspond to the cre site. the blue arrows and the blue letters indicate the palindromic sequence i. the green arrows and the green letters indicate the palindromic sequence ii

fig.  <dig> expression of various yvmc promoter lacz fusions in wild-type and Δyvmb strains. a structure of the yvmc operator region. the − <dig> and − <dig> regions similar to the consensus sequence of σa-dependent promoters are indicated: white boxes. location of the palindromic sequence, palindrome i, is indicated in blue. the dna fragments used to construct pyvmc’-lacz transcriptional fusions are diagrammed. they are numbered with respect to the translational start site of yvmc. stars indicated the location of three point mutations introduced in the pa*yvmc’-lacz fusion. the − <dig> and − <dig> regions located in the yvmb promoter region are indicated: grey boxes. b cells were grown in lb medium. growth was monitored by measuring od600: grey line, wild-type; purple line, Δyvmb. expression of the four pyvmc’-lacz transcriptional fusions was measured: black circles, in the wild-type; red squares, in Δyvmb cells. values are the means from at least three independent experiments. c nucleotide sequence of the palindromic motif , palindrome i. the nucleotides in bold belong to the inverted repeat nucleic sequence. the a, c and a nucleotides at position − <dig>  − <dig> and − <dig>  were replaced by three nucleotides g to construct the pa*yvmc’-lacz fusion



detection of several regions involved in the control of yvmb by yvmb
the dna sequence of the yvmb promoter region is shown in fig.  <dig>  the − <dig>  and − <dig>  σa-dependent regions are indicated  <cit> . to determine the regions involved in yvmb regulation, strains carrying transcriptional luc fusions using different promoter sub-regions of yvmb at the amye locus were constructed  . expression was very low for the large payvmb fusion . the pbyvmb and pcyvmb fusions were 6- and 5-fold up-regulated during entry in the stationary phase indicating that the − <dig> to -  <dig> region was involved in yvmb repression. this corresponded to the location of palindrome i identified above, which lies from nucleotides − <dig> to − <dig> relative to the yvmb translational start site . thus, yvmb is involved in the control of its own transcription via palindrome i.fig.  <dig> expression of various yvmb promoter luc fusions. a structure of the yvmb operator region. the − <dig> and − <dig> regions similar to the consensus sequence of σa-dependent promoters are indicated: white boxes. the location of the cre site  is indicated: grey box. location of the palindromic sequence, palindrome i, is indicated in blue. location of the palindromic sequence, palindrome ii, is indicated in green. the different fusions with the luc gene are numbered with respect to the translational start site of yvmb. the − <dig> and − <dig> regions located in the yvmc promoter region are indicated: grey boxes. b cells were grown in lb medium. growth was monitored by measuring od600: grey lines. expression of the six pyvmb’-luc transcriptional fusions was measured in the wild-type: black lines. for each strain, one representative curve, out of three independent replicates realized, is shown. note that the x-axe is different for the pf fusion to get a better view of the data. c nucleotide sequence of the palindromic motif , palindrome ii. the nucleotides in bold belong to an inverted repeat nucleic sequence



a second set of luc fusions was constructed. expression of the pdyvmb fusion was not detected whereas the peyvmb fusion was 10-fold up-regulated in entry to stationary phase . therefore, the − <dig> to − <dig> region was also involved in yvmb repression. remarkably, this region overlaps a 60-bp imperfect palindromic sequence that we named palindrome ii . the short pfyvmb fusion, without palindrome i nor palindrome ii, was fully depressed in entry to stationary phase  showing a cumulative repressive effect of palindromes i and ii. remarkably, the pfyvmb fusion yielded a very high and transient induction probably due to the repressive effect of ccpa in stationary phase, as shown above .

definition of a yvmb box consensus and prediction of yvmb boxes within the whole-genome sequence
browsing the genome sequence of a-t-rich firmicutes spp., we detected yvma, yvmc and cypx-like proteins in the genome of bacillus licheniformis atcc  <dig>  a sequence similar to palindrome i is present upstream of yvma . inspection of the promoter regions of b. subtilis yvmb and b. licheniformis yvma genes revealed conservation of a 14-bp core region containing an inverted repeat . we showed above that mutation of the conserved nucleotides in position  <dig> and  <dig> resulted in full up-regulation of yvmc expression . this motif could be viewed as the yvmb binding site . indeed, three yvmb boxes were identified in the yvmb promoter region:  one in palindrome i;  one in palindrome ii;  the third one, 41 bp upstream of the yvmb translational start site . this allowed us to propose a first yvmb box consensus sequence, gttymmymgtaaac.fig.  <dig> identification of a 14 bp yvmb-box consensus sequence. a alignment of potential 14 bp yvmb box motifs identified in the promoter region of the b. subtilis yvmb gene and in the promoter region of the b. licheniformis yvma gene. position of the boxes are indicated relative to the translational start sites. b identification of additional putative yvmb boxes. position of the boxes are indicated relative to the translational start sites: yvnb; similar to metallophosphatase; yisi, spo0a-p phosphatase; yxna, similar to glucose 1-dehydrogenase; ndhf, nadh dehydrogenase ; yckd, unknown. c the 14-nt palindromic consensus sequence of the yvmb box motif. the size of the nucleotides at each position indicates its relative prevalence in sequences used as training set for meme algorithm



we used this yvmb box consensus to search putative yvmb boxes within the b. subtilis whole-genome sequence, less than 500 bp upstream of a translational start and in a define promoter region according to nicolas et al.  <cit> . this allowed the identification of  <dig> highly similar motifs preceding the yckd, yisi, yvnb, yxna and ndhf genes . the corresponding proteins were not detected in our proteomic analysis. however, we assumed that yvmb could be involved in the transcriptional regulation of these  <dig> genes. by contrast, no evident yvmb box-like motif was detected upstream of the transcriptional units encoding proteins differentially abundant in the yvmb mutant suggesting an indirect effect of yvmb deletion.

interaction of yvmb with the yvmb, yvnb and yisi promoter regions
his-tagged yvmb protein was overproduced in e. coli and purified in a single step by ni-chelate affinity chromatography to greater than 95 % homogeneity, as revealed by sds-page . a sample of the purified protein was fractionated by chromatography on a gel-filtration column. the yvmbhis-tag protein eluted as a major peak with an apparent molecular mass of 45 ± 5 kda . as the yvmbhis-tag polypeptide has a molecular mass of  <dig>  kda, this means that the native protein is most likely a dimer.

ability of yvmbhis-tag to bind to the yvmb-yvmc intergenic region was tested by gel retardation assays using three different dna fragments as probes . the p <dig> fragment contains palindrome i, the p <dig> fragment contains palindrome ii while the large p <dig> fragment covers the entire dna region located between the yvmb and yvmc genes . one yvmb-dna complex, with an apparent dissociation constant of  <dig> nm, was detected with p <dig> probe  in agreement with prediction of one yvmb recognition motif in this region. two yvmb-dna complexes were detected with p <dig> probe  in agreement with detection of two yvmb box motifs. finally, gel retardation assays with p <dig> probe revealed three yvmb-dna complexes, confirming the presence of three yvmb binding sites .fig.  <dig> yvmb binding to the yvmb-yvmc intergenic region and to the yvnb and yisi promoter regions. a location of the three identified yvmb boxes in the promoter region of yvmb. the − <dig> and − <dig> regions similar to the consensus sequence of σa-dependent promoters are indicated: white boxes. location of the palindromic sequence, palindrome i, is indicated in blue. location of the palindromic sequence, palindrome ii, is indicated in green. location of the three yvmb boxes is indicated in red. the dna fragments p <dig>  p <dig> and p <dig> used to perform gel shift assays are diagrammed. the dna probes used were:  probe p <dig>  probe p <dig> and probe p3;  probe p-yvnb and  prove p-yisi. increasing concentrations of purified yvmbhis-tag were used 



gel shift assays were also performed with a dna fragment corresponding to the yvnb, yisi, yxna, ndhf, yckd promoter regions . fragments  carrying putative yvmb boxes in the centre were subjected to gel retardation analysis with yvmbhis-tag. no interaction was detected with probes corresponding to yxna, ndhf and yckd promoter regions . binding of yvmbhis-tag to the p-yvnb and p-yisi probes resulted in shifts, for which we determined the apparent dissociation constant at  <dig> nm and  <dig>  nm, respectively . it should be noted that a minor second protein-dna complex formed in the presence of  <dig> nm yvmbhis-tag and probe p-yvnb. this could be due to the presence of a degenerated yvmb motif  located 119 bp upstream of yvnb. to conclude, the predicted yvmb box upstream of yvnb and yisi appears functional for yvmb binding in vitro. we assumed that yvmb could be involved in the transcriptional regulation of yisi and yvnb.

dual role of yvmb as repressor of yvnb and as activator of yisi
the dna sequence of the yvnb and yisi promoter regions is shown in additional file 8: figure s <dig>  the yvnb gene is located less than 1 kb upstream of the yvmccypx operon . we then tested the correlation between the presence of a yvmb box and yvmb dependent expression. for this purpose, we constructed a transcriptional fusion between the promoter region of yvnb and the luciferase gene in wild-type and Δyvmb cells. accordingly to nicolas et al.  <cit> , yvnb gene is highly expressed during sporulation condition. luciferase activity was recorded during growth in standard lb medium and sporulation medium. expression of the pyvnb fusion showed 10-fold up-regulation in Δyvmb cells in lb and dsm media . this result validated the yvmb-dependent repression of the yvnb gene.fig.  <dig> involvement of yvmb in the control of yvnb and yisi expression. growth was monitored by measuring od <dig> every 5 min: grey line, wild-type; purple line, Δyvmb. a promoter activity  of the transcriptional fusion yvnb’-luc in lb medium is indicated: black line, wild-type; red line, Δyvmb.
b promoter activity  of the transcriptional fusion yvnb’-luc in dsm sprorulation medium is indicated: black line, wild-type; red line, Δyvmb.
c promoter activity  of the transcriptional fusion yisi’-luc in lb medium is indicated: black line, wild-type; red line, Δyvmb.
d promoter activity  of the transcriptional fusion yisi’-luc in dsm sporulation medium is indicated: black line, wild-type; red line, Δyvmb. one representative curve, out of three independent replicates realized, is shown



we also tested the activity of yvmb as transcriptional regulator of the yisi gene, which encodes a protein involved in the sporulation process. we constructed a transcriptional fusion between the promoter region of yisi and the luciferase gene in wild-type and Δyvmb cells. expression of the yisi fusion is 2-fold down-regulated in Δyvmb cells in the stationary growth phase in lb and dsm media . thus, yvmb positively regulates yisi expression.

subsequently, we used the meme standard bioinformatic method  <cit>  to redefine the yvmb box consensus from the yvmb box sequences upstream of the yvmb, yvmc, yvnb and yisi promoter regions. the resulting new yvmb consensus sequence exhibited an inverted repeat sequence with highly conserved nucleotides at the external positions  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> and in the mid-positions  <dig> and  <dig> .

discussion
in this study, we identified the b. subtilis yvmb uncharacterized marr-like protein as the main negative regulator of the pulcherriminic acid biosynthetic pathway. to our knowledge, this is the first report of the molecular and genetic mechanisms involved in the regulation of this pathway in microorganisms. our genetic analysis, gel-shift assays and computational analysis highlight a 14-bp core perfect inverted repeat, which likely defines the yvmb binding site in the yvmc-cypx operator region. this motif overlaps the − <dig> promoter element of the yvmc target gene, as previously described for marr-type regulators dna-binding sites  <cit> . in addition, our work led to the identification of the yvmb regulon, which extends to yvmba , yvnb and yisi genes. a sequence analysis of the yvmb boxes using the meme suite produced a consensus composed of highly conserved nucleotides at the external positions  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> and at the mid-positions  <dig> and  <dig> . as these nucleotides are also present in the unbound yvmb boxes preceding the yckd, yxna and ndhf genes, the local sequence environment might also be important for the specific dna binding of yvmb.

the regulation of yvmb expression is complex since the activity of its promoter is modulated by at least two transcriptional regulators, ccpa and yvmb. ccpa seems to act as repressor of yvmb expression in the stationary growth phase while yvmb represses its own expression. autoregulation is a characteristic of the marr-like repressor  <cit> . we showed that yvmb binds specifically to three regions containing a yvmb box. the three yvmb boxes play a cumulative effect in yvmb repression. in addition, preliminary analysis of the purified yvmbhis-tag protein by analytical chromatography suggests that yvmb is a dimer in the absence of the effector. the nature of the metabolite controlling yvmb repressor activity by binding to dna remains to be clarified. remarkably, expression of yvmb is also up-regulated in response to iron starvation. our results support the existence of an auxiliary transcriptional mechanism, independent of yvmb, to control yvmb expression in response to iron availability.

an unexpected finding is the activation of the yisi gene by yvmb during entry into the stationary growth phase. to our knowledge there are few examples of marr-like regulator showing a dual role as a repressor and an activator  <cit> . remarkably, the yisi protein is an aspartyl-phosphate phosphatase, which specifically dephosphorylates the sporulation transcription factor spo0a-p and negatively regulates the sporulation initiation pathway in order to control the proper timing of sporulation  <cit> . it is known that the yisi gene is expressed mainly during the transition phase between exponential and stationary phase, its induction is dependent upon the presence of spo0a  <cit> . by our proteomic analysis, two proteins of the spo0a regulon are induced in a yvmb mutant. these are represented by the rocd ornithine aminotransferase and the tkt transketolase, which might be due to a difference in phosphorylated/unphosphorylated form of the spo0a regulator in a yvmb mutant. therefore, yvmb appears an additional regulatory element into the cell’s decision to grow or sporulate. a database search revealed that yvmba, yvmc-cypx and yisi genes are present in b. licheniformis and bacillus thuringiensis, suggesting the functional conservation of the role of yvmb in pulcherriminic acid synthesis and in sporulation in other bacilli.

the exact role of pulcherriminic acid produced by b. subtilis is still unclear. expression of yvmc-cypx is not up-regulated in response to iron deficiency in agreement with kupfer et al., who showed that similar amounts of pulcherriminic acid were detected in the presence of both low and high concentrations of ferric ions  <cit> . since pulcherrimin is a large nondiffusible complex  <cit> , mechanism of iron depletion is different from the mechanisms operating in microbes that release siderophores into the environment for iron acquisition. our comprehensive quantitative proteomic analysis revealed that yvmb deletion induces changes of proteins involved in cellular processes depending on iron availability. however, we did not identify evident yvmb-box motifs upstream of the transcriptional units encoding these proteins. we assume that chelation of external iron by pulcherriminic acid could disrupt iron-dependent processes that can explain the wide indirect cellular changes into Δyvmb cells.

here, we demonstrated that yvmb controls expression of the yvma and yvnb genes, which encodes a putative permease and a putative metallophosphatase, respectively. in m. pulcherrimina, pulcherrimin is involved in antimicrobial effects by depletion of iron in the growth medium . m. pulcherrimina also secretes lytic enzymes such as chitinase that may contribute to the overall antagonistic effects of related m. pulcherrimina strains  <cit> . the role of yvma and yvnb in potential antagonist effects of pulcherrimin produced by b. subtilis deserve further studies.

CONCLUSIONS
this study allowed to identify the mechanism of regulation of the genes involved in the biosynthesis of pulcherriminic acid in b. subtilis. we identified the uncharacterized yvmb marr-like protein as the main regulator of the yvmccypx operon. additionally, we defined the yvmb regulon comprising at least four transcriptional units. our results also highlight a complex impact of yvmb on cellular processes depending on iron availability and on the regulation of the initiation of sporulation. further studies will be required to investigate the role of the genes controlled by yvmb.

