BACKGROUND
the phylum nematoda  is an ecologically diverse clade, that has significant impact as parasites of animals and plants, along with providing a diverse array of ecosystem services as free-living species in many environments  <cit> . parasitic nematodes include many species that negatively impact human health, agricultural production, wildlife, and companion animals  <cit> . free-living nematode species occur in almost every environment, particularly soils and aquatic sediments and serve important roles in food webs, particularly as decomposers and predators  <cit> . despite their biodiversity, ubiquity, and important impacts, molecular phylogenetic hypotheses for major groups of nematodes, including zooparasitic species, are somewhat lacking when compared to recent advances for other organisms. in addition, prior to the application of molecular data, hypotheses of evolutionary relationships for nematodes relied heavily on interpretation of a limited number of "key morphological characters" or placed excessive emphasis on ecological features; as a result, different investigators recovered different relationships, with resulting debate concerning nematode classification systems . during the last  <dig> years, molecular sequence data have been employed for nematode phylogenetics and have provided testable hypotheses at different levels, from across the phylum to within genera. the vast majority of these studies have been based on gene sequences representing a single nuclear locus, ribosomal dna . such ribosomal dna studies have included phylum-wide investigations  <cit> , studies focused on particular clades identified in phylum-wide investigations , evaluation of traditional orders or suborders , and examination of particular genera  <cit> . the first phylum-wide molecular phylogeny of nematodes  <cit>  recognized five major clades. only one of these groups  was exclusively composed of animal parasites. this clade represents four traditional orders , and includes many species of veterinary and medical importance. a revised classification system, based on interpretation of ssu  rdna phylogenetic trees, has been proposed with each traditional clade iii order given infraordinal status within rhabditida, suborder spirurina  <cit> , and renamed ascaridomorpha, spiruromorpha, rhigonematomorpha and oxyuridomorpha. relatively comprehensive sampling and analysis of clade iii taxa  using ssu sequences generally supported clade iii monophyly  and that of oxyurida, but not monophyly of ascaridida or spirurida as traditionally defined  <cit> . however, relationships among the major clade iii orders were not reliably resolved by ssu data, with major differences among phylogenetic trees according to inference method, and inclusion or exclusion of characters judged to be ambiguous with respect to positional  homology  <cit> .

analyses of complete mitochondrial genome sequences have provided an alternative hypothesis for relationships among clade iii taxa  <cit> . these mitochondrial trees supported a closer relationship between rhabditida and ascaridida, with the single oxyurid species in the analysis sister to rhabditida+ascaridida, and this latter clade sister to spirurida. the mtdna tree topology conflicts with results based on ssu rdna, which strongly supports monophyly of taxa representing the sampled superfamilies and orders  <cit> . the recent development of high-throughput approaches for sequencing and annotating mitochondrial genomes  <cit>  holds great promise for increasing the representation of nematode mtdna genomes for analysis, and has already yielded several new strongylid sequences analyzed herein. however, high-throughput approaches have not yet been applied to increase taxon sampling for clade iii nematodes, which remain sparse at most taxonomic levels, including the absence of orders . the great majority of mitochondrial genome sequences for chromadorean nematodes are derived from the rhabditida . in contrast, oxyurida is represented by one species, and although spirurida and ascaridida are represented by multiple species, each of these orders includes a single superfamily . improving the comparative utility of mtdna phylogenetics requires broadened taxonomic sampling of nematode mitochondrial genomes.

in this study, we determined the complete mitochondrial genome sequences of three zooparasitic clade iii nematode species: cucullanus robustus, the first representative of the superfamily seuratoidea , wellcomia siamensis, the second representative of the oxyurida, and heliconema longissimum, the first representative of the superfamily physalopteroidea . we also used these data and complete mtdna sequences from genbank to infer phylogenetic relationships among major groups of enoplean and chromadorean nematodes.

RESULTS
gene organization and content
the complete mitochondrial genomes of c. robustus , w. siamensis  and h. longissimum  are  <dig>  bp,  <dig>  bp and  <dig>  bp in length, respectively. the mitochondrial genomes of all three species contain  <dig> protein coding genes ,  <dig> transfer rna genes and  <dig> ribosomal rna genes , as found in almost all other nematode mitochondrial genomes reported so far. the exception is trichinella spiralis, which also contains atp <dig>  <cit> . all  <dig> genes of each mitochondrial genome are encoded in the same direction with very small intergenic spacer regions . the genome organizations of each species are shown in table  <dig>  as previously reported for other nematode mtdnas, the overall a+t content is very high  with average a+t contents of  <dig> % for h. longissimum ,  <dig> % for w. siamensis , and  <dig> % for c. robustus .

ribosomal rna
transfer rna
*termination codons were not included.

protein-coding genes and codon usage
twelve protein-coding genes were identified for each of the three species , ranging in size from  <dig> bp  for c. robustus, w. siamensis and h. longissimum to  <dig>  bp  for h. longissimum. for the  <dig> protein-coding genes of c. robustus, five  are inferred to use att as the start codon, whereas the other seven  use ttg. in h. longissimum, six genes  are inferred to start with att, four others  start with ata, and nad <dig> and nad <dig> use ttg as the start codon. in w. siamensis, eight genes  are inferred to use ttg as the start codon, three genes  start with att, and cox <dig> uses ata as the start codon. for c. robustus, eight genes are inferred to use taa as the termination codon  and two use tag . in h. longissimum, taa is also the most commonly used termination codon  whereas tag is used for three genes . for w. siamensis, tag is used as the termination codon for six genes , whereas taa is used only for the cob gene. termination with the incomplete codon t is inferred for cox <dig> and cob of c. robustus and nad <dig> and cob of h. longissimum. the incomplete termination codon t is used in high frequency  for w. siamensis . start and termination codons are shown for each species in table  <dig>  the protein-coding genes of the three mitochondrial genomes are composed of amino acids that are encoded by t-rich codons, as has been previously documented for all major clades of chromadorean nematodes . the six most frequently used codons are all t-rich : ttt , tta , ttg , att , gtt , and tct  in c. robustus; ttt , tta , att , gtt , ttg , and tat  in w. siamensis; ttt , tta , att , tat , gtt , and tct  in h. longissimum. these t-rich codons account for almost half of all codons used  in these three species . in addition, unequal use of synonymous codons, especially bias against codons with c in the third position is very prominent in four-fold and two-fold degenerate codon families. for instance, the relative frequency of phenylalanine encoded by ttc is strikingly decreased in each species . these factors  correlate with the high percentage of a+t content in the nucleotide composition of protein-coding genes .

ribosomal rna and transfer rrna genes
the small subunit ribosomal rna  and large subunit ribosomal rna  of each mtdna were initially identified by comparison with related species of the same orders. it was not possible to confirm the exact starting and ending positions of the two ribosomal rna genes, therefore the entire flanking regions between the boundaries of their respective adjoining genes were estimated as rrns and rrnl in each species . the rrns of c. robustus, w. siamensis and h. longissimum is  <dig> bp,  <dig> bp, and  <dig> bp in size, respectively. the total length of rrnl is  <dig> bp in c. robustus,  <dig> bp in w. siamensis, and  <dig> bp in h. longissimum. the predicted secondary structures of  <dig> trnas for each of the three species  are similar to those reported from a variety of other nematode species . for example, all these trnas, except for trns <dig> and trns <dig>  lack a tΨc and instead are equipped with a tv-replacement loop; in addition, trns <dig> and trns <dig> lack a dihydrouridine  arm, but have a tΨc stem-loop structure  <cit> .

non-coding region
the at-rich non-coding regions  for c. robustus, w. siamensis and h. longissimum are, respectively,  <dig> bp ,  <dig> bp , and  <dig> bp  in length . these ncr regions have much higher a+t content than any other regions of these mitochondrial genomes , with a+t contents of  <dig> % ,  <dig> %  and  <dig> % .

nematode mitochondrial phylogeny
phylogenetic relationships among major groups of nematodes represented by  <dig> complete mitochondrial genomes were inferred using two different tree-building methods for nucleotide and amino acid sequence datasets for the  <dig> protein-coding genes common to all the species. the concatenated dataset for nucleotide and amino acid sequences comprised  <dig>  and  <dig>  aligned characters, respectively. in addition, the nucleotide dataset was analyzed after excluding 3rd codon positions . this was performed to assess the possible impact of third codon position saturation on reconstructing mtdna phylogeny, particularly at deeper levels . overall, relationships inferred from bayesian analysis of amino acids differed in several respects from the analyses of nucleotides, with the aa tree recovering somewhat fewer clades consistent with classical taxonomy. relationships among taxa within each sampled superfamily were in broad agreement irrespective of different data types  and different analytic methods, with relatively minor topology differences  that are discussed subsequently. considering orders represented by two or more taxa, oxyurida, spirurida, and mermithida were each monophyletic in all analyses with very high nodal support. ascaridida was monophyletic in three of four analyses , and rhabditida was not monophyletic in any analysis. representatives of enoplea were monophyletic in three of four analyses . chromadorean species were a monophyletic group with very high nodal support in all analyses. relationships among certain enoplean species differed between these datasets and methods. in ml analysis of all nucleotide data , enopleans were not monophyletic, with a dorylaimid , mermithids, and a trichocephalid , each forming successive sister groups to the chromadoreans. in other analyses , x. americanum was more closely related to other enopleans, but with unreliable nodal support in some cases. the unstable position of x. americanum may be due to its long branch length  relative to other enoplean taxa. reversals of strand-specific nucleotide bias in mtdna can lead to convergences in sequence composition and long branch artifacts that can mislead phylogenetic analyses  <cit> . for nematode mitochondrial genomes, differences in patterns of strand-specific bias among species are only beginning to be investigated, but it is known that the mtdna molecules of chromadorean species have relatively conserved synteny and genes that are encoded on the same strand, whereas genes of enoplean species are encoded by both strands and show much greater variation in organization  <cit> . the use of both dna strands to encode genes may be more conducive to producing convergence through mutational constraints and introduction of potential bias affecting phylogenetic analyses  <cit> .

some chromadorean taxa also showed variation in phylogenetic position among analyses and between datasets. some of these differences likely reflect differences in potential resolution of different datasets . for example, relationships within superfamilies of rhabditida often received higher ml bootstrap values in analyses of all nucleotides than the dataset that excluded 3rd positions of codons. ml and bi analyses of the nucleotide datasets recovered all ascaridida  as monophyletic , whereas in the bi of amino acid data , c. robustus  was sister  to a group of ascaridida and rhabditida. notably, one molecular phylogeny based on nuclear ssu rdna also yielded an unexpected relationship for a different seuratoid genus, indicating more recent common ancestry with members of rhabditida and diplogasterida  <cit> . similarly, although the position of steinernema carpocapsae  was strongly supported in bayesian analysis of amino acids , it was unstable and poorly supported in analyses of nucleotide data. steinernema has also been of unstable or conflicting phylogenetic position in analyses of ssu and lsu nuclear ribosomal dna  <cit> . in some recent classifications reflecting certain ssu trees  <cit> , steinernema and strongyloides have been placed in the same superfamily , and this taxonomic convention was followed in this study. however, steinernema plus strongyloides was never recovered as monophyletic in analyses of mitochondrial genome data, and instead steinernema was more closely related to other rhabditida plus ascaridida . analysis of nuclear lsu rdna also depicts steinernema as more closely related to rhabditida such as caenorhabditis and heterorhabditis than to strongyloides  <cit> . although some studies based on nuclear ssu rdna have depicted steinernema as sister to strongyloides and closely related to free living panagrolaimoidea  <cit> , other studies have found the position of this genus to be unresolved by ssu sequences  <cit> . perhaps factors influencing the unstable phylogenetic position of steinernema are common to ribosomal dna and mtdna genes, and resolving the position of this important entomopathogenic genus will require sequences from other loci.

certain older classifications emphasizing vertebrate parasites  <cit>  have included strongyloides within rhabditoidea. in analyses of mtdna genome data, strongyloides stercoralis was recovered as the sister taxon to the ascaridida+rhabditida clade with very robust nodal support in all analyses . this position of s. stercoralis does not conflict with results obtained from analysis of nuclear ribosomal dna, although trees inferred from lsu rdna showed instability of topology that may result from compositional bias or long-branch attraction for s. stercoralis  <cit> . it is interesting to note that the gene order of s. stercoralis mtdna is unique, differing substantially from those of other rhabditid taxa whose complete sequence has been reported so far  <cit> . additional complete mitochondrial genome sequences of rhabditids, including species from the suborder cephalobina  will be needed to assess if phylogenies based on mitochondrial genes are consistent with hypotheses obtained from nuclear genes, and to better understand mitochondrial genome evolution within chromadorea. representation of mitochondrial genomes from as yet unsampled clades  may prove important for stabilizing or modifying relationships in parts of the mitochondrial gene tree; taxa that break long branches are believed to be particularly valuable additions.

of eight superfamiles within chromadorea represented by two or more species, five were monophyletic in all analyses . strongyloidoidea and ancylostomatoidea , were not monophyletic in any analysis, whereas strongyloidea was monophyletic in three of four analyses . relationships among the five filarioid species were identical among the different inference methods and datasets, and these groups received strong nodal support. tree topology for relationships among clade iii orders was not consistent among the analyses, but in no case was clade iii monophyletic. in addition, the four ascaridida species were nested within rhabitida in all analyses. comparison of the best tree for all nucleotide data  with the optimal ml tree for this dataset constrained for clade iii monophyly , indicated that monophyly of clade iii was a significantly worse interpretation of these data . similarly, the s-h test revealed that the best ml tree consistent with clade iii monophyly for the dataset excluding 3rd positions was significantly worse  than the best ml tree  for these data. the deepest node including all rhabditida and ascaridida had 100% bootstrap support  or  <dig>  posterior probability . in three of four analyses , oxyurids were sister to ascaridida plus rhabditida but with strong nodal support only for analyses of the amino acid dataset. in the bayesian analysis of nucleotide data excluding 3rd positions , oxyurids were sister to spirurids, but with low posterior probability . this difference in position of the oxyurids, was the most marked difference between the analyses of complete data  versus nucleotide data excluding 3rd positions. an alternative tree topology test based on ml and the dataset excluding 3rd positions showed that the best ml tree constrained to require a sister taxon relationship between oxyurids and spirurids was significantly worse . this result confirms that there is a significant difference between inference methods  for the same dataset  when considering the position of oxyurids. although one analysis  showed strong nodal support for higher-level relationships involving oxyurids, a conservative interpretation is that additional investigations are required to confirm the relationship of oxyurids among chromadorea based on mtdna genomes. phylogenetic analyses of ssu sequences did not provide reliable support for the relationship of oxyurids to other nematode taxa  <cit> , suggesting that data from other loci may be necessary to resolve this question.

nematodes in the orders ascaridida, oxyurida, and spirurida are a major component of zooparasitic diversity. evolutionary hypotheses and classification schemes for these orders have differed substantially, depending on the types of data considered and the taxonomic authority. for example, chitwood  <cit>  and maggenti  <cit>  both suggested that ascaridida was more closely related to rhabditida than to spirurida. specifically, maggenti's  <cit>  classification placed special emphasis on the morphology of the esophagus and life-history traits, assigning the orders rhabditida, strongylida and ascaridida under the subclass rhabditia. in contrast, other classifications emphasizing different features suggested a sister-group relationship between ascaridida and spirurida  <cit> , and proposed that members of this clade are more closely related to strongylida than to oxyurida and rhigonematida. in other work based on traditional approaches, inglis  <cit>  proposed a sister-group relationship between oxyurida and strongylida, with ascaridida and spirurida belonging to a separate clade. these hypotheses predate the understanding, inferred from molecular phylogenetics  <cit> , that the vertebrate parasites of the classical order strongylida are phylogenetically nested within and closely related to free-living rhabditoidea. phylum-wide phylogenies based on ssu rdna have indicated that representatives of the animal-parasitic orders ascaridida, spirurida, rhigonematida and oxyurida form a monophyletic group with strong support , with the exception of a single species in one study  <cit> . in contrast to this overall monophyly for clade iii taxa, an analysis of ssu sequences for >  <dig> clade iii species revealed that three of the component orders  each lacked monophyly for their sampled species  <cit> . finally, ssu data provide inconclusive resolution for relationships among most major clade iii lineages  <cit> . for clade iii taxa, mitochondrial genome data is inconsistent with clade iii monophyly, and instead depicts ascaridida as nested within rhabditida. the mitochondrial phylogenetic hypothesis conflicts with the evolutionary proposals by inglis  <cit>  and anderson  <cit> , but is more consistent with the proposal of maggenti  <cit>  in that the rhabditida, strongylida, and ascaridida are more closely related to each other than any of these orders are to spirurida. maggenti  <cit>  also treated oxyurids as a superfamily within ascaridida, but our mtdna trees do not support a close relationship between ascaridids and oxyurids. previous results based on substantially fewer mitochondrial genome sequences are consistent with the current conclusions based on broader taxon sampling, for example, support for a sister-group relationship between ascaridida and rhabditida  <cit>  and absence of monophyly for representative clade iii species  <cit> . in the context of mtdna phylogenetics, characterizing the relationships among parasitic nematodes and understanding their relationships to free-living species will require sampling of many additional lineages, which is becoming feasible with high-throughput sequencing methods. however, the current mtdna genome phylogeny is not consistent with an evolutionary hypothesis suggesting two separate origins of zooparasitism, one for ascaridida and spirurida and a separate origin for oxyurida and strongylida   <cit> .

in general, the gene content of mitochondrial genomes is invariant with few changes across a variety of metazoans. based on the viewpoint that gene order is also rather stable, and that gene rearrangements tend to reflect common ancestry rather than convergent evolution, comparison of mitochondrial gene order pattern has often been suggested as a potential tool for resolving deep phylogenetic relationships  <cit> . yet, these assumptions have been called into question as more mitochondrial genome data has been obtained. there is a growing body of evidence that extensive gene rearrangements have occurred within some metazoan groups including enoplean nematodes  <cit> , mollusks  <cit> , tunicates  <cit> , and some crustacean arthropods  <cit> . such exceptions challenge the utility of gene order for inferring deep branch phylogeny. in this context, comparison of gene order does not appear useful for evaluating relationships among enoplean nematodes because extensive gene rearrangement is known even among closely related taxa  <cit> . in contrast, mitochondrial gene order of chromadorean nematode species appears to be more conserved, and shared gene arrangement between the taxa has been interpreted as a reliable indicator of their phylogenetic affinity  <cit> . considering the phylogenetic framework provided by analysis of mtdna genome sequences, a highly conserved gene order is found among most members within the ascaridida+rhabditida clade. for c. robustus, the newly determined genome sequence has a gene arrangement that is almost identical to those of most ascaridida and rhabditida, with only a few translocations of some trnas  . the notable exceptions to highly conserved gene arrangement within the ascaridida+rhabditida clade are found in strongyloides stercoralis and heterorhabditis bacteriophora whose gene arrangements differ substantially from all other members of the clade reported thus far; the former species is the only representative of strongyloidoidea in the analysis, and s. stercoralis is consistently placed as the sister lineage to the other ascaridida+rhabditida. gene arrangement among the species sampled within each of the orders oxyurida and spirurida is very similar and translocations within each order are very limited . for example, there is a single translocation or reciprocal translocation of a trna in oxyurida  and reciprocal translocations of trnv and trnm between heliconema longissimum and dirofilaria immitis-brugia malayi-setaria digitata , and a single translocation of trnk between onchocerca volvulus and dirofilaria immitis-brugia malayi-setaria digitata . despite the similarity within most orders , notable differences in gene arrangement pattern are found among different orders, particularly between oxyurida and spirurida and/or between spirurida and most ascaridida and rhabditida members. although the gene arrangement of oxyurid members sequenced to date is unique, there are some partial gene order identities  shared among most members of rhabditida, ascaridida and oxyurida . in contrast, these identities are not shared with spirurida species. although interpretation of gene order patterns would benefit from formal phylogenetic analysis of these data, this has not yet been performed because additional sampling of more chromadorean groups is needed, particularly since the high variability in gene order among enopleans complicates their utility for rooting the chromadorean tree. nevertheless, shared gene arrangement patterns appear to provide additional support for the hypothesis that spirurida are not closely related to oxyurida and ascaridida, and that the latter two groups  share a more recent common ancestor with rhabditida. neither mitochondrial genome phylogenies nor gene arrangement patterns support the hypothesis that clade iii nematodes  share a most recent common ancestor reflecting a single origin.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we tested phylogenetic relationships of nematodes using complete mitochondrial genome information, with special emphasis on species from clade iii, which includes major components of zooparasitic nematode diversity. for this study, we determined the complete mitochondrial genome sequences of three nematode species, cucullanus robustus  from ascaridida, heliconema longissimum  from spirurida, and wellcomia siamensis  from oxyurida, and used sequences from the protein coding genes to investigate phylogenetic relationships, focusing on chromadorean orders. phylogenetic analysis of these new mitochondrial genomes corroborates the close relationship between ascaridida and rhabditida and confirms that ascaridida is nested within rhabditida. the oxyurida and spirurida are each monophyletic, and are sister groups to the ascaridida plus rhabditida clade. this lack of monophyly for clade iii, as inferred from mtdna genomes, conflicts with phylogenetic trees based on nuclear rdna. these mtdna hypotheses suggest that zooparasitic nematodes represented by ascaridida, oxyurida and spirurida do not share a most recent common ancestor. ultimately, resolution of this and other conflicts between nuclear rdna gene trees and mtdna gene trees will require hypotheses based on additional independent loci. however, regions of topological concordance between mtdna and nuclear rdna phylogenetic hypothesis indicate that continued efforts to obtain complete mitochondrial genomes for unrepresented nematode lineages will prove useful for understanding the evolution of mtdna genomes and developing phylogenetic hypotheses for the phylum nematoda.

