BACKGROUND
several lines of theory have been proposed to account for the enormous diversity of phytophagous insects. diversification conceivably ensues by ecological opportunity and adaptation to the exploitation of previously unattainable resources  <cit> ; by restricted gene flow through allopatric means  <cit> ; and disruptive selection and sympatric speciation  <cit> . in order to discern among potential mechanisms driving speciation, both historical pattern and ecological scale processes are important to consider  <cit> . comparative phylogenetic approaches that test congruence between host and associate populations can contribute to greater resolution in unravelling ecological scale processes  <cit> . here we interpret the codiversification between ficus host species and populations of a group of african fig wasp pollinator species.

no single adaptive hypothesis is yet to explain the conditions determining the origin, maintenance, and extinction of insect-plant mutualisms  <cit>  and the overwhelming amount of literature surrounding the field has led to periodic reassessment of central concepts  <cit> . pollination mutualisms are iconic examples of highly specialized interactions  <cit> . fig trees  are singularly dependent on pollination by fig wasps  that in turn are dependent on the fig 'fruit' for reproduction  <cit> . pollinating fig wasps show remarkable conservatism in host ficus preference having concordant and ancient associations in the vicinity of  <dig> myr  <cit> . correlated evolution between figs and fig wasps is supported by numerous examples  <cit> . these include respiratory adaptation to fluid-filled figs  <cit>  and head and mouthpart adaptation to the receptacle ostiole  <cit> . the presence of close phylogenetic correspondence within the mutualism has been presented in previous work  <cit>  and strongly supports the hypothesis of a historically conservative interaction. the causal mechanisms supporting the maintenance of extremely conserved interactions remain unclear.

the estimation of the strength of these evolutionarily conserved interactions has come about through testing phylogenetic congruence at the species level and above. the presence of strict-sense cospeciation between one pollinator species and one ficus species remain an outstanding case in insect-plant interactions, albeit greater scrutiny over the last decade has revealed species complexes and multiple pollinator species present on single host species  <cit> . from an empirical point of view, tests of phylogenetic correspondence that seek to estimate the level of 'cospeciation'  <cit>  can in theory indicate up to four codiversification scenarios  <cit> . thus, the taxonomic scale at which tests of congruence are conducted can influence interpretation of the cospeciation pattern in uncovering process. analyses of congruence among distantly related taxonomic subdivisions in poorly sampled clades can bias interpretation in favour of 'cospeciation'  <cit> . jackson and colleagues  <cit>  recently demonstrated that the level of resolution of genetic variation can bias the interpretation of host species associations. earlier work on the fig-fig wasp mutualism  <cit>  tended to be conducted at the level of genus and species. fig wasp host fidelity is perhaps most strong at the genus/host section level  <cit> . hypotheses explaining discordance in phylogenetic congruence implicate independent speciation, extinction, lineage duplication of either host or associate as well as horizontal transfer between host species.

recent work has highlighted uncertainties concerning taxonomic classification and difficulty in understanding the phylogenetic associations between african pollinator genera and ficus section galoglychia  <cit> . in this investigation, we test how independent diversification of agaonid pollinators is from host species of galoglychia. global measures of fit and reconciliation approaches are used to test phylogenetic congruence between pollinator fig wasp populations and ficus species. fig wasp within-species genetic variation at the cytochrome oxsidase one  locus is assessed using statistical parsimony, amova, and diversification modelling. alternative pollinator topologies inferred with mitochondrial  and nuclear gene sequences are explored using likelihood ratio tests. the results were optimised over a set of hypotheses and are best characterised by pollinator populations reproducing on multiple ficus species.

RESULTS
phylogenetic inference
our bayesian and parsimony bootstrap consensus inferences based on ef-1α, coi, and cytb produced the same topology . the markov chain reached apparent stationarity after  <dig>  ×  <dig> generations and the last  <dig>  ×  <dig> generations of  <dig>  ×  <dig> generations were used to generate the pollinator and ficus consensus phylogenies. posterior probabilities  for all genera were well resolved and well supported . bootstrap support for the genus elisabethiella was poor  as was the support for the bifurcations of genera especially for the courtella/alfonsiella node . this topology was in general agreement with a phylogeny of machado and colleagues  <cit>  that was based on coi showing courtella and elisabethiella as sister-clades. however, the majority of other cases support a topology where elisabethiella is sister-clade to alfonsiella though topology outside this relationship is inconsistent  <cit>  and pollinator body length compatibility with syconium size measurements supports this hypothesis as well  <cit> . therefore, we used the harmonic means of four separate bayesian runs to generate bayes factors  <cit>  that compared constrained topologies of each case. the results were inconclusive  of one topology over the other so we used both in the reconciliation tests. we elected to use the elisabethiella and alfonsiella sister-genera inference for congruence testing as most studies support this topology and pilot analyses showed negligible differences between the two.

the ficus phylogenetic inferences  generated by bayesian and parsimony approaches had the same topologies and are in general agreement with previous work  <cit> . the subsections chlamydodorae, platyphylla, and caulocarpae form well-supported clades in the bayesian inference . the former two subsections show bootstrap support of  <dig> &  <dig> respectively and more equivocal support  for the caulocarpae clade. subsections urostigma and sycomorus were constrained to outgroup taxa. singleton representatives of subsections crassicostae and galoglychia are consistent with the topology of previous work  <cit> . due to the placement of f. ilicina  miq., the resulting polyphyly of chlamydodorae necessitates future revision.

within-lineage delimitation
the gmyc likelihood test was robust to both molecular clock and relaxed clock assumptions and identified  <dig> 'entities' or clades from a total of  <dig> terminal taxa, which are inferred to include coalescing lineages below the level of species . a total of  <dig> clusters represent clades that comprise potential below-species divergence at the coi locus. the inferred shift at which species diversification changes to within-lineage processes was significant . the threshold time  was converted to a relative time scale. the likelihood of the null model was less than the alternative model  indicating a switch between-species branching according to a yule pure-birth model and neutral coalescence. within  <dig> of these 'coalescing' clades are host associations with more than one ficus species. elisabethiella stuckenbergi , e. glumosae wiebes, alfonsiella binghami wiebes, and courtella bekiliensis  show species level divergences within each of these 'species groups':  e. socotrensis  was collected from f. natalensis natalensis hochst. and f. burkei  miq.;  e. stuckenbergi  from f. burkei, f. natalensis, and f. lingua lingua de wild. & t. durand, f. petersii warb.; and  a. binghami  from f. craterostoma mildbr. & burret, f. stuhlmannii warb., f. petersii, and f. natalensis. the log-lineages through time plot  shows a sharp increase in lineage accumulation that represents the inferred shift between speciation and coalescent processes.

statistical parsimony and amova
the statistical parsimony analysis partitioned the coi sequence data into a series of  <dig> haplotype networks possessing two or more samples and  <dig> singleton haplotypes . of the agaonidae pollinator networks, at least  <dig> groups  were collected from more than  <dig> ficus species. differentiation among species was significant  at fst =  <dig> . analysis of molecular variance showed significant levels of differentiation for all species  except for within the a. binghami group  that was much lower than the those of other groups that ranged from fst =  <dig>  to  <dig>  . species-specific fixation indices ranged from fst =  <dig>  to fst =  <dig>   and were largely in the vicinity of the latter. both gmyc and statistical parsimony tests divide e. stuckenbergi into at least three putative species clades with substantial differentiation between each. statistical parsimony tended to be more sensitive to differentiation among putative species lineages within a. binghami and e. socotrensis. species delimitation that relies on single loci is not conclusive and has to be treated with caution. however, divergence at the coi locus provides credible evidence of negligible differentiation among pollinator lineages sampled from different ficus species and is important to the interpretation of host species associations and co-diversification.

fixation indices  among each fig wasp species at the coi locus.

1
 <dig> 

4
 <dig> 

5
 <dig> 

6
species-specific fixation indices  at the coi locus.

phylogenetic congruence analyses
a comparison between  <dig> terminal pollinator taxa with  <dig> ficus species resulted in non-significant congruence using parafit and under particular event cost schemes in treefitter tests. the application parafit tests a global null hypothesis that the association between the 'host' and 'parasite' phylogenies is independent. the global test of independence was insignificant . tests on individual associations indicate that the inferred lack of cophylogeny was a result of only  <dig> of the  <dig> links being significant  in their contribution to the global test statistic. instances of host switching relative to codivergence events were not particularly sensitive to cost assignment modulation and indicated preponderance to more switching than codivergence . when event costs were set to default values  or where switching was similarly down-weighted , instances of codivergence  by comparison to host-switching  were significantly less  where the total cost of random trees was greater than observed associations. these results are perhaps realistic given undisputed species-level phylogenetic congruence shown in the literature . significant instances of duplication events of pollinator lineages  were indicated by the analysis using default cost assignments.

event-based analysis of host associations between fig wasp lineages and ficus species implemented in treefitter. event costs weighting schemes  are ordered as follows: codivergence, duplication, sorting, and switching. redundant exemplars of the same fig wasp and host-species association were removed for the purposes of the test. * observed event significantly more than randomised trees p <  <dig> . ** observed events significantly less than randomised trees p <  <dig> . *** total event costs of observed trees were significantly less than the randomised trees p <  <dig> .

the general agreement between reconciliation tests of alternative topologies  indicates switching events exert a considerable influence, but does not alter the approximate numbers co-divergence events. phylogenetic uncertainty inherent in these types of analyses, acts to obscure accuracy in tree topology and divergence estimates. the results show that the tests of congruence are robust to changes in topology. incomplete representation of ficus population genetic variation might bias the frequency of codivergence events. however, the results provide a reasonable indication of switching and duplication in terms of ficus species. overall, these results show that pollinators are highly constrained to ficus subsections and switching between these higher taxonomic scales is rare and likely represents very ancient events . for instance, host associations of allotriozoon heterandromorphum grandi and f. lutea vahl, e. enriquesi  and f. ilicina, and an undescribed elisabethiella species and f. usambarensis warb. divergence timing estimates of both pollinator and ficus phylogenies show a high incidence of overlap among the 95% upper and lower posterior density intervals around the mean node ages. regardless of this uncertainty, host-switching events of single pollinator species appears to occur between ficus lineages that share a common ancestor that predates the origin of the pollinator populations. the age of the split between subsections sycomorus/urostigma and the subsections of section galoglychia is inferred as relatively ancient. inconsistency between the performance of coi and ets/its fragments and sampling effects likely explains this discrepancy in the reconstruction of deep nodes.

discussion
species of elisabethiella pollinating fig wasps reproduce on at least three ficus subsections. long branches tend to be associated with the most extreme instances of phylogenetic incongruence implying ancient host shifts have shaped contemporary relationships. although reconciliation tests indicated significant phylogenetic correspondence, host-switching patterns among pollinator lineages inferred to be below species level were more prolific than codivergence patterns. the discordance between the pollinator and ficus phylogenies was in part due to restricted transfer of elisabethiella and alfonsiella populations amongst closely related host species in subsection chlamydodorae. reconciliation analyses also detected duplication patterns that can be partly explained by fig wasp differentiation via host switching, or in allopatry on the same host species, followed by secondary contact with sibling lineages. repeated evidence of divergent putative species-lineages within what is considered the same 'good morphological species' of pollinator is consistent with a time lag between speciation of pollinators and that of hosts. together these findings suggest that diversification in pollinating fig wasps is driven by preferential host-use amongst closely related species in conjunction with ecological factors contributing to speciation.

phylogenetic reconciliation analyses  show significant evidence of independence between ficus and pollinator divergence due to either 'duplication' or 'host switching.' both these types of patterns largely preclude synchronistic wasp-host diversification hypotheses. however, the phylogenetic discordance reported here might also be a function of the dissimilar taxonomic scales used to test associations between wasps and hosts. for instance, breakdown in phylogenetic concordance patterns has been argued to be partly the result of genetic introgression and hybridization across different fig species  <cit> . the ficus phylogeny  considered only species and not intraspecific variation. it is difficult to determine the distribution of host traits that are actually targeted by pollinators and how closely correlated these traits are to host phylogeny. pollinator transfer between different ficus species should increase the tendency for post-speciation introgression between host lineages  <cit>  and presumably influence the evolution of fig wasp and host fig phenotypes. it would appear by the results presented in this study that the intensity of this type of genetic exchange should be predomiantly confined among closely related host species. therefore, underestimation of intraspecific genetic variation of hosts might result in overestimation of phylogenetic incongruence at the species level. however, multiple host species associations with a single pollinator species and associations of elisabethiella with several host subsections  indicates horizontal transfer between different ficus species does play some role in the evolution of wasp and host fig phenotypes.

generally, host-plant switches can occur between distantly  <cit>  or more closely related host lineages  <cit> . arguably, pollinator fig wasps occupy the most extreme end of host specificity observed in insect-plant associations. horizontal transfer by pollinator wasps between host lineages appears to be the most important contributor to the phylogenetic incongruence shown by this study . the patterns of incongruence can be interpreted in a number of ways. the empirical evidence of 'host switching' derived from the reconciliation simulations does not discriminate between the strength of fidelity between natal and novel host species or the duration of associations with different host lineages. thus, intensity of pollinator specialisation for a given host species and the magnitude of gene flow between pollinator populations sharing different host species are difficult to decipher  <cit> . the coi haplotype tree shows e. socotrensis, e. stuckenbergi, and a. binghami all possess low-level  genetic divergence among lineages on different host species . alfonsiella binghami populations are able to reproduce on f. stuhlmannii, f. natalensis, f. burkei, f. petersii, and f. craterostoma . however, this does not imply reproductive isolation among populations on different the host species. it is uncertain whether the pollinator populations that use alternative host species for reproduction are evolutionarily viable and become good species rather than go extinct. conversely, elisabethiella glumosae, e. socotrensis, e. stuckenbergi, and a. binghami show considerable divergence at the coi locus between lineages on the same host species. as these incipient/putative species of elisabethiella and alfonsiella belong to lineages that are mostly monophyletic and not polyphyletic, the haplotype tree  likely shows orthologous alleles that have evolved from a common ancestor  <cit> . one exception was the paraphyletic relationship elisabethiella glumsosae has with another lineage of this 'morphological species' and might reflect phylogenetic uncertainty or a morphologically similar but different species.

together, phylogenetic inference, statistical parsimony, and reconciliation analyses strongly imply that horizontal transfer among host species and lineage duplication are responsible for much of the phylogenetic incongruence. previous work  <cit>  has shown evidence of both lineage duplication and host switching while more recent studies have debated the role extinction and duplication play in explaining phylogenetic incongruence  <cit> . the results presented in this study do not refute any of these arguments, especially as extinction scenarios are difficult to substantiate. assuming wasp and host fig extinction was negligible, more pollinator species should have evolved in relation to host species given duplication or host switching, and this is consistent with other studies  <cit> . pollinator lineage 'duplication' was the least frequent of the significant tree reconciliation scenarios . eventual extinction by competitive exclusion of one pollinator species that shares a host with another has been used to explain phylogenetic incongruence  <cit> . phylogenetic relatedness has been shown to be a good predictor of competitive exclusion  <cit> . however, this hypothesis relies on saturation of available resources or niche and does not seem applicable to ficus. resource utilisation of ephemeral and unpredictable host species by fig wasps in general, occurs at low levels  <cit> . pollinator recruitment does not occur for all available ficus at any given period and should relax selection based on competitive exclusion. duplication is characteristic of insect populations being isolated from one another while the host is not and does not imply that a duplicated lineage has to arise on the same host species nor in allopatry  <cit> . host switching among different ficus species in sympatry might be responsible for pollinator lineage duplication via secondary colonisation of an ancestral host species that still supports a closely related pollinator lineage  <cit> . differentiation in allopatry between populations supported by the same host species followed by secondary contact would result in the same incongruence pattern. presumably, duplication results from either transfers among closely related sympatric host species, or in allopatry on the same host species, or a combination of both. the contribution of any one of these processes should depend on limitations set by ecological, physiological, and morphological specialisation  <cit> .

it is difficult to speculate accurately about the contribution of extinction to the observed phylogenetic incongruence shown in this or any other study. the relatively inconsequential number and non-significance of sorting events  detected in this study  might be a consequence of low extinction probability overall  <cit> . local extinctions have been caused by drought where up to  <dig> pollinator species became locally extinct  <cit> . this could ultimately lead to the local extinction of the corresponding figure. however, co-extinction of pollinator species might not be as influential when host species are broadly distributed over large regions such as southern africa. local extinction of pollinators might not be a threat due to relatively long-lived fig species and re-colonization from other source populations  <cit> . the relative lack of pollinator lineage loss from host lineages might be disguised by a predominance of co-extinction, but would not be detected without fossil evidence  <cit> . low levels of local endemnicity of ficus hosts sampled by this work suggest extinction might not play a substantial role in the low levels of phylogenetic correspondence.

evidence of phylogenetic congruence is indicative of restricted switching among closely related hosts. host species of elisabethiella and alfonsiella species are largely sympatric over their host distributions  <cit> . host switching per se could lead to sympatric speciation via disruptive selection. for sympatric speciation to operate, selection must overcome gene flow where different host species are geographically arranged such that insect dispersal does not limit migration between them  <cit> . fig wasp dispersing capability is believed to be substantial  <cit> . trade-offs between alternative host-species that reduce fitness on one host and increase fitness on another is necessary for disruptive selection and sympatric speciation  <cit> . however, the best-known example of disruptive selection is inconclusive and might have involved divergence in allopatry preceding secondary contact  <cit> . furthermore, it is difficult to test hypotheses that reject allopatry  <cit> . selection imposed by ecological interactions might also induce speciation. host adaptation to different habitat types in close proximity suggests ecologically driven speciation  <cit> . habitat selection and physiological tolerance limitations of pollinator populations to different environmental variables  <cit>  might support ecologically-driven speciation  <cit>  in both pollinator and ficus lineages. host transfers among closely related ficus species should be linked to life history constraints or preferential targeting of traits possessed by closely related phenotypes. fig wasp host-use behaviour has been shown to tightly adhere to specific volatile cues emitted by their host species  <cit> . this suggests that fig wasps track plant secondary chemistry where colonisation of a novel host occurs between chemically similar lineages, assuming convergence of chemical traits is absent  <cit> . such behaviour is characterized by delayed associate speciation and has been described as host tracking  <cit> . host tracking of gall wasps that specialise on oaks  <cit>  appears to be at least partially conserved due to galling life history constraints. rare and periodic switches were shown to occur between more distantly related host section lineages and this is similar to the patterns of host-use by pollinating fig wasps. limitations set by galling behaviour of pollinating fig wasps might have consequences for the breadth of host phenotypes that can be used for reproduction and between which pollen is transferred.

CONCLUSIONS
significant levels of concordant and independent divergence between pollinating fig wasp lineages and ficus species revealed several processes important to the evolution of the mutualism. this study supports recurrent backcrossing between closely related ficus species and very rarely between distantly related host lineages. evidence showing pollinator lineage duplication could have arisen both in sypmatry by switching among different host species, or allopatrically on the same host species, followed by secondary contact between sibling lineages. unrealized within-species genetic variation of both fig wasps and ficus need to be accounted for to accurately identify causal links between host lineage conservatism and speciation. analyses using single pollinator species-representatives might result in misleading interpretation of host associations and obscure patterns relevant to speciation processes. this work shows that the propensity for host transfer among closely related ficus species is variably independent of host speciation and permits ecological infuences on the speciation of pollinating fig wasps.

