BACKGROUND
the development of high-throughput genomic technologies , makes it possible to study dependencies and regulation among genes on a genome-wide scale. in last decade, the amount of gene expression data has increased rapidly necessitating development of computational methods and mathematical techniques to analyze the resulting massive data sets. in order to understand the functioning of cellular organisms, why complicated response patterns to stressors are observed, and provide a hypothesis for experimental verification, it is necessary to model gene regulatory networks . currently, clustering, classification and visualization methods are used for reconstruction or inference of gene regulatory networks from gene expression data sets. these methods generally group genes based on the similarity of expression patterns. based on large-scale microarray data retrieved from biological experiments, many computational approaches have been proposed to reconstruct genetic regulatory networks, such as boolean networks  <cit> , differential equations  <cit> , bayesian networks  <cit>  and neural networks  <cit> . among these approaches, boolean network methods and bayesian network methods have drawn the most interest in the field of systems biology.

much recent work has been done to reconstruct gene regulatory networks from expression data using bayesian networks and dynamic bayesian network . bayesian network approaches have been used in modeling genetic regulatory networks because of its probabilistic nature. however, drawbacks of bayesian network approaches include failure to capture temporal information and modeling of cyclic networks. dbn is better suited for characterizing time series gene expression data than the static version. perrin et al.  <cit>  used a stochastic machine learning method to model gene interactions and it was capable of handling missing variables. zou et al.  <cit>  presented a dbn-based approach, in which the number of potential regulators is limited to reduce search space. yu et al.  <cit>  developed a simulation approach to improve dbn inference algorithms, especially in the context of limited quantities of biological data. in  <cit> , xing and wu proposed a higher order markov dbn to model multiple time units in a delayed gene regulatory network. recently, likelihood maximization algorithms such as the expectation-maximization  algorithm have been used to infer hidden parameters and deal with missing data  <cit> .

the boolean network model, originally introduced by kauffman  <cit>  is also very useful to infer gene regulatory networks because it can monitor the dynamic behaviour in complicated systems based on large amounts of gene expression data  <cit> . one of the main objectives of boolean network models is to study the logical interactions of genes without knowing specific details  <cit> . in a boolean network , the target gene is predicted by other genes through a boolean function. a probabilistic boolean network , first introduced by shmulevich et al. in  <cit>  is the stochastic extension of boolean network. it consists of a family of boolean networks, each of which corresponds to a contextual condition determined by variables outside the model. as models of genetic regulatory networks, the pbn method has been further developed by several authors. in  <cit> , a model for random gene perturbations was developed to derive an explicit formula for the transition probabilities in the new pbn model. in  <cit> , intervention is treated via external control variables in a context-sensitive pbn by extending the results for instantaneously random pbn in several directions. some learning approaches for pbn have also been explored  <cit> . considering the same joint probability distribution over common variables, several fundamental relationships of two model classes  have been discussed in  <cit> .

in this paper, two important computational approaches for modeling gene regulatory networks, pbn and dbn, are compared using a biological time-series dataset from the drosophila interaction database  <cit>  to construct a drosophila gene network. we present the pbn and dbn approaches and grn construction methods used and discuss the performance of the two approaches in constructing grns.

RESULTS
a real biological time series data set  was used to compare pbn and dbn approaches for modeling gene regulatory networks  <cit> . the raw data was preprocessed in the same way as given in  <cit> . there were  <dig> gene samples with  <dig> time points available in drosophila melanogaster genes network through the four stages of the life cycle: embryonic, larval, pupal and adulthood  <cit> . an example network of drosophila muscle development is given in  <cit> , in which muscle-specific protein  <dig>  is treated as hub gene in their inferred network. we used a different subset of the genes which participate in the development of muscle. particularly, mlp84b and other genes which contribute to larval somatic muscle development were used to infer gene regulatory networks.

the d. melanogaster gene muscle lim protein at 84b  has also been known in flybase as lim <dig>  it encodes a product with putative protein binding involved in myogenesis which is a component of the cytoplasm. it is expressed in the embryo . table  <dig> shows the scores of mlp84b interacting with other related genes  <cit> .

here, we first selected  <dig> genes to infer grns using pbn and dbn. the constructed grns are shown in figure  <dig>  there exists  <dig> interactions totally within this small larval somatic muscle network  <cit> .  <dig> and  <dig> interactions in the network have been successful identified. most interactions between mlp84b and genes with high confidence have been inferred.

more comparison results of pbn and dbn are given in table  <dig>  where n is the number of nodes  in network and e the number of edges  among the nodes. pbn means that there are  <dig> nodes and  <dig> edges in that pbn simulation. to analyze the effect of network size on the inference accuracy, four  combinations, , ,  and , were considered for inferring gene network. for each combination, we randomly selected five subsets of genes of the same numbers of genes and edges from the drosophila gene network. for each subset genes, we inferred a gene network and retrieved the number of correct edges ce, miss errors me, and false alarm errors fe. for each combination , the average and range of ce, me and fe were calculated, as given in table  <dig>  a correct edge is the one that exists in a real network  and is successfully identified by the inference methods. miss error is defined as the edge between two genes that exists in a real network, but the inference algorithms miss or make wrong orientations. false alarm error is the edge that the inference algorithms create but does not exist in the real network.

we used the benchmark measures recall r and precision p to evaluate performances of inference algorithms for pbn and dbn. while different definitions for recall and precision exist  <cit> , in this paper, r is defined as ce/ and p is represented as ce/. the selection of subset genes in network was based on the current existing gene interactions and network diagram in the drosophila genes network  <cit> .

the results in table  <dig> show that for the same  case, dbn reduces miss errors but increases false alarms errors slightly. for all cases, dbn can identify more corrected edges than pbn and hence improve recall. the precision of dbn is better in three cases but worse in one case than pbn. for both pbn and dbn methods, recall and precision decrease if the number of genes increases. one can see that if more genes are selected for inferring grns, the network contains more edges and it is more difficult to successfully identify the interactions among genes. while the dbn method can give better recall of identifying genetic network interactions, it is more time-consuming than pbn.

discussion
it is challenging to infer grns from time series gene expression data. among thousands of genes, each gene interacts with one or more other genes directly or indirectly through complex dynamic and nonlinear relationships, time series data used to infer genetic networks have low-sample size compared to the number of genes, and gene expression data may contain a substantial amount of noise. different approaches may have different performances for different datasets. moreover, inference accuracy depends not only upon models but also on inference schemes. in this paper, we only select two representative inference algorithms for pbn and dbn to model the grns, respectively. it is desirable to perform a more comprehensive evaluation of the two approaches with different inference methods and to develop the more robust algorithm and techniques to improve the accuracy of inferring grns.

CONCLUSIONS
pbn-based and dbn-based methods were used for inferring grns from drosophila time series dataset with  <dig> time points obtained from the drosophila interaction database. the results showed that accuracy in terms of recall and precision can be improved if a smaller subset of genes is selected for inferring grns. both pbn and dbn approaches had good performance in modeling the gene regulatory networks. in all tested cases, dbn identified more gene interactions and gave better recall than pbn. the accuracy of inferring grns was not only dependent upon the model selection but also relied on the particular inference algorithms that were selected for implementation. different inference schemes may be applied to improve accuracy and performance.

