BACKGROUND
gene expression data  <cit>  and protein interaction data  <cit>  are two types of data produced in the bioinformatics field. we investigated whether human gene expression levels of interacting protein pairs show a higher degree of dependence than those of random protein pairs. to date, such studies have only been performed in lower organisms like s. cerevisiae  <cit> , in a comparative study using bacteriophage t <dig> and s. cerevisiae  <cit> , and in c. elegans  <cit> .

the first global evidence that genes with similar expression profiles are likely to encode interacting proteins has been provided in a study on s. cerevisiae by ge et al.  <cit> . they compared the probability of interaction between proteins encoded by genes that belong to common expression profiling clusters with the probability of interaction between proteins encoded by genes that belong to different clusters. they found that proteins from the intra-group genes are more than five times as likely to interact with each other as proteins from the inter-group genes.

tornow et al.  <cit>  used superparamagnetic clustering to integrate protein interaction and expression data from independent experiments in s. cerevisiae and revealed hypothetical functional protein modules. grigoriev  <cit>  demonstrated the similarity of expression patterns for a pair of genes and interaction of the proteins they encode for both the bacteriophage t <dig> and in s. cerevisiae. he found the mean correlation coefficients of gene expression profiles between interacting proteins to be significantly higher than those between random protein pairs.

recently li et al.  <cit>  analysed the transcriptome and interactome data of c. elegans and discovered that the correlation is lower than expected from observations in yeast.

a study by jansen et al.  <cit>  links gene expression on a genomic scale with protein-protein interaction in s. cerevisiae. they showed that while the subunits of the permanent protein complexes do indeed share significant correlation in their rna expression, the correlated expression is relatively poor in detecting transient interactions. in a comprehensive study about s. cerevisiae conducted by kemmeren et al.  <cit> , up to 71% of the biologically verified interactions could be validated with the gene co-expression approach. integration of expression and interaction data is thus a way to improve the confidence of protein-protein interaction data generated by high-throughput technologies. kemmeren et al.  <cit>  see enormous challenges in large genomes  because of poor annotation, non-standardised gene names, and more complex interactions with the environment.

RESULTS
expression levels of genes encoding interacting proteins are correlated more strongly
using five publicly available human expression datasets  and  <dig> human interacting protein pairs we compared the correlation of expression of genes encoding interacting proteins  with the correlation of random protein pairs . figure  <dig> shows that the distribution of empirical correlations is slightly shifted to the right compared to the distribution of correlations in the case of random protein pairs. this result implies that in our data interacting proteins are preferentially encoded by coregulated genes.

using mutual information as a measure of dependence the shift observed in figure  <dig> has almost vanished . the difference between empirical and background distribution of the medians is  <dig>  in the correlation case and < <dig>  in the mutual information case. this observation suggests that correlation as a measure of dependence is more suitable than mutual information when analyzing dependencies between expression levels of interacting proteins. in the methods section we give a possible interpretation of this observation.

using each dataset separately we tested the hypothesis that correlation between expression of genes encoding interacting protein pairs is not higher than correlation between expression of genes encoding random protein pairs. the detailed algorithms are given in the methods section. for four out of five analysed datasets this hypothesis is rejected at a significance level α =  <dig> . this means that in these four datasets the correlation of expression levels of genes which encode interacting proteins is statistically significantly higher than the correlation of expression levels in genes which encode random pairs of proteins.

increased p-values by use of mutual information instead of correlation
using mutual information instead of correlation as a measure of dependence between gene expression levels leads to increased p-values for each of the five datasets. thus the significance results of the analysis with correlation as dependence measure do not hold when using mutual information as dependence measure. this may be caused by the fact that most dependencies between expression levels are linear or close to linear and not parabolic which would preferentially be discovered by the mutual information measure. because the correlation coefficient seems to be the more appropriate measure of dependence for this analysis we do not discuss mutual information in the following.

expression of genes involved in different biological processes
assigning go-classes to the  <dig> protein interactions as described in the methods section below, for each dataset we analysed the expression levels of genes encoding interacting protein pairs both belonging to the same go-class. each of the figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> contains the box-and-whisker plots and the p-values of the twenty go-classes that yield the most significant results for the respective dataset and of the go-class biological process. our method is different from the methods used by the authors that generated the datasets that we analysed. thus our results cannot be compared directly with theirs. however, we feel that it is still useful to point out the similarity of some of our findings with the observations of these authors.

in the following we refer to the different datasets by the number they have received in table  <dig> 

in figure  <dig>  describing our results of the second expression dataset of higgins et al.  <cit> , many genes included in immune response and inflammatory response like interleukins, chemokine receptors, and chemokine ligands are highly correlated. this is an indication that the expression of chemokines and chemokine receptors is spatially and temporally restricted not only in the developing human kidney as reported in gröne et al.  <cit>  but also in the fully developed kidney.

zhang et al.  <cit>  analysed the changes in transcript abundance occurring during senescence in human fibroblasts, as compared with early passage proliferating cells or quiescent cells. figure  <dig> shows the results of our analysis of their expression dataset. in agreement with their findings we observed a strong correlation of genes that relate to apoptosis and genes that relate to transcription, but in contrast to them, we could not find significant correlation of genes that are involved in the cell cycle regulation.

zhao et al.  <cit>  analysed the effects of methylseleninic acid on the transcriptional program of human prostate cancer cells. corresponding to their observation of decreased expression of genes involved in all phases of the cell cycle lines that do not express androgen receptor protein we found significant correlation of genes involved in m phase, nuclear division, and mitosis. figure  <dig> displays the correlations and p-values of the top twenty go-classes we calculated for the fifth dataset. in consensus with the expectations genes encoding proteins that are involved in the cell cycle show the lowest p-values in our analysis.

discussion
this study investigates the relationship between two biological phenomena – gene expression and protein-protein interaction in h. sapiens – based on experimental data available in public databases. the study was prompted by the fact that in yeast and other lower non-mammalian organisms correlation is observed between expression levels of genes encoding interacting proteins. we were able to obtain convincing evidence of correlation using the pearson's correlation coefficient but could not confirm these results when taking the mutual information as a measure of dependence. using information on the go-class to which both proteins of an interacting protein pair belong, we were able to find significant correlations of expression levels mostly in accordance to existing knowledge.

the results of our investigation lend additional credibility to the protein-protein interaction data used.

once more interaction data are available, an analysis of the type presented here should be repeated including information on domains and phenotypes. for instance, one of the remaining open questions is whether the correlation of expression vectors of genes encoding interacting proteins with certain compared to random combinations of domains is statistically significantly different.

larger interaction datasets will also provide the opportunity to analyse the question if genes encoding interacting proteins are located on the same chromosome or even in close neighbourhood to each other more often than expected when assuming a random order. this problem has been addressed recently by hurst et al.  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we observed a statistically significant correlation between expression of genes encoding interacting proteins in h. sapiens. this finding points towards a biological mechanism which coregulates the expression of such genes. additionally it confirms the relevance of using gene expression data and interaction data in human genome analysis.

