BACKGROUND
in eukaryotic cells, the acto-myosin system is important for controlling the delivery of diverse cargos  <cit> . myosin motors exhibit directional stepping along actin filaments, and most of them are capable of binding cellular targets simultaneously. plant myosins mediate the targeting of diverse organelles, such as the golgi apparatus  <cit> , the er  <cit> , the mitochondria  <cit> , the plastids  <cit> , and the nucleus  <cit> . the acto-myosin system is also involved in the plant cell cycle  <cit> , cell division  <cit> , and auxin transport  <cit> .

some characteristics of myosin-related motility may be unique to plant cells. for example, peroxisomal targeting, which requires microtubules in animals, depends on actin microfilaments  <cit>  and myosin  <cit>  in plants. of the three major myosin classes in plants , members of myosin class xi are most often implicated in organelle movement  <cit> . class xi myosins are broadly distributed in the plant phyla and are represented by  <dig> isoforms in arabidopsis  <cit> . they share several features with myosin class v from animals and fungi. one of these features is the extremely long neck, usually consisting of  <dig> iq motifs, which may regulate myosin activity by binding to calmodulin or calmodulin-like myosin light chains  <cit> . according to the lever arm model, the high number of iqs amplifies the motor force of the myosin heads  <cit> . indeed, biophysical studies of class xi myosins from tobacco and characean alga revealed extraordinary properties: a processive movement along f-actin and strikingly high velocities that are 3– <dig> times faster than those of muscle myosin ii  <cit> . recent motility assays with an arabidopsis myosin, atmya <dig>  revealed relatively slow sliding velocities for this class xi myosin  <cit> , showing, however, good agreement with velocities found for cytoplasmic streaming in epidermal cells of arabidopsis  <cit> .

the cytoskeletal motility of plant cells is closely linked with the specific cellular architecture  <cit> . in general, the cortical f-actin underneath the plasma membrane supports peripheral structures, including the cell wall and the microtubular network. the fine mesh at the cortex protrudes into the region below, i.e. cytoplasm, with long cables of f-actin running through transvacuolar strands. these strands, radiating towards the nucleus and the cell poles, constitute the tracks for rapid cytoplasmic streaming, probably with myosin xi as the main motor. the fine f-actin mesh at the cell cortex probably functions in short distance transport and in co-action with cortical microtubules  <cit> , while the longer f-actin strands at the cytoplasmic regions may be linked to vigorous cellular motility. this raises the question of whether these different tasks of f-actin are paralleled by myosins.

here, we used live cell imaging to study the association of a class xi myosin from arabidopsis with actin filaments in plant cells. we transiently expressed a gfp-fusion protein containing the motor and neck domain of atmya <dig>  and looked for its localization in various cell-types. the gfp-mya2-head6iq produced a different f-actin labeling pattern than standard f-actin-binding proteins. from this observation, and considering the co-distribution of myosin xi with microfilaments used in organelle-transport, we conclude that myosin xi colocalizes with the cytoplasmic f-actin that runs through the transvacuolar strands. furthermore, we found that the gfp-mya2-head6iq, similar to other f-actin-binding proteins, interferes with cellular motility, possibly by blocking endogenous myosin.

RESULTS
the head of mya <dig> binds to the transvacuolar microfilaments but not to the fine f-actin mesh at the cell cortex
the motor head and  <dig> iqs from atmya <dig>  were introduced into the plant expression vectors pcat-gfp and pbin. the expression of the fusion protein, gfp-mya2-head6iq , in the cells of various plant species, resulted in the labeling of the actin filaments. western blot analysis proved that the mya2-gfp-head6iq was fully translated . in the epidermal cells of allium cepa , nicotiana benthamiana , or sinapis alba , f-actin decoration by this construct revealed a filamentous network extending towards the cell cortex with cables running through longitudinally and nucleus-oriented cytoplasmic strands.

this pattern was consistently displayed in all of the cells examined, without differences in the density of the microfilament network; it was independent of the expression level. since the net produced by gfp-mya2-head6iq applied to a typical f-actin organization, we tested for possible differences from other f-actin-binding proteins. we used gfp-talin  and rfp- or gfp-fabd <dig>  which contains the actin-binding domain  <dig> of arabidopsis fimbrin  <dig> known to produce the best quality of f-actin imaging in living plant cells  <cit> . for comparison, we introduced these fluorescently coupled abps into the same plant tissues .

because of the strong expression due to the double 35s-promoter, a fluorescent signal from the head-neck-fusion appeared very shortly after transformation  and was clearly associated with f-actin . however, the imaging of f-actin revealed that the gfp-mtn- and rfp- or gfp-fabd2-labelled networks were much denser than the relatively loose mesh visualized by gfp-mya2-head6iq . cells expressing the myosin head fusion protein showed a filamentous pattern with fewer cross-links and a slightly higher cytoplasmic background. after longer expression times, the gfp-mya2-head6iq signal became increasingly cytoplasmic and accumulated at diverse cellular sites . in addition, the gfp-mya2-head6iq produced a less constricted signal  than the rfp-fabd <dig> signal , which sharply outlined the filaments. thus, the myosin-decorated microfilaments often appeared slightly wider compared to those of other abps . at more than one day after transfection, the gfp-mya2-head6iq molecules were localized almost entirely in the cytoplasm , while the f-actin labeled by rfp-fabd <dig> remained unchanged for at least  <dig> h , and only disappeared at  <dig> d after transformation due to the normal decay in cellular viability .

the f-actin reporter rfp-fabd <dig> also produced different filamentous patterns near nuclei. the gfp-mya2-head6iq marked highly fluorescent short bundles in nuclei  or, occasionally, fluorescent patches in or close to nuclei ; these were absent in cells expressing rfp-fabd <dig> .

generally, rfp- and gfp-fabd2-labeled actin filaments appeared at various cellular sites: as microfilaments extending from the cell cortex towards the plasma membrane and as microfilaments running through cytoplasmic strands . microfilaments labeled by gfp-mya2-head6iq were found only in the more internal regions of cells. this was noted when the plane of the f-actin net was focused under the microscope, starting from the uppermost surface of cells . while comparing cells expressing either gfp-mya2-head6iq or rfp-fabd <dig>  it became evident that the plane of focus of the fabd2-labelled f-actin net was nearly identical to that of the cell surface . in contrast, the plane of the main focus of myosin-labelled microfilaments never appeared in these cortical regions , but localized in regions more than  <dig> μm below the cell surface .

gfp-mya2-head6iq dissociates rapidly and is not able to compete with other abps
to detect further differences in the labeling of f-actin, gfp-mya2-head6iq and rfp-fabd <dig> were simultaneously introduced into cells . the actin filaments were exclusively decorated by the fimbrin protein , while the myosin was localized entirely in the cytoplasm . to test whether other abps respond in a similar manner, due to possible competition for binding sites or limited space along f-actin, rfp-fabd <dig> was co-expressed with yfp-mtn. as result, a similar actin network was visualized, with fully overlapping signals . none of the abps displayed enhanced cytoplasmic localization. when yfp-mtn was co-expressed with gfp-mya2-head6iq, the myosin was again detached from filamentous actin . however, if the gfp-mya2-head6iq was co-expressed with a peroxisomal marker under similar conditions, its labelling ability was preserved .

the overexpression of gfp-mya2-head6iq interferes with fast organelle motility
we then questioned whether the mya2-decorated actin filaments reflect the main pathways of cytoplasmic movements. to address this, we focused on the cytoplasmic strands with the most vigorous streaming of organelles and compared their distribution with the gfp-mya2-head6iq signal distribution. we also examined peroxisome targeting in cells by co-bombardment of a peroxisomal marker and the gfp-mya2-head6iq or rfp-fabd <dig> fusions . the most vigorous movement of organelles was observed in longitudinal and nucleus-oriented strands that, along with the actin cables, occupied the more internal  regions of the cell. thus, peroxisome highways appeared to coincide with the thicker, more longitudinal filaments labeled by the gfp-mya2-head6iq  or rfp-fabd <dig> . the apparent elongated shape of a peroxisome that co-distributes with the myosin-labeled strand in the center of fig. 5h indicates that the organelle was moving rapidly during imaging.

because the transport of organelles is mediated by myosin, overexpression of other f-actin-binding proteins is expected to interfere with cytoplasmic streaming by blocking the attachment of myosin to actin filaments. as shown previously, such dominant negative effects on cytoplasmic streaming exist for gfp-mtn and gfp-fabd <dig> overexpression  <cit> . in order to examine the possibility that excess gfp-mya2-head6iq would interfere with the binding of endogenous myosin's to f-actin, we transformed cells of a. cepa and measured the maximal streaming velocities with time-lapse images. focusing only on rapidly moving particles to obtain "mean maximal speeds" has been proven to be a suitable approach for evaluating changes in cytoplasmic streaming  <cit> . in untransformed cells, the mean maximal speed was  <dig>  μm/sec; the expression of gfp-mya2-head6iq and gfp-fabd <dig> reduced this by about 40% without significant differences between the abps . in control cells expressing gfp alone, the mean maximal speed was significantly decreased by about 10% . thus, it appears reasonable to assume that the net reduction of the maximal streaming velocity caused by myosin or fimbrin overexpression was about 30%.

comparison of potential actin-binding regions in myosin head domains
structural analysis of the motor domain of myosins has revealed that various regions and surface loops are involved in the contact between actin and myosin  <cit> . to find possible clues to the interaction of mya2-head6iq with f-actin, we aligned the amino acid sequences of several loops and the teds rule site  <cit>  from all class xi myosins in arabidopsis, from dictyostelium myosin , and from skeletal muscle myosin  . the first actin binding site is partially conferred by loop  <dig> . in all sequences, it bears one or two negatively and 4– <dig> positively charged amino acids. thus, even though the loop  <dig> sequences are quite divergent, they have similar ionic strengths.

exceptionally, atxi-j has additional alterations in charge and polarity not present in the other sequences . a net positive charge also prevails in the secondary actin-binding site . in all sequences, a total of 15– <dig> hydrophobic amino acid residues are in a conserved region which contributes to the primary actin-binding . at the teds rule site, which is named on the basis of these amino acids, regulates motor activity by phosphorylation in some myosins  <cit> , all sequences have a unphosphorylatable and negatively charged glutamic acid . however, a phosphorylatable threonine residue is proximal to the teds site in ddmyoj and all plant myosins.

discussion
the biology of organelle streaming, in terms of myosin traveling along an f-actin filament, is enigmatic. although recent experiments with myosin tails have greatly contributed to our understanding of the target-related functions of plant myosins  <cit> , the interaction of plant myosins with f-actin is still not completely understood.

since myosins were identified as actin filament-based biochemical machines, a huge number of in vitro studies have identified their biophysical properties including velocity, power, and f-actin-binding affinity  <cit> . studying the interaction between plant myosins and f-actin has remained limited, perhaps, due to the difficulties in obtaining protein from tissue or heterologous expression systems. nevertheless, in order to study the interaction between arabidopsis myosin mya <dig> and actin filaments, we applied in vivo microscopy combined with transient expression assays. this approach took advantage of the complexity that occurs in live cells, including the presence of cytoskeletal interactors and factors that may be involved in acto-myosin function. the use of the previously described mya <dig> mutant  <cit>  was not possible due to a second deletion which has since been detected  <cit> . despite the success of gfp-mya2-head6iq expression in all plant species, we could not identify expressing cells of arabidopsis with a quality suitable for f-actin imaging. the small size of the cells and the diffusive tendency of the protein, together with problems of plant transformation, hindered our plan to maintain a homologous system.

gfp-mya2-head6iq signals produce a pattern coinciding with long cytoplasmic f-actin strands
as shown here, the head-neck of mya <dig> fused to gfp is functional and can recognize filamentous actin. in epidermal cells, it preferentially labeled microfilaments in cytoplasmic regions, i.e. in transvacuolar strands, and was rarely found in cortical f-actin. while other abps, such as gfp-fabd <dig> or yfp-mtn, associated more ubiquitously with f-actin, the gfp-mya2-head6iq was absent from the fine arrays at the cell cortex. the observation that the myosin head often paralleled pathways of fast streaming organelles suggests its association with f-actin populations specific to long-distance transport.

the question arises as to how this specificity is determined. actin assembly and remodeling is regulated by a variety of abps that recognize actin pools or control actin stability  <cit> . in pollen tubes, for instance, different actin polymer-binding domains fused to gfp label different populations of f-actin  <cit> . perhaps myosins distinguish between actin polymers based on the composition or dynamics of actin monomers, or with the help of other f-actin- or myosin-binding proteins. for instance, a less dynamic actin net could exist in cytoplasmic strands that may be recognized by myosins that support long-distance transport. myosin heavy chains present various possibilities for protein-protein interactions. repulsive as well as attractive forces produced by side chains, ion strength, phosphorylation, or the association with other proteins can positively or negatively influence the binding and motility of myosin motors . the ability to associate with filamentous actin can even be determined by the myosin tail  <cit> . in the case of mya <dig>  the tail itself lacks f-actin-binding capacity  <cit> .

according to motif recognition programs  <cit> , the head subdomains of mya <dig> include f-actin- and atp-binding sites and sites for phosphorylation. other motifs exist with yet unknown function, such as myosin n or sh3-like domains , murb , and farp . the neck domain , following the motor core, contains  <dig> iq motifs believed to bind myosin light chain binding, probably calmodulin  <cit> . a tropomyosin-like domain, which enhances f-actin-binding in conventional myosin ii, spans from amino acids 851– <dig>  based on this data it is not possible to predict the association of mya <dig> with actin filaments more precisely. f-actin affinity studies with other abps, such as fabd <dig>  revealed a stoichiometry of 1: <dig>  <cit>  and adf-mediated f-actin turnover was inhibited in the presence of mtn  <cit> . due to the difficulties of in vitro protein production, such assays were not performed for mya <dig>  in addition, we cannot draw conclusions about the natural situation of abps. dimerization of two head molecules via the coiled-coil domain, as proposed for other members of class xi  <cit> , was not expected because this domain was not included in our construct.

potential roles of mya <dig> in the cell nucleus
the increase of fluorescent signal in the nucleus following overexpression of abps appeared to be specific for mya <dig>  the fact that other abps, such as gfp-mtn  <cit>  and gfp- or rfp-fabd <dig>  never produced a similar accumulation cannot be explained by the different molecular weights, because myosin is much larger . the gfp-mya2-head6iq signals produced conspicuous rod-like formations in or at the nucleus, reminiscent of the actin bundles that were observed in grooves and invaginations of tobacco nuclei  <cit> . considering these findings and other observations showing myosin i-dependent nuclear transport of rna polymerase ii  <cit> , our observations suggest that mya <dig> may function in mrna export. whether mya <dig> has roles in the cell cycle and cell division requires further analysis.

the localization of gfp-mya2-head6iq suggests a weak in vivo f-actin-binding
the lower quality of filamentous signals induced by the gfp-mya2-head6iq, compared with other f-actin markers, is not fully explained by artifacts due to overexpression or protein degradation. the expression times for the transient assays were short and the protein expressed in leaves of n. benthamiana was still functional more than  <dig> d after transformation. secondly, even though the amount of the gfp-mya2-head6iq protein greatly exceeded that of rfp-fabd <dig> during the co-expression experiments, the cells still displayed a relatively normal rfp-fabd2-actin network. despite some minor declines in the quality of the cortical f-actin, we detected neither microfilament bundling nor depolymerisation . moreover, the quality of this net is similar to those in cells that expressed gfp alone . gfp is known to produce cytoplasmic signals that do not severely affect f-actin function .

nevertheless, the cytoplasmic signal patches observed in all gfp-mya2-head6iq expressing cells suggest that a considerable amount of molecules were not bound to actin filaments. this circumstance cannot be explained by a low number of binding sites on f-actin because myosin binds frequently to it  <cit>  and microfilament decoration was rich. even though the patches could indicate some disruption of the cytoplasmic actin strands, this subpopulation of long filaments was still preserved and able to sustain organelle trafficking quite similarly to gfp-fabd <dig> .

another explanation for the diffusive behavior of the myosin may be found in the inability of the head to compete with fabd <dig> or mtn. this inability might point to different mechanisms for f-actin-binding, which are possibly weaker for the myosin head. recent in vitro motility assays, with a recombinant head of atmya <dig>  revealed a high ratio of f-actin-bound states  <cit> . this suggests a tight contact with f-actin, in vivo.

however, the modular arrangement of abps as well as the potential co-action with other factors in vivo might influence f-actin binding quite differently. in a study of fp-fusions of arabidopsis fimbrin  <dig>  <cit> , f-actin-binding varied from a more distinct network to enhanced cytoplasmic localization, dependent on the sequence length used for the different constructs. therefore, the observed weak association of the gfp-mya2-head6iq with f-actin might be a consequence of the conditions in vivo or related to intrinsic features of the mya <dig> protein.

multiple points on myosins may coordinate actin filament association including surface loops and positive or negative charges. ideas about these contacts came from high-resolution crystallography of conventional myosin  <cit> . several similarities and conserved amino acids exist in myosin surface loops between different phyla. our comparison of the teds site and surface loops in myosins from chicken muscle, dictyostelium and arabidopsis also revealed conservation of important amino acid residues suggesting consistency in ionic strength and hydrophobicity. the high degree of functional conservation between the actin-binding residues in myosins of plants and other phyla might indicate a similar contact with f-actin. whether variations in individual sequences could affect this contact such as charge and polarity changes in loop  <dig> of atxi-j or the phosphorylatable threonine residue in class xi myosins  <cit>  and in ddmyoj can not be predicted. analysis of the kinetics and mechanical properties of plant myosins might be a key for enhanced understanding the mode of f-actin-binding. dissecting the modular organization of myosin by head truncations or mutations of amino acid residues might also help to resolve this question.

gfp-mya2-head6iq affects cytoplasmic streaming in a similar manner to other abps
in a former study, it was shown that the method of determining the maximal streaming velocity by the selection of only three of the fastest particles in a cell results in reliable values and small standard deviations  <cit> . in good accordance with these results including the velocity reduction following abp-overexpression in epidermal cells of arabidopsis, we observed that the maximal velocity was reduced by gfp-fabd <dig> by at least 30% in cells of a. cepa. the expression of gfp-mya2-head6iq had the same effect. in the light of competition experiments, in which the head of mya <dig> appeared to be displaced by fabd <dig>  a more severe reduction of streaming might have been expected for the myosin. interestingly, other authors reported that overexpression of the tail of myosin atxi-k nearly halted organelle motility  <cit> . that the negative effects caused by the displacement of endogenous myosins by gfp-mya2-head6iq molecules are comparable low may be explained by different scenarios.

first, a variety of myosin isoforms is usually present in a cell. numerous reports demonstrate that arabidopsis myosins of class xi share common functions, such as the transport of peroxisomes  <cit> . however, negative effects resulting from overexpression of their tails or rnai were shown to be highly variable among different isoforms  <cit> . compared to xi-k, mya2-induced effects were only moderate.

secondly, the well preserved streaming could again be a result of the complex structure that endows endogenous myosins with much better f-actin-binding ability. the double-head formation of myosin xi is known to be required for processive movement along f-actin  <cit>  and indispensable for fast organelle transport  <cit> . if dimerisation of endogenous myosins enhances f-actin-binding, which itself activates myosin atpases  <cit> , quite different myosin binding and sliding dynamics might be expected. finally, other subdomains, such as the tail  <cit> , could influence the acto-myosin complex and thereby protect endogenous myosin from disturbances by gfp-mya2-head6iq or other gfp-fused abps.

CONCLUSIONS
our study of mya <dig> in live plant cells by overexpression of its head-neck domain suggests that this myosin xi associates predominantly with cytoplasmic f-actin involved in the rapid movement of organelles. roles of mya <dig> may also exist in the cell nucleus. the comparison of potential actin-binding sites on myosins between different phyla did not allow making assumptions about different contacts between f-actin and myosin isoforms from arabidopsis. so far, under conditions in live cells, this contact seems to be weak in case of the mya <dig> head-neck either indicating a flexible binding mode or that other factors might be involved such as the myosin tail or other cytoskeletal proteins.

