BACKGROUND
grasslands, such as permanent meadows and pastures, cover about 37% of the agricultural area in europe
 <cit>  and harbour much of europe’s overall biodiversity
 <cit> . many plant and animal species are restricted to this habitat type
 <cit> . however, agricultural intensification and land-use change have caused major losses in grassland biodiversity
 <cit> . large amounts of fertilizer are applied in grassland to increase yield
 <cit> , allowing for earlier and more frequent cuttings in the growing season. additionally, herbicides may be used to suppress unwanted plant species . these management practices greatly affect both plant biomass and species composition. plant species that are adapted to low nutrient levels and low cutting frequencies are replaced by more competitive, faster-growing species
 <cit> , thereby altering the invertebrate communities of the grassland as well
 <cit> . frequent cutting disturbs the vegetation structure, removes food resources and kills many animals
 <cit> .

here, we present results from a novel grassland management and plant functional group manipulation experiment 
 <cit> , combining experimental variations in cutting frequency  and fertilizer application  with a plant functional group manipulation treatment , testing the enhancement of grasses or herbs independent of management changes. we focus on insect responses to plant species composition and management intensity. the resulting  <dig> treatment combinations were replicated six times, resulting in  <dig> plots laid out experimentally as a latin rectangle
 <cit> .

other studies on trophic interactions in biodiversity experiments have largely relied on artificially sown gradients in plant diversity
 <cit> . to achieve more realistic results, we performed this study in an old grassland and only changed the relative importance of grasses and forbs
 <cit> .

we chose leafhoppers, planthoppers and froghoppers , as model organisms as they are a highly diverse plant-sucking insect group that has been shown to be strongly influenced by management regime, productivity, vegetation structure and plant species composition
 <cit> . leafhoppers play an important role both as herbivores and as prey for higher trophic levels. their rapid reaction to changes in management regime makes them highly appropriate for ecological studies such as the one presented here
 <cit> . nevertheless, they have rarely been studied in this context .

we hypothesize that

 leafhopper abundance and diversity decrease with cutting frequency, as cutting acts as a mechanical disturbance.

 leafhopper abundance and diversity increase with fertilizer application, as this enhances quantity and nutritional quality of available food resources.

 leafhopper abundance and diversity increase under experimental enhancement of graminoid cover, because many species feed preferably on graminoids.

RESULTS
treatment effects on vegetation
we found  <dig> plant species,  <dig> graminoids and  <dig> forbs . plant shannon diversity was positively affected by higher cutting frequency  . in addition, fg manipulation significantly affected plant shannon diversity . plant shannon diversity  was highest in unfertilized, forb-rich plots with three cuts  and lowest in fertilized, graminoid-rich plots with one cut , but fertilizer effects were generally non-significant .

glm with gamma errors ; glm with logit link .

compr. veg. height = compressed vegetation height.

plant shannon diversity was strongly negatively correlated with the proportion of graminoids .

the proportion of graminoids was highest in fertilized, graminoid-rich plots with one cut  and lowest in unfertilized, forb-rich plots with three cuts . generalized linear models with logit-transformed proportion of graminoids  showed that the proportion of graminoids increased  <dig> -fold with fertilizer application . forb-rich communities had a significantly lower proportion of grasses than control plots , and graminoid-rich plots had significantly more grasses than forb-rich plots . the positive effect of fertilization on the proportion of graminoids was even higher under fg reduction of forbs .

treatment effects on leafhoppers
in total, we caught  <dig> adult leafhopper specimens from  <dig> species . twenty-eight species  were graminoid-feeders, and eight species were forb-feeders
 <cit> . the four most common species were arthaldeus pascuellus  with  <dig> % of total abundance, philaenus spumarius  , streptanus sordidus   and macrosteles viridigriseus  .

leafhopper shannon diversity  was highest in the most natural and least disturbed plots  with an average of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  species per plot . a consistently negative effect of three cuts per year  and of fg manipulation  was observed. fertilizer application had no direct effect on leafhopper shannon diversity. untransformed leafhopper species richness was positively affected by the proportion of graminoids . for a numerical summary of effects on leafhoppers, see additional file
3: table s <dig> 

direct and indirect treatment effects on vegetation
structural equation modeling  showed that an increasing proportion of graminoids, due to fg manipulation, reduced plant diversity . plant diversity  was mainly driven by forb diversity . fertilizer application and cutting frequency jointly influenced the latent variable “plant productivity”: fertilization increased plant biomass and height, while cutting reduced both. finally, higher plant productivity negatively influenced plant diversity . notably, alternative pathways, e.g. arrows from plant diversity to plant productivity, were not supported by our data.

direct and indirect effects of treatments and vegetation on leafhoppers
our structural equation model  indicated that there were both direct and indirect effects of treatments on leafhopper abundance and species richness.plant functional group manipulation was the most important direct driver of leafhopper species richness : in forb-rich communities, leafhopper species richness was lowest, while it was highest in grass-rich communities. in contrast, a higher percentage of grasses affected plant diversity negatively, while the number of plant species  had a positive effect on leafhopper species richness . cutting frequency had a negative effect on leafhopper species richness , whereas fertilizer application exhibited no effect on leafhopper species richness. finally, leafhopper species richness was strongly related to leafhopper abundance .

in addition to these direct effects, the treatments had indirect effects on leafhopper abundance and species richness. this was mediated by changes in plant productivity and plant diversity. an inspection of the standardized total effects  shows that fg manipulation was the most important driver of leafhopper species richness . in addition, the latent variable “plant diversity” positively affected leafhopper species richness .

* = p<  <dig> ;** = p<  <dig> ;*** = p<  <dig> .

discussion
the combination of management measures such as cutting and fertilizer application with the manipulation of functional group composition and their interactions led to contrasting sward types, ranging from nutrient poor, forb-dominated plots harbouring a greater diversity of plants to highly productive, graminoid-dominated plots with lower plant diversity. this had both direct and indirect effects on leafhopper species richness and abundance. leafhopper species richness profited directly from both a higher cover of graminoids  and from a lower cutting frequency. however, an indirect  effect on leafhopper species richness was caused by the higher proportion of graminoids due to forb reduction and management intensification, which both had a negative impact on plant diversity.

plant diversity had a negative effect on leafhopper abundance in our study, likely because the most abundant leafhopper species such as arthaldeus pascuellus were grass feeders
 <cit> . plant diversity was driven by forbs, whereas productivity was driven by graminoids, which benefit from fertilizer application. therefore, fertilizer application led to lower plant diversity but higher amounts of harvestable aboveground biomass.

the grassland in the experimental field site has been used for cattle grazing and hay making for at least a century. we therefore also expect the leafhopper community to be adapted to the long-term managed, grass-dominated vegetation, which may have led to the selection of the dominant species in the pool associated with grasses
 <cit> .

the increase in plant shannon diversity  with graminoid reduction, the decrease in plant shannon diversity with forb reduction, as well as the strong decrease in plant shannon diversity with increasing proportion of graminoids highlights the impact of the functional group manipulation on plant diversity and composition and the strong contribution of forbs to plant species richness. some graminoid species, such as agrostis capillaris, festuca rubra and dactylis glomerata, play a dominant role in productivity in our study, resulting in a negative species richness–biomass relationship
 <cit> .

plant diversity was particularly high under a higher frequency of three cuts per year, confirming that cutting can increase plant species diversity due to removal of nutrients from the soil
 <cit> . however, a moderate frequency of two cuts per year may improve plant species richness in our experimental field site even more, because the disturbance rate is lower but removal of nutrients is still high
 <cit> . this nutrient limitation only occurs when no fertilizer is applied and the harvested agb is removed. recent studies have shown that such grasslands may harbour a higher species number and proportion of forbs
 <cit> . this is in line with our finding of a higher number of plant species  under the regime of three cuts per year.

when fertilizer is applied, many herbs cannot efficiently use higher nitrogen inputs
 <cit>  and are out-competed by more competitive species
 <cit> , which are mainly graminoids
 <cit> . however, disturbance events such as mowing create niches for weaker competitors
 <cit> .

similar to morris
 <cit> , we observed a negative direct effect of higher cutting frequency on leafhopper species richness, but a positive effect on leafhopper abundance. however, we did not observe any significant direct responses of leafhopper species richness, abundance or shannon diversity  to fertilizer application, which are often described in the literature .

as indicated by our structural equation model, fertilizer application had a weak indirect negative effect on leafhoppers, mediated by the strong increase in aboveground primary production and its negative association with plant species diversity.

npk fertilizer application has been shown to result in a strong increase in aboveground biomass production
 <cit>  along with an increase in the proportion of graminoids
 <cit>  and a decrease in plant species diversity
 <cit> . in our study, this may have been due to the higher tolerance of the dominant graminoid species  to high cutting frequencies and their faster re-growth capacity after cutting, especially under fertilizer application
 <cit> .

many generalist leafhoppers can benefit from the improved performance of some graminoids under more frequent cutting, as the opposing effect of cutting frequency on leafhopper abundance  and leafhopper species richness  in the path diagram shows. some very abundant species , which are generalists on graminoids
 <cit> , show a clear preference for plots cut three times per year.

the negative direct effect of higher cutting frequency on shannon diversity  and species richness of leafhoppers indicates that the majority of leafhopper species found within our study site showed a clear preference for plots cut only once a year, which is in line with findings of other studies
 <cit> . this preference of leafhoppers for plots cut only once a year
 <cit>  is also supported by our finding of a negative impact of higher cutting frequency on vegetation height and biomass. this shows that reduced disturbance rate results in larger amounts of food resources and shelter due to higher vegetation and aboveground biomass. higher vegetation and aboveground biomass were shown by kőrösi et al.
 <cit>  to have a positive effect on leafhopper abundance and species richness. we expect the same to apply here, since lower vegetation height and biomass on plots cut three times per year also implies a lower amount of available food resources and therefore directly results in lower leafhopper species richness.

the strong positive direct effect of the herbicide-induced increase of graminoids on leafhopper species richness can be explained by the preference for graminoids displayed by most leafhopper species found in our study  which is in accordance with other studies
 <cit> .

higher plant diversity has also been shown to lead to more diverse leafhopper communities
 <cit> , which, in our study, is owed to less common but more specialized species .

the herbicide treatment was applied only once in  <dig>  nevertheless, this manipulation of plant functional group composition was efficient, since plant diversity and functional group composition were clearly affected even three years after the treatment.

although most leafhopper species are mobile
 <cit>  and our plots were small, the differences in management and plant functional group composition caused species sorting even on a small scale, which has also been found to be the case for highly mobile bees and wasps
 <cit> .

our experimental manipulation of established grassland shows very strong design effects on vegetation, therefore we expect the direct and indirect effects of management regime and vegetation parameters on leafhoppers to be even stronger in larger and unconnected areas
 <cit> . our findings also indicate that leafhoppers prefer certain microhabitats within a defined community.

to gain a deeper understanding of the interactions behind the design effects , we included vegetation parameters, such as vegetation height, harvested peak biomass and plant species richness  in our structural equation model.

the strong direct negative effect of higher cutting frequency and the positive direct effect of higher proportion of graminoids  on leafhopper species richness  may be explained by several causes:  plant diversity was greater with herbicide-induced reduction of graminoids, higher cutting frequency and without application of npk-fertilizer, since it was mainly driven by forbs. but species richness of graminoids, which are the preferred food source for the majority of the leafhopper species caught
 <cit>  did not increase. therefore, a higher proportion of graminoids indirectly reduced leafhopper species richness via its negative effect on plant diversity, but also had a direct positive effect due to greater availability of the preferred food source.

 cutting is a disturbance event and reduces food resource heterogeneity. the higher its frequency, the higher the direct impact on leafhoppers, since many leafhoppers are killed and removed during the process of harvesting
 <cit> . this is comparable to the negative effects of cutting on slug abundance within the same experiment
 <cit> .

 the lower vegetation height and biomass on plots cut three times per year also implies a lower amount of available food resources and therefore results in lower leafhopper species richness.

the proportion of graminoids increased with fertilizer application and also with application of forb-specific herbicides. this increased proportion of graminoids may explain the negative effect of vegetation biomass and height on plant diversity, as indicated by our structural equation model, demonstrating how a continuously managed agricultural system results in a high-yield but low-diversity system. this can be associated with less resilience towards sudden perturbation, microclimatic change and invasions
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that contrasting sward types may result from direct and indirect interactions among management regimes  and the manipulation of functional group composition.

leafhopper species richness increased indirectly in nutrient-poor, forb-dominated plots, since these harboured a greater diversity of plants and therefore greater food-resource heterogeneity. on the other hand, leafhopper species richness increased directly with higher graminoid cover in highly productive plots with lower plant diversity, likely due to a greater availability of graminoids as a preferred food source for many leafhopper species.

with our novel approach of combining variation in cutting and fertilization with a manipulation of plant functional group composition , we were able to disentangle the complexity of direct and indirect effects within a 100-year old, moderately species-rich and continuously managed grassland, based on the example of the easily accessible group of leafhoppers.

this study allows insights into the effects of grassland management on plant diversity, productivity and functional group composition and the trophic links and feedbacks on leafhopper species richness and abundance. furthermore, we show that - apart from food resource heterogeneity represented by plant diversity - the availability of preferred food sources and the frequency of disturbance are important drivers of leafhopper species richness, but interactions between biodiversity and management are highly complex.

