BACKGROUND
colletotrichum gloeosporioides is one of the most common and widely distributed plant pathogens in the world  <cit>  and has been associated with a minimum of  <dig> different host genera, either as a pathogen or as an endophyte  <cit> . the fungus can cause quiescent infections that result in severe losses due to pre- and post-harvest disease in a wide range of fruit crops  <cit> . c. gloeosporioides is considered to be a species complex but for practical reasons, it may be simpler to refer to the taxa as a species complex rather than using intra-specific designations  <cit> .

anthracnose disease is one of the most economically important post-harvest diseases affecting papaya  production worldwide  <cit> . c. gloeosporioides sensu lato is the pathogen most commonly associated with anthracnose of papaya. c. acutatum from papaya in australia was identified as an ex-epitype strain by simmonds in  <dig>  but it has not been reported in papaya since that time. there have been reports of c. truncatum  infecting papaya in trinidad  <cit> , japan  <cit> , florida  <cit> , thailand  <cit>  and in mexico  <cit> , but, anthracnose infection in papaya by c. truncatum is more widespread and severe in mexico than in other affected countries.

global trade in papaya is dominated by usa, canada and the eu  <cit> . independently, production and export of papaya as fresh fruit in the caribbean have increased over the last decade but the leading producers are latin and central america , asia and the pacific  and africa   <cit> . trinidad  is one of the larger member islands of the lesser antilles in the west indies. it lies in the caribbean sea, off the north-eastern coast of venezuela; east of trinidad is the atlantic ocean . it lies approximately  <dig> km from mexico. papaya is an important fruit crop in trinidad and two cultivars are commonly grown, ‘red lady’ and ‘tainung no.  <dig> - f <dig> hybrid’. mexico is ranked among the leading global producers of papaya  <cit> ; chiapas, veracruz, oaxaca and the yucatan peninsula are the main producing states  <cit> . ‘maradol’ is the most widely grown cultivar and the fruit is exported to several countries but mainly to usa and canada. the yucatan peninsula  in southern mexico separates the gulf of mexico from the caribbean sea. it lies in south-eastern mexico and is north of guatemala and belize. off of the eastern coast is the caribbean sea and to the west is the pacific ocean.

it is widely believed that papaya originated from the caribbean coast of central america  <cit>  through natural hybridization between carica peltate and another wild species  <cit> . historical records indicate that papaya seeds were taken to the panama coast and to the dominican republic before  <dig> and cultivation spread throughout the other islands of the caribbean by  <dig>  <cit> . there is currently no information regarding the population structure or demographic history of c. gloeosporioides sensu lato and c. truncatum as pathogens of c. papaya in any of the affected countries. cannon et al.  <cit>  purported that unique c. gloeosporioides sensu lato genotypes may become adapted to occupy specific geographical areas and which may be associated with host co-evolution. the genetic diversity of c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates is large where native or naturalized host species occur compared to locations where the host species has been recently introduced  <cit> . one of the underlying hypotheses of this study is the possible inter-dependence of the phylogeographic histories of c. gloeosporioides sensu lato, c. truncatum and the host; this hypothesis is, in part, based on the assumption that the caribbean coast of mexico is the centre of origin of the host species and the first distribution of the host species occurred in the caribbean by the 16th century.

one approach for deriving meaningful information on population genetics is by comparing multiple nucleotide sequences, including arbitrary regions  <cit> , and subsequent assessment of calculated patterns of diversity, tests of selection , gene flow, linkage disequilibrium and migration  <cit> . many potential markers are inappropriate for certain applications due to low sequence variability   <cit> . a comparison of genic regions that exhibit the greatest level of polymorphisms to allow intra-specific genotyping is preferred  <cit> . multi-gene phylogenetics have been used to systematically characterize colletotrichum species relationships  <cit> . for example, prihastuti et al.  <cit>  used six genes, the nuclear rdna internal transcribed spacer  region, partial actin , β-tubulin , calmodulin , glutamine synthetase  and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  to study c. gloeosporioides sensu lato and concluded that species relationships could be resolved.

knowledge of molecular demographic parameters, such as the effective population sizes, levels of species divergence, and rates of gene flow and migration patterns between populations will elucidate the biogeographic histories of the species, the evolutionary and adaptive potential of these pathogens; information on the genetic structure of these populations can also assist in the development of disease management strategies i.e. pesticide use, predicting resistance breakdown, production of disease resistant transgenics and in streamlining cultural practices  <cit> . understanding the evolution of epidemics ensures that the full spectrum of genetic variability of the pathogen population is captured or represented when screening against genetic host tolerance, fungicide sensitivity, or any research application where pathogen diversity is relevant to the outcome of any proposed intervention strategy.

the objectives of this study were to  compare the genetic and population structure of isolates of c. gloeosporioides sensu lato and c. truncatum from mexico and trinidad and  determine the demographic history of these isolates based on multi-locus sequence data.

RESULTS
isolate collection data for trinidad and mexico is summarized in table  <dig> 

key for morphotype designation for trinidad and mexico isolates:-

m <dig> : olive-colored colony with dark grey-colored conidial mass in center.

m <dig> : cream to light salmon-colored colony with no visible conidial mass in center.

m <dig> : cream to pink-colored colony with greyish-colored conidial mass in center.

m <dig> : white flocculose colony with no visible conidial mass in center.

m <dig> : tan-colored colony with no visible conidial mass.

m <dig> : light salmon to pale grey colony, with conidial mass in center.

m <dig> : white to light salmon colony, with conidial masses produced in concentric rings.

m <dig> : pale grey to black colony, with conidial masses produced in concentric rings.

m <dig> : white to orange colony, with orange conidial mass in center.

m <dig> : white flocculose colony, with orange conidial mass in center.

m <dig> : white to pale grey colony, with orange conidial mass produced in concentric rings.

m <dig> : white flocculose colony, with no visible conidial mass.

m <dig> : olive to black colony, with no visible conidial mass.

dna divergence
measures of dna divergence enabled gene-by-gene comparisons of the level of genetic diversity in each population under study. c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates from trinidad had more segregating sites  in the act and its sequences than those from mexico as well as a greater number of mutations  and haplotypes  than mexico. haplotype diversity  was highest for act but there were near equivalent values for the other three genes. the highest number of haplotypes  was obtained for the act gene, followed by gpdh, β-tub and its ). only one haplotype of the gpdh gene was shared between the two populations.

the c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates from mexico had a higher number of nucleotide differences  and consequentially, higher nucleotide diversity  than trinidad for all four genes. a comparison of dna divergence parameters for the four genes indicated that gpdh had the highest cumulative number of polymorphic sites, total number of mutations and the highest average number of nucleotide differences followed by act, its and β-tub had the lowest. there were no fixed differences among the four genes. watterson’s theta  was also higher for act and its  while theta was higher for gpdh and β-tub . generally, the conservation threshold  was highest for β-tub and its genes  and lowest for gpdh . there were no shared mutations in the β-tub gene; gpdh and its had a near equivalent number of shared mutations and act had the least number. the average and net number of nucleotide substitutions per site between populations were highest for gpdh, followed by act, β-tub and its ). the average number of nucleotide differences  and consequentially, nucleotide diversity  were highest for gpdh, followed by act ).

c. truncatum isolates from trinidad had no polymorphisms in the sequences of three gene regions  analyzed and as such certain population genetics statistics could not be computed. the mexico population had greater diversity for all parameters. none of the haplotypes were shared between the two populations except for one haplotype of the gpdh gene. the conservation threshold was highest for β-tub and its and near equivalent for trinidad and mexico. gpdh had the lowest conservation threshold value for both populations  and 3).

genetic differentiation and population structure
an assessment of the genetic differentiation was conducted to determine the level of sub-population structuring for all isolates and for each gene analyzed. hudson’s snn statistic also suggested that the two populations were highly structured; snn values were significant and close to  <dig>  for two genes . the snn value for the gpdh gene region was intermediate between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ). for the its gene regions, however, the snn value was closer to  <dig>  than to  <dig> . hudson’s snn statistic indicated that the c. truncatum populations were highly structured  for act, β-tub and its gene regions but, the snn value for the gpdh gene region was close to  <dig>  ).

structure was used to determine population sub-division for all gene regions. individuals with membership coefficients of qi ≥  <dig>  were assigned to a specific genetic cluster. sub-division was detected for all gene regions of all isolates of the c. gloeosporioides sensu lato trinidad population with a maximum of three genetic clusters for its and two clusters for the other three gene regions. sub-division was also detected in the c. gloeosporioides sensu lato mexico population with a maximum of two genetic clusters for act, gpdh and β-tub. however, sub-division was not detected for the its gene region for the mexico isolates and a single population appeared to predominate . evidence of gene flow was apparent for the two populations of c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates for three of the four genes ).

* p ≤  <dig> .

** p ≤  <dig> .

*** p ≤  <dig> .

**** p ≤  <dig> .

with respect to c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates, amova indicated population sub-structuring for the trinidad and mexico populations; of the total observed variation in the act gene, 13% was between populations and 87% was within populations. for the other three genes, there was  <dig> to 10% variation between populations and  <dig> to 91% variation within populations .

for c. truncatum isolates, after  <dig>  permutations, gst values were high for three genes  and ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  suggesting a high level of genetic differentiation between c. truncatum populations. however, amova identified that of the total observed variation in the act gene, 57% was between populations and 43% was within populations; in the gpdh gene it was 5% and 95%; in the β-tub gene it was 71% and 24%; in the its gene it was 82% and 18%, respectively . there was no gene flow between the two c. truncatum populations for any of the genes ).

there was no significant linear relationship between genetic and geographic distances and therefore, a poor fit of the isolation by distance model for c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates from trinidad and mexico. isolation by distance could not explain the genetic structure of the trinidad and mexico populations .

significance level at p ≤  <dig> .

linkage disequilibrium
significant ld was found for all four genes in c. gloeosporioides sensu lato populations from trinidad and mexico. there was a higher percentage of significant pairwise comparisons for three genes  for the trinidad population than for the mexico population. for mexico, the highest percentage of ld was found in the gpdh gene . for the trinidad population, the highest percentage of ld was found in the β-tub gene  . ld could not be computed for c. truncatum isolates.

population size changes
 tests of neutrality-tajima’s d and fu and li’s f* and d* tests

neutrality tests were used as an indication of recent population expansion. strongly negative and significant values suggest recent population expansion or selection. tajima’s d values were negative for all four genes in the c. gloeosporioides sensu lato mexico population and for three genes  in the c. gloeosporioides sensu lato trinidad population. only β-tub  had positive d-values but these were not significant at p ≤  <dig> . for both trinidad and mexico populations, three genes, act, gpdh and its, had tajima’s d-values that were less than zero and were significantly different from the neutral assumption which suggest recent population expansion or selection. the f* statistic was negative and significantly  deviated from the assumption of neutrality for three genes  in the trinidad population. the d* statistic significantly deviated from the null hypothesis for its  at p ≤  <dig> , but act  and gpdh  deviated significantly at p ≤  <dig>  and were large negative values ).

the c. truncatum population from trinidad could not be assessed because there were no polymorphisms for three of the four genic regions. data for only the act gene  was analyzed, but none of the tests of neutrality were significant at the stipulated alpha levels. tajima’s d and fu and li’s f* and d* statistics were negative and significant at p ≤  <dig>  and p ≤  <dig>  levels respectively for the β-tub  ).

 mismatch distribution and demographic expansion

mismatch distribution was used to determine patterns of demographic expansion for all populations and to test the null hypothesis of population growth. with respect to c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates, none of the sums of squared deviations  of mismatch distribution was significant for the act and gpdh gene regions indicating a fit to the demographic expansion model tested. these results suggest that the deviation from neutrality was due to recent population expansion. for both populations, the sums of squared deviations  of mismatch distribution for β-tub and its gene regions were significant which provides evidence to reject the null hypothesis of recent population expansion ).

based on the demographic data for β-tub, the potential role for selection in shaping substitution rates within the β-tub -protein coding gene was assessed using dnasp by comparing the number of synonymous and non-synonymous substitutions within populations to those between populations. the ka to ks ratio was greater than one . these results in conjunction with the non-significant ssd model values obtained from mismatch distribution tests suggest that this gene may be under positive selection in both populations. although the its region is transcribed, putatively conserved domains as a translated protein were not detected and no coding regions were identified thus, the ka:ks ratio could not be determined. however, the demographic data and the large significant negative values obtained for fu and li’s d* statistic for both populations, suggest that the its region may also be under selection.

conservative estimates of the putative time of population expansion from tau , calculated by arlequin after  <dig>  re-samplings, indicate that the trinidad population has a more recent evolutionary history and that the mexico population is older and would have diverged earlier than the trinidad population based on analysis of act, gpdh and β-tub gene regions.

the sum of squared deviations  of mismatch distribution was significant for act and β-tub gene regions of the mexico c. truncatum population indicating a fit to the demographic expansion model tested. the sum of squared deviations  of mismatch distribution was not significant for the gpdh and its gene regions of the mexico population which provides evidence to reject the null hypothesis of recent population expansion ).

* p ≤  <dig> .

** p ≤  <dig>  for f* and d* statistic.

*** p ≤  <dig> .

nc not computed.

migration estimates
historical migration between populations was estimated. for c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates, there was evidence of asymmetrical migration from mexico to trinidad for three gene regions  as migration rates were higher for the mexico to trinidad direction than in the opposite direction. β-tub was shown to be under positive selection and would not be exchanged in gene flow events. the effective population size was also larger for mexico than for trinidad. the number of immigrants was higher for the trinidad population for the three genes than for the mexico population. the  <dig> %,  <dig> % and the mean likelihood estimates are presented . gene flow estimates from gst values corresponded to migration patterns deduced by migrate.

 <dig> % to  <dig> % confidence intervals given in parentheses.

 <dig> x scalar =  <dig> for haploids.

discussion
the objectives of this study were to  compare the genetic and population structure of isolates of c. gloeosporioides sensu lato and c. truncatum from mexico and trinidad and  determine the migration pattern of these isolates based on multi-locus sequence data.

a higher degree of haplotype and nucleotide diversity is expected in an ancestral population  <cit> . we found greater nucleotide diversity in the mexico c. gloeosporioides sensu lato population for all genes and greater haplotype diversity in the trinidad c. gloeosporioides sensu lato population for act and gpdh genes alone. the measures of haplotype diversity, hd, can range from zero, meaning no diversity, to  <dig> , which indicates high levels of haplotype diversity  <cit> . with respect to the mexico population, all four genes had a haplotype diversity index that ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  indicating high levels of diversity for each gene. with respect to the trinidad population, all four genes had a haplotype diversity index that ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  indicating a wider range of diversity spanning moderate to high levels of diversity for each gene. if mexico was the older ancestral population and trinidad the more recent population, then there would be more time for accumulation of nucleotide changes and nucleotide diversity in mexico compared to trinidad. this would explain the differences in nucleotide diversity in the two populations. further, if gene flow occurred and was contemporary and recurrent, then the haplotype characteristics would be similar for both populations. because there was only one shared haplotype  between the two populations, gene flow is likely to have been a past event. another explanation for the differences in haplotype characteristics would be that more intensive sampling may be required to detect shared haplotypes, however, this may be unlikely as the same pattern of haplotype dissimilarity was found for all four gene regions. gene flow is unlikely to have contributed significantly to the observed haplotype distribution across coasts. we interpreted this gene flow between c. gloeosporioides sensu lato populations as an historical event that occurred prior to isolation and divergence.

divergent selection can impose variable genome-wide effects. for example, gene flow can override genetic differentiation at all loci except those that are directly under selection or are linked to selection  <cit> . this explains the higher level of genetic differentiation  in the β-tub gene region which was under selection and was not exchanged in gene flow events.

we also examined the data for the occurrence of sub-division in our study isolates based bayesian posterior probability, amova, and hudson’s test statistics. we found significant within-population sub-division of the trinidad and mexico c. gloeosporioides sensu lato populations and low levels of genetic divergence among populations for three of the four gene regions . hudson’s snn statistic indicated that the c. truncatum populations were highly sub-divided for act, β-tub and its gene regions.

mutation rates are usually low but can vary according to loci and pathogen and the effects are detectable when operating in conjunction with other evolutionary forces e.g. population size  <cit> . in this study, watterson’s estimator of mutation rate indicated that mutation may have some role in shaping the population structure of c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates in trinidad and in mexico especially with respect to the act and gpdh gene regions. the lowest number of mutations was obtained for the β-tub gene region which is expected as this region was shown to be under positive selection. strong positive selection causes a reduction in levels of nucleotide diversity  and the β-tub gene region had the lowest level of nucleotide diversity of all four gene regions in the trinidad population. mutation in the its region would be tolerated once the transcribed product is not negatively affected and compensation mechanisms would be engaged because of the multi-copy number nature of this region.

linkage disequilibrium  can be influenced by a number of evolutionary factors including selection by selective sweeps in which the alleles at flanking a locus under selection are rapidly swept to high frequency or fixation due to genetic hitchhiking  <cit> . population expansion can also affect ld as large populations could maintain genetic diversity generated by past recombination events even if they occurred rarely with weakly acting genetic drift to reduce variation. population expansion has been detected for both populations in this study. generally, the effective population size was also found to be greater for the mexico population. if there is ld between loci in the source population, then this will contribute even further to non-random association of alleles which may explain why the trinidad c. gloeosporioides sensu lato population appeared to have a higher ld than the mexico population.

to further examine evolutionary forces acting on the populations of c. gloeosporioides sensu lato three neutrality test statistics  were used in this study to examine the sequence data for departure from neutrality. d* and f* test statistics for all except the β-tub gene were significant and negative in the trinidad population, which we cautiously interpreted as rejection of the null hypothesis of constant population size. other evolutionary processes such as genetic hitchhiking or extinction and recolonization events  <cit>  can cause fluctuation in population size. additional analyses may be necessary to discriminate between the two competing alternative hypotheses that may explain changes in population size.

the mexico population of c. truncatum isolates had higher haplotype and nucleotide diversity than the trinidad population. but, again, there was only one shared haplotype  between the two populations. there was no evidence of gene flow, however, for these populations and it is likely that the haplotype characteristics reflect distinct populations that shared no past or historical migration events. watterson’s estimator of mutation rate was also lower for all four genes for c. truncatum isolates than for c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates. it is likely that the c. truncatum populations emerged independently of each other. tapia-tussel et al.  <cit>  suggested that co-cultivation of pepper and papaya may have given rise to isolates with the ability to infect and cause disease in papaya. in trinidad, co-cultivation of both host species is also common. further research on tracking the migration of c. truncatum infecting a range of different hosts  would reveal more information of the possible introduction of this species to trinidad and mexico.

structural and metabolic genes that are transcribed and then translated into protein products are often used in phylogenetic analysis and for taxonomic demarcation, but their use in population genetics studies may result in a bias in the evolution of genes that are under strong selection. nucleotides in third or wobble codon position may not be subject to positive selection but, their frequency in a given population could be affected by proximity to selected regions through genetic hitchhiking  <cit> . in smaller and younger populations, there is also a question of insufficient variation in the genes to make substantiated explanations with respect to population genetics. the study of a single gene is also of particular concern because its genealogy may not truly reflect the history of populations or species under study and would lead to erroneous conclusions.

the relative migration rates of hosts and pathogens play a key role in determining patterns of local adaptation, which can in turn influence patterns of disease. migration influences the evolution and sustainability of genetic diversity in host resistance, pathogen virulence genes, and fungicide resistance  <cit> . it is valuable to explore and track the co-evolutionary dynamics of host-pathogen systems. the rational use of integrated management strategies requires an understanding of pathogen adaptive dynamics. several evolutionary phenomena, such as genetic drift, migration, and selective pressure make it possible for an escape mutant to emerge  <cit> . understanding the evolution of epidemics, therefore, can lead to essential changes in the criteria for disease and quarantine control. such data are needed to predict the emergence, genetic and population structure, and differential pathogen responses to treatment especially in highly diverse and complex ecological landscapes like the agricultural setting.

CONCLUSIONS
with respect to c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates, population expansion has been detected for both populations in this study, however, the effective population size was found to be greater for the mexico population. there was also evidence of asymmetrical migration from mexico to trinidad for three gene regions . mexico appeared to be the older ancestral population and trinidad the more recent population based on the estimated demographic parameters. this would explain the differences in nucleotide diversity in the two populations. there were also dissimilar haplotype characteristics for both populations. watterson’s estimator of mutation rate indicated that mutation may have some role in shaping the population structure of c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates in trinidad and in mexico especially with respect to the act and gpdh gene regions. the data suggests that c. gloeosporioides sensu lato isolates may have co-migrated with the host to trinidad. there was no evidence of gene flow between the c. truncatum populations and it is possible that these populations emerged independently of each other.

pathogen populations may be bound by differently-acting evolutionary processes including recent or historical migration events, selective sweeps and extinction-recolonization processes typical of agroecosystems  <cit> . strong priority effects may enable genetic differentiation that is sufficient to move populations along independent evolutionary routes. understanding the genetic structure of pathogen populations will assist in determining the evolutionary potential of the pathogen and in identifying which evolutionary forces may have the greatest impact on durability of resistance. intervention strategies that target these evolutionary forces would prove to be the most practical.

