BACKGROUND
hyperbaric oxygen therapy  is an effective treatment for decompression sickness  and arterial gas embolism  <cit> , and is proposed as an adjunct in treating ischemia-related inner ear diseases  <cit> , sudden deafness  <cit> , and acute noise trauma  <cit> . the efficacy of hbot in treating these inner ear diseases is variable, and the mechanism of hbot in inner ears is still not fully understood. for example, hbot has been proposed to be an effective rescue strategy for noise trauma  <cit> ; however, one study found that hbot had an adverse effect on the inner ear after noise trauma  <cit> . consequently, a high degree of medical skepticism still exists regarding the role of hbot in treating inner ear diseases. more studies on the functional and cellular changes that occur after hbot may help to elucidate these conflicting results.

nitric oxide  has important roles in cochlear physiology, including neurotransmission  <cit> , regulation of cochlear blood flow  <cit> , homeostasis of cochlear endolymph  <cit>  and induction of cytotoxicity under pathological conditions  <cit> . no is synthesized by nitric oxide synthase  with the conversion of l-arginine to l-citrulline. three isoforms of homologous nos have been identified, including two constitutive isoforms  and one inducible isoform   <cit> . constitutive nos is calcium/calmodulin dependent and is continuously expressed, whereas inos is calcium independent and is expressed in response to specific stimulants such as cytokines or endotoxins  <cit> . constitutive isoforms of nos, both nnos and enos, are expressed in the normal cochlea  <cit> , but inos is expressed in the cochlea only after exposure to some pathologic conditions such as endotoxins  <cit> , ischemia  <cit>  or acoustic trauma  <cit> . the aim of this study was to investigate the effects of repetitive hbot on cochlear function and the expression of nos isoforms by means of immunohistochemical staining.

RESULTS
no significant auditory changes after repetitive customary hbot
all the animals in the experimental group tolerated the entire course of hbot without signs of irritability or discomfort. all eardrums were checked and were found to be normal before the study. after  <dig> hbot sessions, one ear still remained clean and normal without evidence of hemorrhage , one ear showed slight vascular injection , seven ears developed minor hemorrhage  and one ear developed moderate hemorrhage in the eardrum . no hemotympanum or eardrum perforation was observed in the experimental group. the eardrum condition in the control group remained normal throughout the duration of this study.

tone burst auditory brainstem responses  were used to assess hearing before and after hbot . in the control normobaric air  and experimental hbot groups, the intragroup hearing level prior to the study and four weeks after commencing the study did not significantly differ. although slight elevated hearing level at  <dig> khz was recorded in the nba group, the intergroup hearing level between the control nba and experimental hbot groups did not significantly differ .

differential expression of nos isoforms in different cochlear regions after repetitive hbot
the immunohistochemical results for nos expression in cochleae from the control group and the experimental group are illustrated in figures  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  in the control nba group, nnos exhibited moderate immunoreactivity in the spiral ganglion and stria vascularis and faint immunoreactivity in the modiolar nerve fibers, afferent nerve fibers, limbus and organ of corti . in the experimental hbot group, enhanced immunoreactivity of nnos was present in the spiral ganglion, modiolar nerve fibers, afferent nerve fibers and stria vascularis . using semi-quantitative morphometric analysis, significant enhanced immunoreactivity of nnos was noted in the nerve fiber bundles in the hbot group .

immunohistochemistry using the antibody against enos in the control nba group revealed moderate immunoreactivity in the stria vascularis, organ of corti, limbus, spiral ganglion and modiolar blood vessels . in the experimental hbot group, enhanced immunoreactivity of enos was present in the spiral ganglion, modiolar blood vessels, limbus and stria vascularis . significantly enhanced enos immunoreactivity was noted in the modiolar blood vessels, nerve fibers and the limbus in the hbot group .

immunohistochemistry using the antibody against inos did not reveal immunoreactivity in the nba and hbot groups, as compared with the inos expression in the positive control spleen tissue .

to assess the co-expression of nnos and enos in the cochlea after hbot, we used confocal microscopy . co-expression of nnos and enos was noted in the spiral ganglion and stria vascularis. single expression of enos immunoreactivity was also present in the capillaries within the spiral ganglion region . in the cochlear modiolus, nnos was expressed in the modiolar nerve fibers, whereas enos was expressed along the modiolar blood vessels.

no obvious dna fragmentation after hbot by tunel assay
to determine if there was any dna fragmentation or apoptotic cell death after hbot, we used the tunel assay to evaluate the cellular changes after hbot. dna fragmentation and possible apoptotic cell death were observed in the positive control obtained from brain tissue with penetrating damage ; however, no dna fragmentation was found in the cochlear tissue after hbot .

discussion
our present study, which was designed according to the hbot protocol used in clinical practice for acute cerebral ischemia  <cit> , provides a functional measurement and immunohistochemical evidence of cochlear nos changes as well as morphological evaluation of the eardrum after hbot. hbot effects on hearing may be caused by decompression illnesses or barotraumas to the middle or inner ear  <cit> . a slight increase in hearing sensitivity is evident in animals receiving extreme acute hyperbaric conditions  <cit> . the increased hearing sensitivity may be caused by changes in the tympanic membrane and middle ear impedance, which may be altered under hyperbaric conditions  <cit> . in this study, the tympanic membrane and mesotympanum were observed by otoscopy after repetitive hbot. no significant changes in tympanic membrane or mesotympanic injury were observed, with the exception of one ear with moderate hemotympanum . because of their widely patent eustachian tube, guinea pigs have been shown to tolerate compression well, with minimal middle/inner ear barotrauma even under rapid compression rates such as  <dig> ata in  <dig> seconds  <cit> . any barotrauma due to repetitive hbot might gradually improve without significant sequelae  <cit> . therefore, the hearing threshold was not significantly affected by the minor changes in the eardrum and middle ear .

transient deterioration of cochlear function during the initial exposure to hbot has been observed in guinea pigs and rabbits, which has been attributed to the vasoconstriction of cochlear blood vessels during the initial exposure to hyperbaric oxygen  <cit> . hyperbaric oxygen causes a slight morphologic alteration in the outer hair cells of newborn rats  <cit> . after repetitive hbot, minor changes in cochlear function were observed including cochlear degeneration, inner hair cell damage and hemorrhage in the perilymphatic space and scala media  <cit> . the cochlear hemorrhage phenomenon after hyperbaric treatment was also reported in rats  <cit> . the cochlear changes observed in these studies  <cit>  might be caused by higher-pressure conditions and a more-rapid compression-decompression process, since cochlear degeneration and hemorrhage were more pronounced under higher-pressure conditions   <cit> . in that study, the rate of compression was > <dig>  ata/min, and decompression was about  <dig>  ata/min. these conditions exceed the standard hbot protocols used in clinical practice. with slower compression-decompression procedures and more modest maximum compression pressures, no significant changes in hearing levels were observed after repetitive hbot  <cit> . in this study, a slower compression-decompression protocol  and lower peak pressure  more closely mimic the current hbot protocol used in clinical practice. it is of note that no significant shifts in the hearing level or cell death by tunel assay were observed before and after hbot using this animal model. we suggest the results of this study more accurately reflect the clinical effects of hbot on the cochlea.

the elevation of the hydrostatic pressure while breathing oxygen during hbot will increase the partial oxygen in target tissues providing the animal has a functioning cardiorespiratory system and the target tissue is perfused. after hyperbaric treatment at  <dig>  ata with pure oxygen, partial oxygen pressure in the cochlear perilymph may increase by up to 5-fold  <cit> . by this mechanism, hbot may be effective for sudden sensorineural hearing loss where ischemia may be the cause  <cit> . this may also include noise-induced hearing loss  <cit> . in addition to elevation of partial oxygen pressure, oxidative stress is believed to be fundamental to the therapeutic mechanisms for hbot  <cit> . reactive nitrogen species, including no, contribute to this stress  <cit> . no is synthesized by different nos isoforms and the expression of these isoforms varies both from tissue to tissue and with the application of hbot. we might therefore expect a range of effects from hbot in different target tissues. the cerebrovascular responses to hyperoxia may be modulated by enos and nnos-derived no  <cit> . hyperbaric oxygen exposure may enhance sensitivity to seizure because of the early cerebral vasoconstriction by enos-derived no  <cit> . repetitive hbo exposure may further elevate no content in the brain, which may promote an imbalance between glutamatergic and gabaergic synaptic function and the genesis of oxygen-induced seizures  <cit> . in contrast, hbot preconditioning may protect myocardium from subsequent ischemia/hypoxia by way of upregulating enos  <cit> . therefore, hbo may be beneficial or harmful depending on the type of tissue.

different nos isoforms are expressed in discrete regions of the cochlea. the constitutive nos, nnos and enos, are distributed in the substructures of the cochlea under normal physiologic conditions  <cit> . nnos immunoreactivity is found in the hair cells, spiral ganglion, stria vascularis, spiral ligaments, limbus and nerve fibers and spiral ganglion, whereas enos immunoreactivity is present in the endothelium of the cochlear microvascular trees, stria vascularis, limbus and the spiral ganglion  <cit> . inos was not found in the structures of the normal cochlea  <cit> . inos is expressed in the cochlea only after exposure to some pathologic condition such as endotoxin  <cit> , ischemia  <cit>  or acoustic trauma  <cit> . in this study, the distribution of nnos and enos was similar to that of previous studies  <cit> . nnos was distributed in the spiral ganglion, nerve fiber bundles, stria vascularis, limbus and hair cells. enos was distributed along the microvascular structures in the cochlea such as the endothelium of blood vessels in the modiolus, stria vascularis, spiral ganglion and limbus. after repetitive hbot, constitutive nos immunoreactivity was enhanced in these regions . morphometric analysis depicted the significantly enhanced immunoreactivity of nnos in nerve fiber bundles and that of enos in nerve fiber bundles, limbus and modiolar blood vessels . marginally significant enhanced immunoreactivity was demonstrated in stria vascularis and spiral ganglion. co-expression of enos and nnos was also shown in stria vascularis and spiral ganglion after hbot . these indicate that the possible therapeutic role of hbot may be through the upregulation of constitutive nos in the cochlear neurovascular substructures since mild elevation of no may provide a neuroprotective effect on auditory hair cells under ischemic condition  <cit> . we have  <dig> cochleae for each group in this study. regarding the marginal significance in some effects such as spiral ganglion and stria vascularis, our study was underpowered to determine the statistical significance of such effect. for example, given the sample size and effect size we had in the current study, the power for the immunoreactivity  of enos comparison between hbot and nba group for spiral ganglion was  <dig> . future studies will need to include larger numbers of animals in order to confirm or refute these marginal findings.

to our knowledge, this is the first report of the upregulation of constitutive nos in some substructures of the cochlea after hbot treatment. constitutive nos may act as a protective enzyme. in cerebrovascular tissue, hyperbaric oxygen can elicit a vasorelaxing effect from constitutively active no by enos and nnos  <cit> , although enos-derived no may have some vasoconstrictive effect during the early exposure to hbo  <cit> . nos produces no, which induces relaxation of the smooth musculature and regulation of the vasotonia as a microbiotic messenger  <cit> . thus, the important role of no in cardioprotection  <cit>  and cerebroprotection  <cit>  against ischemic damage is established. no released from constitutive nos such as enos also protects cochlear venules from excessive venular leakage  <cit> . in contrast, inos usually has a devastating role in biological processes. induction of inos has also been demonstrated in some cochlear pathologies like ischemia  <cit>  or noise trauma  <cit> . when the cochlea is exposed to hypoxic or ischemic conditions, the expressed inos may lead to an overexpression of peroxides  <cit> , which subsequently induce a direct toxic effect on neurons and may affect the endocochlear potential. the synaptic complex between the hair cells and the nerve fibers is another region that the no may exert its role  <cit> . no could inhibit the glutamate receptors by positive feedback under normoxic conditions. conditions causing cochlear hypoxia such as acoustic overstimulation may induce glutamate release and calcium influx at the synaptic complex between the hair cells and the nerve fibers  <cit>  and increase inos expression with excessive formation of no  <cit> . upon glutamate release, overproduction of inos-derived no can further increase the cochlear oxidative stress and cochlear dysfunction. in this study, only constitutive nos, especially enos, was upregulated after hbot, whereas inos was not immunoreactive. thus, customary hbot may play a therapeutic role rather than an adverse affect on cochlear pathology.

CONCLUSIONS
this study showed a differential effect of hbot on the expression of nos isoforms. upregulation of constitutive nos was shown in the substructure of the cochlea after hbot, but inos was not expressed. such observations should be extrapolated to the humans with caution, but support a therapeutic role for hbot. there were no significant changes in the eardrums or abr threshold shifts, and there was no obvious dna fragmentation after hbot in the guinea pig model.

