BACKGROUND
metabolomics, generally defined as the measurement of all metabolites in a given system under particular conditions  <cit> , is a key functional genomics tool with widespread applications ranging from genotype discrimination to pathology phenotyping and natural product discovery. compared with animals, plants represent a special problem for metabolomics studies as they contain a remarkably large number  and wide variety of metabolites  <cit> . plants accumulate a plethora of specialized metabolites, many which possess potent pharmacological activities. prominent examples include compounds of the benzylisoquinoline alkaloid  class, which occur abundantly in the order ranunculales, particularly within papaveraceae, ranunculaceae, berberidaceae and menispermaceae families . although bias share a common biosynthetic origin beginning with tyrosine, branched biosynthetic pathways – many which remain unresolved at the biochemical and genetic levels – lead to the formation of diverse molecular structures . targeted study of alkaloid content has been performed for many bia-accumulating plants, especially those with importance in modern or traditional medicinal and cultural practices  <cit> . the emergence of increasingly sophisticated analytical platforms has supported high-resolution mass spectrometry -based bia profiling of hydrastis canadensis  <cit> , opium poppy  and corydalis species  <cit> . hyphenated techniques such as liquid chromatography -nmr and lc-ms-nmr have been applied to alkaloid analyses of eschscholzia californica  <cit>  and nandina domestica  <cit>  cell cultures.

only a limited number of reports have attempted to define the biochemical networks underpinning alkaloid biosynthesis. broad-scope metabolomics encompassing both primary and secondary metabolism has been largely restricted to model plant species, including opium poppy, a longstanding model system for the study of bia metabolism. 1h nmr was used to identify and quantify  <dig> root and  <dig> latex metabolites in opium poppy plants  <cit> . similarly,  <dig> diverse metabolites were monitored in opium poppy cell cultures using nmr, revealing extensive reprogramming of primary and secondary metabolism following induction with fungal elicitor  <cit> . nmr-based metabolomics was reported for chelidonium majus, although capacity for compound identification was limited  <cit> . compound identification similarly restricted a more detailed profile of opium poppy cell cultures analyzed using ft-icr-ms, although the occurrence of  <dig> distinct analytes was confirmed  <cit> . technical advances made since these reports have improved the capacity for compound identification. analyses of animal metabolomes now boast routine identification and quantification of hundreds metabolites  and progress is mirrored in plant metabolomics studies  <cit> . key strategies now include the integrated use of multiple extraction procedures and analytical platforms to improve metabolic coverage and reduce bias. for example, separate extractions with water, alcohol, and organic solvents can yield different metabolite profiles  <cit> . proton nmr of aqueous extracts remains a field standard in terms of the number and structural diversity of compounds identified and quantified, and a variety of biochemical databases and secondary analysis tools are now available  <cit> . ms-based approaches complement nmr by offering enhanced spectral resolution and sensitivity for the analysis of low-abundance compounds  <cit>  while numerous open-source and commercial software packages aid downstream analysis  <cit> . choices concerning sample fractionation , ion generation, and ms analyzer type  impact the nature of the resulting datasets. both nmr and ms-based platforms are well suited for chemometric methods such as principal component analysis  and hierarchical clustering, which are often required to derive biologically relevant conclusions from complex datasets  <cit> .

we designed a multi-platform approach incorporating four different analysis methods to acquire a more complete view of the biochemical networks operating in non-model, bia-accumulating plants . this study represents the first time a metabolomics approach has been applied to most of these species, despite their importance in modern and traditional medicine  <cit> . the large data collections reported herein serve as a key resource for  research of the biochemical mechanisms governing alkaloid metabolism,  novel gene discovery, and  future metabolic engineering efforts. metabolite and transcript resource development has greatly expedited novel gene discovery in model systems such as opium poppy, permitting the near-complete elucidation of several major bia pathways. in tandem with our accompanying transcriptome analysis  <cit> , the goal of this work was to establish equivalent resources for plants displaying distinct and unexplored bia profiles.fig.  <dig> metabolomics workflow used in this study. five different analytical platforms  were employed to analyze plant tissues derived from  <dig> bia-accumulating species. metabolite classes measured using targeted methods are indicated. identification and quantification were achieved using software packages  or manually . untargeted uplc-ftms -mode data was mined for exact masses corresponding to alkaloids. targeted analysis using triple quadrupole lc-ms/ms was performed to acquire additional identifying information. abbreviations: bia, benzylisoquinoline alkaloid; nmr, nuclear magnetic resonance; lc, liquid chromatography; dfi, direct flow injection; ms, mass spectrometry; ms/ms, tandem mass spectrometry; hplc, high-performance liquid chromatography; uv, ultraviolet light absorption spectroscopy; uplc, ultra performance liquid chromatography; ftms, fourier transform mass spectrometry; esi, electrospray ionization



RESULTS
species and tissue selection for alkaloid structural diversity and enrichment
twenty plant species were chosen for metabolomics analysis based primarily on reported alkaloid accumulation profiles, as determined by relevant literature. other factors included taxonomic distribution, tissue availability, and uses in traditional medicine or cultural practices .

focus was placed on ranunculales members belonging to one of four families: papaveraceae , ranunculaceae , berberidaceae , and menispermaceae  . although bias have been reported in diverse angiosperm taxa, they occur most commonly in these four families  <cit> . many different bia structural subtypes occur in the ranunculales, including twelve shown in additional file  <dig>  in an effort to maximize diversity in terms of alkaloid types, we selected plants reportedly rich in a wide variety of different bias. for example, corydalis and papaver species are known to accumulate a plethora of different bias, including morphinan, protoberberine, benzophenanthridine, aporphine, pavine and phthalideisoquinoline alkaloids  <cit> . menispermum canadense produces highly unusual acutumine alkaloids, in addition to bisbenzylisoquinoline alkaloids more typical of menispermaceae family members  <cit> . diversity was also captured within berberidaceae and ranunculaceae families; thalictrum species, for example, produce oxobenzylisoquinoline alkaloids, secoisoquinoline derivatives, and differentially substituted aporphine molecules  <cit> . roots, stems or rhizomes were selected for metabolomics profiling based on literature sources indicating accumulation sites of bias. this was a key consideration as bia content can vary considerably in different organs. for example, sanguinarine in sanguinaria canadensis occurs at concentrations ten- and one thousand-fold lower in roots and aerial organs , respectively, compared with the accumulation in rhizomes  <cit> . plant-specific circumstances  were secondary considerations when selecting species and organ type. for instance, hydrastis canadensis is important for traditional medicine among certain first nations of canada, and owing to modern overharvesting practices is now regarded as a threatened species  <cit> . these circumstances, together with a distinct, phthlideisoquinoline-rich bia profile  <cit>  led to the selection of h. canadensis a target plant. in three species, callus culture was used in place of differentiated organs . as an alternative to intact plants, cell cultures have been used for more than three decades as biosynthetic models and alkaloid production systems  <cit> . the inclusion of callus in this study permitted general comparisons between metabolomes of intact plants versus cell cultures.table  <dig> details of plant species selected for metabolomics analysis

argenome mexicana
chelidonium majus
papaver bracteatum
stylophorum diphyllum
sanguinaria canadensis
eschscholzia californica
glaucium flavum
corydalis chelanthifolia
hydrastis canadensis
nigella sativa
thalictrum flavum
xanthorhiza simplicissima
mahonia aquifolium
berberis thunbergii
jeffersonia diphylla
nandina domestica
menispermum canadense
cocculus trilobus
tinospora cordifolia
cissampelos mucronata


1h nmr profiling highlights species- and tissue-specific variation in sugar, amino acid and organic acid content
metabolite surveying by nmr was expected to favor sugars, amino acids and organic acids, as these constitute the most abundant, water-soluble primary metabolites found in plants  <cit> . most benzylisoquinoline alkaloids are sparingly soluble in pure water and extract more efficiently with alcohol or water-alcohol mixtures  <cit> . to place focus on primary metabolites, plant extractions for nmr were performed using water, whereas methanol extraction enriched alkaloid content prior to uplc-ftms. chenomx nmr suite  <dig>  was used for nmr spectral analysis owing to its capacity for targeted identification and quantification of > <dig> metabolites in complex samples . standard spectra for benzylisoquinoline alkaloids are not yet represented in chenomx libraries; this reality, in addition to poor solubility in pure water, precluded alkaloid structural analysis. nonetheless, a total of  <dig> metabolites were identified and quantified using one-dimensional  1h nmr and chenomx nmr suite support. additional file  <dig> lists the compounds detected and their abundances in each of  <dig> replicates performed for every plant species. metabolite quantities formed the basis for principal component analysis  using metaboanalyst v.  <dig>   <cit> . pca is an unsupervised method used to summarize large datasets as more easily interpreted principal component  scores. the goal of pca is to account for as much variance in the data as possible using the smallest number of pcs  <cit> . typically, 2- or 3-dimensional scores plots are sufficient for meaningful interpretation of metabolomics data. accompanying loadings plots are used to interpret the patterns of scores plots. in particular, loadings plots can reveal the metabolites  that contribute most to the variance between samples. figure 2a and b illustrate pca scores and loadings plots, respectively, for nmr-based metabolite quantities. the most abundant metabolites detected by nmr were sugars, sugar acids and alcohols, and various amino acids including glutamine, asparagine and arginine . however, metabolite quantities varied dramatically between species, forming a basis for overall variance. for instance, loadings corresponding to fructose, glucose and sucrose are important contributors to variance along pc <dig> , which distinguished sugar-rich chelidonium majus , argemone mexicana , and glaucium flavum  from sugar-depleted corydalis chelanthifolia  tissues . individual plots for these and other metabolites contributing to variance are shown in fig.  <dig>  whereas cma roots were depleted of saccharides, a number of other metabolites such as glucarate and arabinitol were found exclusively in these tissues. polyols such as arabinitol are mainly associated with the fungal kingdom  <cit>  and can be elevated in root ectomycorrhizae relative to free-living fungi  <cit> . saccharide depletion and arabinitol enrichment in cch roots could reflect the presence of symbiotic fungi. an evaluation of associated transcriptomics data for cch roots  <cit>  revealed the presence of non-plant sequences with high homology to dna of uncultured rhizosphere isolates and other unidentified fungi, bacteria and protists. while it is clear that various microorganisms were associated with cch root at the time of rna extraction, blast results were insufficient to ascertain the nature of any plant-microbe interactions, if such relationships were present.fig.  <dig> two-dimensional principal component analysis  of metabolite quantities obtained using nmr-based profiling. results are presented as scores  and loadings  plots. the percent variance accounted for by each principal component  is indicated. for the scores plot, each dot represents a one of four replicates analyzed per plant species. areas enclosed by 95 % confidence ellipses, containing dots of the same color, define statistically significant class separations  <cit> . species abbreviations are defined in table  <dig>  loadings representing individual metabolites are shown as black dots . metabolite names are indicated for loadings contributing more to variance. a complete listing of loadings data is found in additional file 16


fig.  <dig> individual metabolite quantities as determined by nmr analysis for  <dig> bia-accumulating plant species. plant species are designated by number, as defined in table  <dig>  averages ± sd were calculated using  <dig> replicates per species



callus cultures were distinguished from most other plant tissues, particularly along pc <dig> . this result was partially explained by low abundances of certain amino acids , glycerate and mannitol . similar results were found for papaver bracteatum  stem tissues, highlighted by clustering of pbr with cocculus trilobus , cissampelos mucronata  and tinospora cordifolia  data . with some exceptions, mono- and disaccharide sugars were generally lower in roots and rhizomes compared with stems, perhaps reflecting the presence of lignified secondary xylem in these tissues.

dfi-ms/ms reveals ubiquitous presence of key membrane lipids and acylcarnitines
to detect less polar metabolites including long-chain acylcarnitines, glycerophospholipids and sphingolipids, extraction was performed using organic solvents in preparation for direct flow injection -ms/ms analysis. a kit-based, targeted, quantitative approach using direct flow injection  with tandem mass spectrometry  was used for detection and quantification of carnitines, phospho- and sphingolipids. in total,  <dig> metabolites were detected and quantified in the  <dig> bia-accumulating plant species. detected compounds belonged to one of three classes of lipids distinguished by the o- or n-linked head group: acylcarnitines, glycerolipids and sphingolipids. compound identities and abundances are listed in additional file  <dig>  phosphatidylcholine  molecules exhibiting partially desaturated, o-linked diacyl  chains of variable length totaling  <dig> or  <dig> carbons  were by far the most abundant metabolites. in plants and animals, pc lipids represent major components of plasma and mitochondrial membranes and endoplasmic reticulum  <cit> . c <dig> or c <dig> diacyl  lipids with one or more double bonds  ranged up to 1000-fold more abundant than equivalent pc lipids exhibiting shorter chain lengths. these results reflect pc content of arabidopsis  <cit>  and were not surprising, as fatty acids  <dig> or  <dig> carbons in length generally constitute the bulk of fatty acids synthesized in the chloroplast stroma prior to further derivitization. diacyl pc lipids were more abundant than mixed-chain  and single-chain  lipids. for example, the average level of pc aa c34: <dig> was 37-fold greater than pc ae c34: <dig>  phosphatidylglycerol  lipids, which are specific to thylakoid membrane, and glycolipids, which predominate the chloroplast envelope and thylakoid membrane, were not measured using the absoluteidq p <dig> kit. despite the large compound library accessible using this kit, areas of application are generally animal-focused and certain plant-specific metabolites are not yet represented . twenty-eight acylcarnitine metabolites were measured, in addition to  <dig> sphingolipids. compared with animals, plant acylcarnitines are present at low levels and little is known regarding their biological role, aside from perceived involvement in fatty acid metabolism  <cit> . pca indicated that pc levels were important contributors to variance along pc <dig>  which distinguished roots of berberis thunbergii , xanthorhiza simplicissima  and corydalis chelanthifolia  from tissues exhibiting higher levels of several pc classes . additionally, the combined contribution of pcs and acylcarnitines to variance along pc <dig> appeared to distinguish eschscholzia californica  from other species. further investigation regarding the biological role of plant acylcarnitines will help explain these observations.

phenolic content suggests impact of environmental factors
a hplc-uv-based method targeting plant phenolics was used to identify and quantify  <dig> metabolites including flavonoids, benzoic acid derivatives and hydroxycinnamic acids . with the exception of the two benzoic acid derivatives  all phenolic compounds examined in this study derive from the phenylpropanoid pathway. phenylpropanoids comprise nearly 20 % of total carbon in the terrestrial biosphere  <cit>  and more than  <dig> different phenylpropanoid compounds are found in plants  <cit> , where they function as pigments, cell wall components, scent compounds and signaling molecules. despite the abundance of these compounds and their ubiquitous presence in plants, occurrence and quantity of phenolic compounds can vary dramatically from species to species, and also within single species depending on environmental, developmental, or genetic factors. for example, substantial quantitative differences in various flavonoids were reported for seeds of different arabidopsis thaliana accessions, indicating that even minor changes in genetic background can influence polyphenol content  <cit> . both quantitative and qualitative differences in phenolic content were observed in the present study, and a clear distinction was made between cultured tissue and intact plants. pca defined callus of cmu, tco and ctr from roots and stems of other species along pc <dig>  which accounted for >40 % of the observed variance in the data . callus cultures were low or lacking in a number of phenolic compounds, including luteolin and kaemferol, which were comparatively abundant in root and stem tissue  and contributed to variance along pc <dig> . luteolin and kaemferol are flavonoids with photoprotective function and are known to accumulate in response to sun irradiance and uv stress  <cit> . further, flavonoids are enriched in root cortical tissues, likely providing protection against biotic and abiotic stresses  <cit> . callus, which was grown under sterile conditions in the dark, could be lower in these compounds owing to an absence of elicitation by light or other environmental stresses.

the abundance of several compounds varied widely between species. for example, quercetin levels were >35 mg g− <dig> dry weight in stylophorum diphyllum stem but barely detectable  in several other species. although phenolic accumulation profiles are influenced by genetic factors, it is possible that the metabolite content of these plants, which were cultivated in a variety of different locations, both outdoors and in greenhouses, was directly impacted by environmental factors. coumarin, which was generally low in stem tissues, was abundant in the roots of several species, particularly corydalis chelanthifolia  . cch roots were also abundant in cinnamic and syringic acids compared with other species. fungal challenge is known to cause cinnamic and syringic acids secretion by roots  <cit> . it is possible that cch roots, and possibly others examined in this study, were exposed to microbial challenge prior to analysis.

uplc-ftms analysis distinguishes callus from bia-rich plant tissues
untargeted uplc-ftms profiling was expected to generate extensive mass lists corresponding to a wide variety of metabolites, including alkaloids. analysis performed in positive ion mode detected an average of  <dig> compounds, listing up to > <dig> distinct masses , each assigned their own chromatographic retention time  . in contrast, analysis performed in negative ion mode yielded an average of  <dig> compounds per species, with a maximum of  <dig> masses for e. californica . although the large number of metabolites detectable by ms-based approaches is important for untargeted applications such as biomarker discovery and pathology diagnostics, compound identification remains a challenge  <cit> . nonetheless, ms-based methods are important to the analysis of alkaloids, which are often present in low abundance. to gain insight into the bia content of the  <dig> selected plant species, we mined the positive ion mode datasets  and identified exact masses corresponding to empirical formulae of known alkaloids. these masses and associated information  were compiled in a separate file  representing a condensed, alkaloid-specific listing. since structural isomerism is common among bias, many compounds share the same empirical formula and therefore share identical masses. in such cases of ambiguity, masses were assigned not to a single bia, but groups of alkaloids sharing the same empirical formula . the list of known bias  used to mine the positive mode dataset is found in additional file  <dig> 

standards were not included as part of the uplc-ftms profiling, disallowing absolute quantification. however, comparison of ion counts provided a snapshot of relative bia abundances. ion counts formed the basis for pca as shown in fig. 4a  and 4b . although variability in ionization efficiencies between structurally different bias likely impacted observed abundances to some extent and caution should be exercised when making head-to-head comparisons, general conclusions can still be drawn from multivariate analysis. these results are presented as heat maps in fig.  <dig> and  <dig>  enabling comparison of relative alkaloid abundances across species. pc <dig>  which accounted for more than 45 % of the variance in the dataset, clearly distinguished callus tissue  from root, rhizome and stem samples . visual inspection of revealed a comparative lack of masses corresponding to bias in callus tissue, especially in cmu . only a single mass  eluting at rt =  <dig>  min was detected in cmu, compared to an average of  <dig> putative alkaloids per species for differentiated tissues. situations where alkaloid is abundant in whole plants but absent in cultured cells occur frequently, although alkaloid biosynthetic machinery  is often still present  <cit> . for example, opium poppy cell cultures are devoid of morphinan alkaloids, despite the plethora of these compounds in whole plants. yet, resources derived from opium poppy cell cultures have lead to the discovery of several enzymes participating in morphine biosynthesis  <cit> .fig.  <dig> two-dimensional principal component analysis  of relative abundances  of ion masses  detected using uplc-ftms. only masses corresponding to those expected for alkaloids, extracted from positive mode data, are included. results are presented as scores  and loadings  plots. the percent variance accounted for by each principal component  is indicated. for the scores plot, each dot represents a one of four replicates analyzed per plant species. areas enclosed by 95 % confidence ellipses, containing dots of the same color, define statistically significant class separations  <cit> . species abbreviations are defined in table  <dig>  loadings representing individual masses are shown as black dots . masses and putative identities, where applicable, are shown for select loadings. a complete listing of loadings data is found in additional file 16


fig.  <dig> relative ion abundances in  <dig> plant species. only masses corresponding to those expected for alkaloids, extracted from positive mode ftms data, are shown. uplc retention times  for each ion mass  are provided to distinguish identical masses, which presumably represent different structural isomers. variability in ionization efficiencies should be considered when comparing abundances between different ions. relative abundance scale  highlights quantitative differences for each mass across different species. species abbreviations are defined in table  <dig>  species are grouped according to family or tribe: 

fig.  <dig> relative ion abundances between m/z  <dig>  and m/z  <dig>  in  <dig> plant species. masses extracted from positive mode ftms data and corresponding to those expected for alkaloids are shown. uplc retention times  for each ion mass  are provided to distinguish identical masses, which presumably represent different structural isomers. variability in ionization efficiencies should be considered when comparing abundances between different ions. the relative abundance scale  highlights quantitative differences for each mass across different species. species abbreviations are defined in table  <dig>  species are grouped according to family or tribe: .



putative identification of bias reveals leads for gene discovery
masses occurring most frequently across different species include m/z  <dig>  ,  <dig>   and  <dig>  . the last of these masses likely corresponded to berberine, a common alkaloid present throughout the ranunculales  <cit> . as standards were not available during uplc-ftms analysis, we performed an additional triple quadrupole lc-ms/ms study on identical tissues using  <dig> available alkaloid standards, which allowed definitive identification of several unknowns. the presence of berberine was confirmed in several species and compound identity was ascertained through collision-induced dissociation  analysis. lc-ms/ms results are summarized as representative, annotated chromatographs  and cid peak lists . although many bias share the formula c20h24no <dig>  , a metabolite with this composition running at  <dig>  min occurred frequently  and could be magnoflorine . like berberine, magnoflorine is a common bia found across all families of the ranunculales and occurring sporadically in unrelated orders  <cit> . pca suggested that loadings putatively corresponding to berberine and magnoflorine  contributed to the distinction observed between alkaloid-rich and alkaloid-depleted plant tissues.

corydalis chelanthifolia  was rich in several alkaloids found in few or no other species, a result likely contributing to a clear separation of cch from other plants along pc <dig> . also, certain masses abundant in other plants  were absent in cch. masses unique to cch included those potentially corresponding to phthalideisoquinoline alkaloids. for example, m/z  <dig>   could potentially represent corledine, corlumidine or severtzine, all with the empirical formula c20h20no <dig> and so far found exclusively in corydalis species  <cit> . other compounds with this formula include the phthalideisoquinoline egenine and the secoberbine -canadaline, which are largely restricted to the fumarioideae tribe   <cit> . -canadaline, a potential precursor to the phthalideisoquinoline hydrastine   <cit>  is known to occur in hydrastis canadensis. masses corresponding to these alkaloids were found in hca rhizome . unlike phthlideisoquinoline alkaloids of the model plant opium poppy , hydrastine, corledine, corlumidine, severtzine and egenine all lack a 4′-hydroxyl or 4′-methoxyl group . the presence of this group is an absolute requirement for noscapine biosynthesis in opium poppy, as a key cyp <dig> enzyme  will not accept substrates lacking a hydroxyl function at this position  <cit> . the presence of non-hydroxylated phthalideisoquinoline alkaloids in cch and hca could signify a cyp <dig> variant with a different substrate acceptance profile or an alternative biosynthesis. eleven and eight cyp <dig> homologues are found in hca and cch transcriptomes, respectively  <cit> . testing these enzymes for involvement in the biosynthesis of non-hydroxylated phthalideisoquinoline alkaloids could help elucidate pathways in hca and cch.

interestingly, ftms results revealed that pbr could be producing phthalideisoquinoline alkaloids, albeit in low amounts. a single mass putatively representing noscapine  was found in pbr stem . these results are important to the process of gene discovery, especially when considered together with transcriptomics data. for example, several uncharacterized genes expressed in pbr stem have significant homology to those with established involvement in noscapine biosynthesis in opium poppy  <cit> . identification of a mass corresponding to noscapine in pbr adds weight to the hypothesis that these pbr genes are functional homologues with roles in phthlideisoquinoline biosynthesis. further, the appearance of unique masses in species such as cch enables ‘hypothesis-driven mining’ whereby suspected occurrence of target alkaloids enables rational candidate gene selection and assay design. for instance, the presence of masses possibly corresponding to phthlideisoquinoline alkaloids such as egenine in cch could form the basis for testing uncharacterized, noscapine-synthase -like genes from cch, using phthlideisoquinoline substrates such as bicuculline, a suspected product of egenine oxidation  <cit> . an analogous reaction in opium poppy involves nos-catalyzed oxidation of narcotine hemiacetal to noscapine  <cit> . six cch genes with substantial homology to opium poppy nos were identified in cch transcriptome  <cit> . essentially, this metabolite list  can be used as a guide when choosing novel genes to test for hypothesized activity.

CONCLUSIONS
an important goal of metabolomics is to acquire information regarding as many metabolites as possible, which requires the use of more than one analytical platform. the multi-faceted approach taken in this study combined five different techniques in order to gain a broader and more accurate snapshot of primary and secondary metabolism within  <dig> different bia-accumulating plant species. differences in the profile of primary metabolites were observed between different source tissues  that could relate to variation observed in alkaloid content. factors such as uv light and the presence of fungi in the rhizosphere are among myriad elements contributing to the overall biochemistry of plants. environmental factors impact both primary and secondary metabolism, and strong evidence suggests that plant responses are highly coordinated  <cit> . the production of alkaloids as defense metabolites is likely underpinned by biochemical events that can only be visualized through broad-scope metabolite profiling. elucidation of these complex mechanisms depends on persistent and iterative metabolomics studies, which in turn rely on continuously improving analytical technologies.

