BACKGROUND
the cell envelope of members of the mycobacterium genus contains a unique array of structurally-complex free lipids thought to be non-covalently bound to the mycolic acid layer of the cell wall
 <cit> . these free lipids are believed to form a membrane outer leaflet that partners with a mycolic acid-based membrane inner leaflet to form an asymmetric lipid bilayer-like structure. this lipid bilayer constitutes the distinctive outer membrane of the mycobacterial cell envelope. the documented role of some of these free lipids as mycobacterial virulence effectors highlights the enzymes involved in their production as potential target candidates for exploring the development of novel drugs that could assist conventional antimicrobial therapy in the control of mycobacterial infections. notably, the first inhibitor of the biosynthesis of a group of these free lipids  has been recently reported
 <cit> . the inhibitor works in a manner analogous to that of the first reported inhibitor of siderophore  biosynthesis
 <cit> , and it blocks the production of phenolic glycolipids in mycobacterium tuberculosis and other mycobacterial pathogens
 <cit> .

glycopeptidolipids  are among the major free glycolipid components of the outer membrane of several mycobacterium species
 <cit>  . the gpl-producing species include saprophytic mycobacteria, such as mycobacterium smegmatis , and many clinically-relevant nontuberculous mycobacteria. the members of the mycobacterium avium-mycobacterium intracellulare complex  are among the gpl producers of clinical significance. mac infections cause pulmonary and extrapulmonary diseases in both immunocompromised and immunocompetent individuals
 <cit> . importantly, gpls have been implicated in many aspects of mycobacterial biology, including host-pathogen interaction
 <cit> , sliding motility
 <cit> , and biofilm formation
 <cit> . an altered expression profile of gpls has been observed in drug-resistant clinical isolates of mac
 <cit> , a finding that raises the possibility that gpl production might have an impact on drug susceptibility as well. thus, elucidation of the gpl biosynthetic pathway is important not only because it will expand our understanding of cell wall biosynthesis in mycobacteria, but it may also illuminate potential routes to alternative therapeutic strategies against infections by mac and other opportunistic mycobacterial human pathogens.

structures of gpls from several mycobacteria have been characterized . in brief, gpl molecules are composed of an n-acylated lipopeptide core decorated by a variable pattern of glycosylation that is built from o-methylated and o-acetylated sugar units. the peptide moiety is the tripeptide-amino alcohol d-phenylalanine-d-allothreonine-d-alanine-l-alaninol . this tripeptide-amino alcohol is assembled by nonribosomal peptide synthetases  designated mps <dig> and mps <dig> in ms <cit> , whereas biosynthesis of the lipid substituent  is believed to require a dedicated polyketide synthase 
 <cit> . nrpss and pkss are two large families of enzymes that are best known for their involvement in the synthesis of natural products with pharmacological activities of clinical significance
 <cit>  and microbial siderophores
 <cit> . n-acylation of the tripeptide-amino alcohol of ms gpls has been proposed to require the protein papa3
 <cit> , a member of the polyketide-associated protein  family of acyltransferases
 <cit> . lastly, various glycosyltransferases, methyltransferases and acetyltransferases have been implicated or are suspected to be involved in the building of the glycosyl portion of gpls
 <cit> .

despite the increasingly recognized widespread presence of gpls in mycobacteria and the relevance of these compounds in mac and other mycobacteria of clinical significance, the gpl biosynthetic pathway remains incompletely understood. the individual involvement of several genes suspected to be required for gpl production remains to be experimentally probed. in particular, the involvement of a gene encoding a member of the mbth-like protein family 
 <cit>  and clustered with the nrps-encoding genes required for d-phe-d-allothr-d-ala-l-alaninol assembly in gpl production has been hypothesized
 <cit> , but not conclusively demonstrated. mbth-like proteins form a family of small proteins  linked to secondary metabolite production pathways involving nrpss
 <cit> . the founding member of this protein family is mbth, a protein encoded in the mycobactin siderophore biosynthetic gene cluster of m. tuberculosis <cit> .

recent seminal biochemical studies have established that mbth-like proteins activate amino acid adenylation domains of nrpss
 <cit> . genes encoding mbth-like proteins have been shown to be required for production of siderophores or antibiotics by mutational analysis
 <cit> . interestingly, however, we have recently shown by mutational analysis that the mbth orthologue in the mycobactin biosynthetic gene cluster of ms  is not essential for mycobactin production
 <cit> . similarly, the mbth-like gene in the biosynthetic gene cluster of the balhimycin glycopeptide antibiotic has been shown not to be required for antibiotic production
 <cit> . these findings illustrate the well-recognized limitations of bioinformatics-based genetic predictions in complex biosynthetic pathways and highlight the need for probing gene involvement by unconfounded mutational analysis. in this study, we provide evidence unequivocally establishing that the conserved mbth-like gene  located in the gpl biosynthetic gene locus of ms is essential for gpl production. this finding presents the first case of a mbth-like gene required for biosynthesis of a cell wall component and provides the first example of a mbth-like gene with confirmed functional role in a member of the mycobacterium genus. moreover, we show that loss of gplh leads to a mutant with atypical colony morphology, lack of sliding motility, reduced biofilm formation capacity, and increased antimicrobial drug susceptibility. altogether, this study demonstrates a critical role for gplh in mycobacterial biology and advances our understanding of the genetic requirements for the biosynthesis of an important group of constituents of the unique mycobacterial outer membrane.

RESULTS
conservation of a mbth homologue in the gpl biosynthetic pathway
mbth is a protein encoded in the mycobactin siderophore biosynthetic gene cluster of m. tuberculosis and the founding member of the mbth-like protein family 
 <cit> . our analysis of available genome sequences of gpl producers revealed that every gpl biosynthetic gene cluster known to date contains a mbth-like gene located upstream of nrps-encoding genes required for d-phe-d-allothr-d-ala-l-alaninol assembly . the mbth-like protein orthologues encoded by these mbth-like genes are comprised of 69– <dig> amino acids and have remarkable sequence identity  . this sequence identity extends to the three fully conserved tryptophan residues that are a hallmark of the protein family 
 <cit>  . the open reading frame corresponding to the mbth-like gene of m. avium  <dig>  has not been previously annotated; however, our genome sequence analysis revealed its presence. the mbth-like protein encoded by this gene is shown in the protein alignment . the orthologous mbth-like genes or mbth-like proteins in the other species shown in figure
 <dig> have been annotated each as mbth or mbth, respectively
 <cit> , presumably due to their sequence relatedness with m. tuberculosis mbth. this name assignment is misleading as these genes are not orthologues of mbth, the gene of the mycobactin biosynthetic pathway present in many mycobacteria, including m. smegmatis, m. abscessus, and m. avium <cit> . this name assignment leads to gene nomenclature confusion by resulting in more than one gene named mbth in the same species. we proposed herein to name all the orthologous mbth-like genes associated with gpl production as gplh, a name derived from glycopeptidolipid and mbth and not previously assigned to any mycobacterial gene.

deletion of gplh in m. smegmatis
our bioinformatics analysis revealed that every gpl biosynthetic gene cluster known to date contains a mbth-like gene, gplh. the involvement of this conserved gene in gpl production remains unproven. herein, we sought to conclusively establish whether gplh was required for gpl production. to this end, we engineered ms Δgplh, a mutant with an unmarked, in-frame deletion of gplh , the ms gene upstream of the nrps-encoding gene mps <dig> , and assessed the ability of this mutant to produce gpls as described below. ms was selected as a representative prototype of gpl producers for the studies presented herein due to its superior experimental tractability compared with other gpl producers .

the gplh deletion was engineered using the gplh deletion cassette-delivery suicide vector p2nil-goalc-Δgplh c in a homologous recombination- and counter selection-based approach that replaced gplh by a 17-codon gene remnant cloned into the vector. the deletion in ms Δgplh encompassed  <dig> central amino acids of the predicted mbth-like protein encoded by gplh . the deletion was verified by pcr using primer pairs that produced amplicons of different sizes depending on whether the genomic dna used as pcr template was wild type  or carried the gene deletion . the successful engineering of ms Δgplh set the stage for probing the involvement of gplh in gpl production.

the gene gplh is essential for gpl production
we investigated the effect of the gplh deletion in ms Δgplh on gpl production using tlc and ms analyses. in addition, a control strain for genetic complementation analysis was constructed , and the ability of this strain and that of ms wt controls to produce gpls was investigated. representative results from the tlc analysis are shown in figure
 <dig>  the analysis of lipid extracts from the parental ms wt strain, or ms wt bearing the empty pcp <dig> vector, revealed the expected production of gpls in these wt controls. conversely, analysis of lipid extracts from ms Δgplh did not reveal detectable amounts of gpls. transformation of ms Δgplh with pcp0-gplh  rendered the strain ms Δgplh + pcp0-gplh, for which tlc analysis demonstrated that production of gpls was restored to levels comparable to those seen in the wt controls. in contrast, ms Δgplh retained its gpl deficient phenotype after transformation with empty pcp <dig> vector . the results of our complementation analysis rule out the possibility that the gpl deficient phenotype observed in ms Δgplh is due to a polar effect of the gplh deletion on downstream genes required for gpl production .

the presence of gpls was probed for in lipid samples from ms wt + pcp <dig>  ms Δgplh + pcp <dig>  and ms Δgplh + pcp0-gplh  by gc-ms analysis as well. the pcp0-bearing strains, ms wt + pcp <dig> and ms Δgplh + pcp <dig>  rather than their respective plasmid-free parental strains, were used in these experiments so that the wt, the mutant, and the complemented strain could all be cultured under identical conditions  for comparative analysis by gc-ms. representative results from the gc-ms analysis are shown in figure
 <dig>  this analysis probed for the presence of the alditol acetate derivatives of the characteristic glycosyl residues of ms gpls as a fingerprint indicator of the presence of gpls in the lipid samples analyzed
 <cit> . the gc-ms analysis of samples from ms wt + pcp <dig> revealed the expected m/z peak array consistent with the characteristic presence of alditol acetate derivatives of the  <dig> ,4-trimethyl-rhamnose,  <dig> -dimethyl-rhamnose and 6-deoxy-talose components of gpls
 <cit> . conversely, these alditol acetate derivatives were not detected by gc-ms analysis of samples from ms Δgplh + pcp <dig>  the samples from the complemented strain, ms Δgplh + pcp0-gplh, displayed an m/z peak array comparable to that of ms wt + pcp <dig> and consistent with the presence of the alditol acetate derivatives originating from gpls . overall, the results of the gc-ms analysis and the results of the tlc analysis are in agreement with each other and, coupled with our genetic complementation-controlled analysis, conclusively demonstrate that gplh is essential for production of gpls.

based on the recent elucidation of the function of mbth-like proteins as amino acid adenylation domain activators
 <cit> , it is reasonable to propose that gplh is required for the assembly of the d-phe-d-allothr-d-ala-l-alaninol core moiety of gpls by the mps1-mps <dig> nrps system. gplh might act as a critical activator of the amino acid adenylation activity of one or more of the four amino acid adenylation domains predicted by sequence analysis of the mps1-mps <dig> nrps system
 <cit> . biochemical studies will be required to investigate this possibility.

mbth-mediated cross-talk between gpl biosynthesis and mycobactin biosynthesis
we noted that ms has two potential mbth-like genes located outside the gpl biosynthetic gene cluster. one of these genes is the mbth orthologue in the mycobactin biosynthetic gene cluster of ms mentioned above
 <cit> . the second gene, msmeg_ <dig>  is clustered with genes implicated in the production of the siderophore exochelin
 <cit> . the protein products of these two ms gplh paralogues have considerable amino acid sequence identity between themselves and with gplh and m. tuberculosis mbth . the gpl deficiency of ms Δgplh indicates that neither of these two ms gplh paralogues can support the production of gpls in ms Δgplh to a meaningful level under our culturing conditions.

it is worth noting that ms mbth and msmeg_ <dig> are associated with siderophore production pathways known to be repressed during growth under iron-rich conditions
 <cit> . this fact raises the possibility that neither of these genes is expressed  in the iron-rich standard middlebrook media used in our studies. with this consideration in mind, we explored whether an increase in expression of ms mbth  could complement the gpl deficiency of ms Δgplh. to this end, we evaluated gpl production in ms Δgplh after transformation of the mutant with pcp0-mbthms . tlc analysis of lipid extracts from the transformant revealed the presence of gpls, thus indicating that plasmid-directed constitutive expression of ms mbth complements the gpl deficient phenotype of ms Δgplh . thus, it appears that ms mbth has the potential to functionally replace gplh if present in sufficient quantities. this cross-complementation phenomenon is in line with recent cell-based studies demonstrating mbth-like protein-mediated cross-talk between nrps systems
 <cit> . our finding is also consistent with reported in vitro enzymology indicating that, at least in some cases, the activity of amino acid adenylation domains of nrpss can be stimulated not only by bona fide mbth-like protein partners, but also by mbth-like protein homologues from disparate natural product biosynthetic pathways
 <cit> .

deletion of gplh leads to a pleiotropic phenotype
colony morphotype, biofilm formation and sliding motility are properties that have been shown to be altered in gpl deficient mutants
 <cit> . loss of gpl also perturbs bacterial surface properties
 <cit>  and reduces the cell-wall permeability barrier to chenodeoxycholate uptake
 <cit> . interestingly, an altered profile of gpls has been observed in drug-resistant mac isolates
 <cit> . this finding raises the possibility that gpl production might have an impact on antimicrobial drug susceptibility as well. we investigated whether deletion of gplh had an effect on all these properties. ms wt + pcp <dig> and ms Δgplh + pcp <dig>  rather than their respective plasmid-free parental strains, were used in the experiments so that the wt, the mutant, and the complemented ms Δgplh + pcp0-gplh strain could all be cultured under identical conditions  for comparative analysis. representative results from these studies are shown in figure
 <dig> 

ms is known to develop into smooth, reddish colonies with a glossy and translucent appearance when grown on low carbon source congo red agar plates
 <cit> . as expected, ms wt + pcp <dig> displayed this characteristic morphotype in our congo red agar plate assay . ms Δgplh + pcp <dig>  however, had a drastically different morphotype. the mutant was characterized by rough, whitish colonies with a non-translucent and dried appearance. the strain ms Δgplh + pcp0-gplh had a morphotype more similar to wt than to that of the mutant, indicating partial complementation by episomal expression of gplh in the congo red agar assay. deletion of gplh also altered the ability of ms to form biofilms . ms wt + pcp <dig> formed a continuous, thin biofilm at the liquid-air interface, as expected based on previous reports
 <cit> . in contrast, ms Δgplh + pcp <dig> failed to develop such a biofilm and instead grew as chunky patches on the liquid surface. the strain ms Δgplh + pcp0-gplh produced biofilms comparable to those seen with ms wt + pcp <dig>  sliding motility was also compromised in ms Δgplh + pcp <dig> . the mutant did not show sliding motility, whereas ms wt + pcp <dig> was highly active in the motility assay. ms Δgplh + pcp0-gplh also displayed sliding motility, although the motility was somewhat reduced compared to wt. this observation indicates partial complementation by episomal expression of gplh. overall, these results clearly indicate that deletion of gplh has a profound impact on colony morphotype, biofilm formation, and sliding motility. these mutant phenotypes have previously been associated with other gpl deficient strains and attributed to alterations of the properties of the cell surface due to lack of gpls. thus, it is likely that the phenotypes observed in the gplh mutant arise from its gpl deficiency.

in contrast to the drastic impact of the gplh deletion on colony morphotype, biofilm formation and sliding motility, lack of gplh had a relatively minor effect on antimicrobial drug susceptibility. when compared with ms wt + pcp <dig> , ms Δgplh + pcp <dig> showed a slight, yet consistent, increase in susceptibility to only two drugs  from a panel of  <dig> drugs of different classes tested in standard disk diffusion assays.

interestingly, these two drugs belong to the cephalosporin class, suggesting that the hypersusceptibility of the mutant is antibiotic-class dependent. representative results illustrating the hypersusceptibility of the mutant to these cephalosporins are shown in figure
7d.

streptomycin susceptibility results are also shown in figure
7d. the streptomycin susceptibility is presented as an example of those drugs to which the mutant had no meaningful difference in susceptibility relative to the wt control. the ms Δgplh + pcp0-gplh strain showed a drug susceptibility pattern similar to that of ms wt + pcp <dig>  indicating that the hypersusceptible phenotype of the mutant was complemented by episomal expression of gplh.

the molecular mechanism behind the cephalosporin hypersusceptibility arising from the lack of gplh remains obscure. it is generally believed that the permeability barrier imposed by the mycobacterial outer membrane reduces antibiotic susceptibility by decreasing compound penetration. thus, it is tempting to hypothesize that the observed cephalosporin hypersusceptibility arises from an alteration in the permeability barrier of the outer membrane of the gplh mutant due to the lack of gpls. the observation that lack of gpls correlates with a reduction in the permeability barrier to chenodeoxycholate uptake
 <cit>  is in line with this hypothesis. the absence of gpls might produce structural or fluidity changes in the membrane that lead to an increase in cephalosporin penetration. the fact that ms Δgplh displays only a modest increase in antibiotic susceptibility suggests, however, that the lack of gpls in the outer membrane of the mutant does not have a profound effect on the permeability barrier that this cell envelope structure presents to drug penetration. thus, our results support the view that gpls are not critical contributors to the physical integrity of the permeability barrier of the mycobacterial cell envelope.

CONCLUSIONS
our results unambiguously demonstrate that the conserved gene gplh is required for gpl production and its inactivation leads to a pleiotropic phenotype. while genes encoding members of the mbth-like protein family have been shown to be required for production of siderophores or antibiotics
 <cit> , our findings present the first case of one such gene required for biosynthesis of a cell wall component. furthermore, gplh is the first mbth-like gene with proven functional role in a member of the mycobacterium genus. altogether, this study formally demonstrates a critical role for gplh in mycobacterial biology and advances our understanding of the genetic requirements for the biosynthesis of an important group of constituents of the unique mycobacterial outer membrane.

