BACKGROUND
alternative splicing
alternative splicing  is an important mechanism implicated in eukaryotic gene expression, whereby exon segments of precursor-mrna transcripts are joined together in different arrangements. in contrast to constitutive splicing, where all exons of a gene are joined together in a single fixed composition, as is thus a mechanism which generates distinct mature mrna transcripts from the same gene by variable use of splice sites. many different types of as events are known so far. the most common types are exon skipping, intron retention and the alternative usage of 5' or 3' splice sites. exon skips have been shown to be the most prevalent type in mammals, whereas intron retentions account for most as events in plant systems, such as a. thaliana  <cit> . accumulating evidence suggests that in many instances the generation of alternative isoforms of a gene is not just transcriptional noise, but a specifically regulated process of physiological importance, as it, for instance, substantially contributes to the structural and functional diversification of cell types  <cit> . consistent with this view, several studies of as in different organisms reported that as events may undergo differential regulation between tissues, i.e., the ratios of alternative transcript isoforms were observed to vary across tissues  <cit> . this suggests that tissue-specific differential splicing plays a major role in the evolution of specialized cell and tissue types  <cit> . moreover, misregulation of as may give rise to pathophysiological processes and has been associated with human diseases, such as cancer  <cit> , cystic fibrosis  <cit> , and many others  <cit> . since as has been extensively studied in mammals, but to a notably lesser extent in plants, we focused on the well-established model organism a. thaliana for investigating the regulation and prevalence of as in plants. environmental stresses have been found to impact as in plants, and novel transcript isoforms appearing under biotic or abiotic stresses have been reported  <cit> . stress-induced as is supposed to be mediated by altered levels, localization, or phosphorylation status of splicing factors  <cit> . consequently, levels of mrna isoforms change or new splice variants appear. this regulatory mechanism enables sessile plants to adapt their transcriptome in response to substantial environmental changes. cold and heat stress, for instance, have been shown to result in altered splicing of sr protein pre-mrnas  <cit> , which are known to act as splicing factors that in turn affect alternative splicing of pre-mrnas at a more global level. however, the whole complexity of the interaction network underlying stress-regulated as events still remains to be elucidated by experimental and computational in-depth studies of as in plants. large-scale studies of as are either based on sequencing mrna transcripts or on the inference of as events from splicing sensitive microarrays. sequencing approaches are typically based on a mapping of expressed transcripts  to the genomic sequence of the studied organism using a spliced alignment algorithm, such as blat  <cit> . array-based approaches utilize microarray platforms which are purpose-built for the highly parallel quantitative profiling of alternative transcript isoforms on a genome-wide level. unless very deep sequencing of transcriptomes becomes a routine and affordable, splicing-sensitive microarrays are still a viable alternative for detecting and profiling transcript isoforms <cit> .

splicing-sensitive microarray platforms
since microarrays commonly used for gene expression profiling do not generally allow to accurately detect as events, special array platforms have been developed for the characterization of transcript isoform variation. most of them can be assigned to one of the following categories: tiling arrays, exon arrays and exon junction arrays  <cit> , each of which comes with its own advantages and limitations. exon or exon junction arrays as well as tiling arrays enable de novo discovery of new transcript isoforms. one distinguishing feature of tiling arrays is that they are unbiased, as the tiling probes are designed independently of genome annotations. to measure the expression of individual isoforms relative to the overall expression of a gene, microarrays comprising both exon body as well as isoform-specific exon junction probes, have been widely used  <cit> . the design of these arrays is often focused on a particular gene set of interest. in contrast to that, tiling arrays typically interrogate the whole non-repetitive portion of a genome with equally spaced probes, a design which is particularly suited for compact genomes, such as that of a. thaliana. moreover, in contrast to exon arrays, which are mostly limited to monitoring exon skips and alternative 5' and 3' splicing owing to their probe design, tiling probes complementary to intronic regions enable the discovery of intron retention events, which account for more than 50% of the known as events in a. thaliana  <cit> . theoretically, all types of as are detectable from tiling arrays, but in practice, probe density is a limiting factor. for instance the detection of alternative 3' or 5' splice site selection is very difficult with the arabidopsis tiling array  <dig> r by affymetrix, because a substantial fraction of these events can only be detected from changes in a single probe set .

methods for the analysis of splicing microarray data
previous array-based approaches aiming at global analysis of as in diverse organisms are mostly unsupervised and typically based on statistical testing. the widely used method midas http://www.affymetrix.com/support/technical/whitepapers/exon_alt_transcript_analysis_whitepaper.pdf, which is part of the freely available r/bioconductor package exonmap,  <cit>  is based on the assumption that the signal level of an exon relative to the overall gene signal level is constant over samples for constitutively spliced exons. however, in the presence of as significant differences in the logarithmized ratio of normalized exon and gene levels, which is referred to as splicing index, can be detected over samples using an anova test. mads is an algorithmically similar approach which is also based on splicing indices  <cit> . the main difference to midas, which computes p-values on probeset-level, is that mads performs the statistical test for the detection of differential splicing indices across samples on the probe-level and performs the summarization over probes afterwards. purdom et al. developed another unsupervised method for the detection of as from exon arrays, which is called firma  <cit> . firma extends the very popular robust multi-chip analysis  model. as events are in essence inferred from high residuals of individual exon probe sets in the base rma gene-expression model, since these indicate a high deviation of the observed from the expected signal level of an exon. all of the above-mentioned methods are based on the assumption that the expression level of single exons is equal to the overall gene expression level in the absence of alternative splicing, and consequently exon skips are inferred based on deviations from this behavior. however, a recent study reported that in practice a technical bias of exon array platforms leads to a dramatic overestimation of as in the presence of differential gene expression. to correct for this bias, the authors developed the method cosie, which adjusts splicing indices using a non-linear model that incorporates probeset-specific response characteristics and saturation effects  <cit> . all of these computational methods were developed for the analysis of data from exon  arrays, and in practice they cannot easily be applied to tiling array platforms. conceptually, however, many of their modeling approaches are applicable to tiling arrays as well. most notably, the concept of relating the hybridization pattern of an exon or intron, for which as is to be tested, to those of surrounding exons and introns in the same gene can be transferred to tiling arrays. one of the first approaches for tiling array-based inference of as was developed by ner-gaon et al.  <cit> . it discovers retained introns based on untypically high hybridization signals. specifically, hybridization intensities measured for individual introns of a gene are related to each other and to the mean exonic signal level by means of a one-way anova test. building on the key concept common to many of the above-mentioned methods that the hybridization pattern of a putatively skipped exon is expected to be dissimilar to those of surrounding exons , we developed a method for tiling array data which uses a new principle of inference. instead of employing a statistical test, our method is based on supervised learning, and specifically makes use of well-studied support vector machine  classifiers . in contrast to the unsupervised testing approaches, our method is trained on known as events obtained from est/cdna databases or genome annotations. it proceeds in two steps: first, we predict single-sample confidence scores measuring the inclusion level of an exon or intron in the mature mrna transcripts of a gene. in a second step, we integrate these confidences across samples to predict all-sample confidence scores for alternative splicing.

RESULTS
we focused on two types of alternative splicing  events, namely exon skips  and intron retentions , which can be detected sufficiently accurately with the given tiling array resolution.

a supervised machine learning approach for the identification of ir and es requires a set of "labeled data", i.e., exons and introns which are known to be subject to as or not. such labeled data are needed for the training of classifiers, and provide a reference for the evaluation of the prediction accuracy and comparisons of different detection methods. owing to extensive previous work, several thousand as events have been annotated and confirmed by est and cdna sequences  <cit> . as the svm classifiers had to distinguish alternative from constitutive splicing, we also collected examples which are unlikely to be alternatively spliced. however, despite the existence of several as databases and continuous improvements of gene annotations  <cit> , it remains a challenging task to assess for exons and introns which are not annotated as alternatively spliced, whether alternative isoforms may exist, but have not yet been sequenced. arguably, exons or introns which are confirmed by many sequenced transcripts, none of which reveals an alternative isoform, are the best candidates for true constitutive splicing events  <cit> .

as confirmed by est and cdna sequences
after aligning ests and cdnas to the genome and inferring exon-intron structures , we obtained confirmation counts for each exon and intron as the number of sequenced transcripts confirming both adjacent splice sites. to account for the higher quality of full-length cdnas, we counted them twice. based on these confirmation counts, we compiled a high-confidence sequence-confirmed splicing  data set as follows. as positive examples, it contains  <dig> ir and  <dig> es events for which each isoform was found in at least two sequenced transcripts. to obtain a ratio between alternative and constitutive splicing that reflects current knowledge about the prevalence of as in the a. thaliana genome  <cit> , we included  <dig>  constitutive exons and  <dig>  constitutively spliced introns. these negative examples were sampled from exons and introns with confirmation counts greater or equal to  <dig>  for which no alternative transcript had been sequenced. on average, constitutive exons and introns in the scs set are confirmed by  <dig> and  <dig> sequenced transcripts, respectively. the composition of the exon and intron scs data sets is available as supplemental material from additional file  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively.

a supervised two-stage approach for the identification of as
in this work, we developed a supervised two-stage approach for the detection of ir and es events from tiling array data . at the core of the first stage, a set of support vector machine  classifiers distinguish exons from introns, based on features derived from their hybridization patterns and their relative position in the spliced transcript. we employed these exon-intron classifiers to decide for each tissue or stress treatment in isolation whether a given mrna segment  is included or excluded in a mature mrna transcript under this condition. this step is based on the assumption, that all included mrna segments  show similar hybridization patterns, which can accurately be distinguished from those of excluded mrna segments . subsequently, the resultant svm scores were transformed into probabilistic confidences indicating the inclusion probability of a given exon or intron in the mature mrna transcripts of a gene for a given condition.

clearly, the difficulty of the exon-intron classification task, solved in the first stage, varies from gene to gene depending on the expression level, as the difference between the hybridization signals of intronic and exonic probes increases with gene expression. to alleviate the expression-dependent differences of exonic and intronic signal levels, we employed a meta-classifier, consisting of m =  <dig> svm classifiers, each of them specialized to a certain range of expression values. these ten svm classifiers were independently trained on hybridization patterns corresponding to exons and introns not included in the scs data set and posterior class probabilities estimated . we verified that this meta-classifier consisting of several expression-specific svm classifiers indeed achieved higher accuracy than a single svm classifier .

in the second stage, another layer of classifiers integrates these single-sample inclusion probabilities across multiple hybridization samples to predict alternatively spliced segments. we trained different svm classifiers for the prediction of different types of as. one of these classifiers learned to infer es events from untypically low exon inclusion probabilities; another one was trained to detect ir events from untypically high inclusion probabilities of introns. in addition to the sample-specific inclusion probabilities, we provided these predictors of as with sample-matched gene expression values allowing them to re-weight the inclusion probabilities in an expression-dependent manner.

the proposed two-layer architecture allows to optimally use the existing labeled data: abundant constitutive splicing events are used to train the model dealing with highly variable the hybridization intensities to obtain stable exon/intron inclusion rates, while the much fewer as events are used to predict as based on the inclusion estimates.

prediction accuracy assessed in comparison to genome annotation and sequence data
in order to assess the prediction accuracy of the exon-intron classifiers, applied in the first stage of our method, we performed a 5-fold cross-validation on a large set of  <dig>  constitutive exons and  <dig>  constitutive introns, obtained from the tair annotation  <cit> . for this purpose, we employed receiver operating characteristic  as well as precision-recall analysis. depending on gene expression levels, exon-intron classifiers achieved values for the area under the roc curve  ranging from  <dig>  to  <dig>  indicating very high accuracy . precision-recall plots further confirmed that exons can be distinguished from introns with very high recall rates at a low false discovery rate . in addition to gene expression level, as measured on tiling arrays, two more factors were identified to influence classification accuracy. sequence confirmation had a positive effect, partly, because it is also strongly correlated with gene expression level, but probably also because label uncertainty decreases as sequence confirmation increases . furthermore, the number of tiling probes interrogating an exon or intron also impacts prediction performance. accuracy was found to increase with the number of informative probes, especially for genes expressed at low levels . the accuracy values shown here are the result of carefully selecting features on the basis of their discriminatory power . whereas a reliable benchmark set for exon/intron classification could readily be obtained from the annotation, assessing the accuracy of as predictions resulting from the second-stage classifiers was more challenging. here we used the est/cdna-based scs data set  to evaluate our predictions of as in a 5-fold cross-validation. roc plots show a large overlap between our predictions and the scs data , notwithstanding the fact that there are caveats to the direct comparison between array-based and sequence-confirmed as events. importantly, tissues and conditions analyzed with tiling arrays are not matched to those sampled by ests and cdna sequencing, and due to inconsistent labeling of est origin, it is hardly feasible to filter est data for a more direct comparison to tiling array data. the lack of deep est and cdna data for some of the conditions represented in the tiling array data sets analyzed here implies that cases which are labeled as constitutively spliced in the scs data set, may potentially be true examples of alternative splicing if a broader set of conditions is considered. effectively, this can result in exaggerated estimates of the false-discovery rate of tiling array-based predictions of as as benchmarked on the scs data set. similarly, such a comparison likely underestimates the true recall rate of our as predictions. nonetheless, the strong enrichment of our predictions with known cases of as directly confirms the validity of many of these predictions and allows us to estimate an upper bound of the false discovery rate.

a comparison of supervised and unsupervised as detection methods
although it is difficult to estimate absolute values for the accuracy of tiling array-based predictions of as using the scs data set as a benchmark, it is, however, useful to compare the predictions of different methods to each other in terms of their relative enrichment with known cases of as contained in the scs data set.

since most of the previous array-based approaches for profiling or discovery of as events  <cit>  are restricted to other types of microarray platforms, such as exon and/or exon junction arrays, it was not possible to directly compare our method to these approaches.

here, we selected two representative tiling array-based approaches for the method comparison; an approach by ner-gaon et al.  <cit> , which had to be modified to enable a direct comparison to our method, and another anova-based test, similar to midas http://www.affymetrix.com/support/technical/whitepapers/exon_alt_transcript_analysis_whitepaper.pdf. both methods are unsupervised, relying on statistical testing. in essence, the former approach identifies potentially retained introns for which the mean probe signal is significantly higher than the mean signal of other introns of the same gene and statistically similar to the mean exonic signal. similarly, the naive anova-based approach directly takes the hybridization signals as input. first the overall gene expression levels are normalized to correct for expression differences across experimental conditions. subsequently, the statistical test identifies differentially spliced introns, based on the assumption that their normalized probe signal levels significantly differ between the analyzed samples.

we compared the three different array-based methods for the identification of ir events relative to the scs data set by means of roc analysis. we found that irs predicted by our supervised learning approach are significantly stronger enriched for sequence-confirmed as events than the results of the two other as detection methods that are based on statistical tests . particularly, precision-recall curves show that both statistical testing methods achieve considerably lower agreement with known as events .

moreover, we evaluated to what extent different design choices  and tiling array-derived features contributed to the accuracy of our method and how it compares to simpler ad-hoc procedures for the inference as events .

genome-wide identification of as
using the svm-based predictors of as, we conducted a whole-genome analysis of all introns contained in the top 50% of tair annotated genes with highest expression level. we tested a total of  <dig>  internal exons and  <dig>  introns, contained in  <dig>  and  <dig>  tair annotated genes, respectively.

to quantify the uncertainty associated with each prediction, svm outputs were transformed to probabilistic confidences using the scs data sets as a reference . taking a stringent cutoff, conservative genome-wide predictions included  <dig>  ir events.

we also performed a whole-genome screen for exon skips, which resulted in the prediction of  <dig>  candidates that are expected to be enriched with exon skipping events. however, the predicted es events are considered as unreliable, as the observed overlap with the scs data set is substantially lower. the ir and es events predicted genome-wide are available as supplemental material in additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  the confidence scores computed for all introns and exons considered in our genome-wide study of as can be found in additional file  <dig> 

external validation against as events derived from rna-seq data
we performed an additional external validation of our genome-wide predictions of ir by comparing them to a recently published rna-seq data set  <cit> . from the rna-seq read data, which covers diverse abiotic stress conditions, we derived ir events  and determined the overlap with tiling array-based predictions. more than 25% of our predictions are also supported by the rna-seq data - a > 9-fold enrichment over random . we note, however, that annotated as events are more strongly overrepresented among our predictions   and furthermore that the overrepresentation of annotated as events among those derived from rna-seq data is weaker  . thus, tiling array-based inference of as recovered annotated ir events more accurately than could be achieved with a comprehensive rna-seq data set  <cit> . this result can in part be explained by the fact that the tiling array data set covers a richer set of experimental conditions than the rna-seq data set. in total,  <dig> out of our  <dig>  genome-wide predictions of ir  are supported by either annotation or rna-seq data with  <dig> events being present in all three sets. we expect that many more of our predicted as events will be confirmed by more comprehensive sequence experiments.

tissue-regulated and stress-induced as
inferring as based on tiling arrays rather than est and cdna sequences has the advantage that complete information for all analyzed samples is available. we thus investigated splicing profiles across tissues and stress conditions for the set of genome-wide predicted as events. to detect tissue-specific and stress-induced as events, respectively, we implemented two scores integrating multiple samples on top of the single-sample inclusion probabilities, which were estimated in the first stage of our method. tissue-regulated as was inferred from high differences of tissue-specific inclusion levels. stress-regulated events were identified based on varying inclusion levels between stress treatments and controls. accordingly, we defined tissue and stress scores  and selected differentially spliced introns using a stringent cutoff.

we identified  <dig> ir events showing tissue-specific regulation.  <dig> ir events were found to be differentially included in mrna transcripts between stress treatments and the corresponding controls. for  <dig> ir events we observed both tissue-specific and stress-dependent as. the predicted as events listed in additional files  <dig> and  <dig> are specifically marked to indicate tissue-specificity and/or stress-dependency.

discussion
tiling arrays are well-suited to study as in a plant model
many of the commonly known biases and limitations inherent in sequence-based approaches for the study of as are ameliorated by tiling arrays. est coverage usually increases toward the 3' and 5' ends of transcripts as a consequence of over-representation of end-sequence reads in the respective libraries, and similar biases resulting from oligo-based priming are commonly known for cdnas  <cit> . furthermore, traditional sequence-based approaches with limited sequencing depth inevitably result in a poor coverage of genes with low expression. consequently, as events occurring in genes with expression restricted temporally, spatially, or to certain environmental conditions are often missing or underrepresented in current databases. however, tiling array data exist and are publicly available for a large variety of tissues, developmental stages, and environmental conditions for many model organisms including a. thaliana  <cit> . tiling arrays provide a well-suited platform for profiling as in plants, not least because in contrast to other as-sensitive arrays, only tiling arrays allow for the discovery of novel intron retention events. a better understanding of this most prevalent type of as in plants will also contribute to the elucidation of the mechanistic differences in splicing between plant and animal systems.

accuracy of the proposed method
with the amount of training data available for a. thaliana, svms were found to more accurately recover known ir events than the unsupervised statistical methods considered in our comparison. a possible explanation for this is the robustness of svms against high levels of noise as observed in the microarray data. furthermore, statistical tests often rely on modeling assumptions  which might not necessarily be true for real microarray data. in contrast to statistical methods which are normally exclusively based on normalized probe intensities, our svm-based classifiers incorporate additional features, which were found to increase the classification accuracy .

we observed much lower accuracy for the es classifier compared to ir predictions. this may be a consequence of es events being less frequent in a. thaliana than ir events . hence also the class distribution, i.e., the ratio between constitutively and alternatively spliced exons/introns, is much more imbalanced for es events than for ir events , which makes the es classification task more difficult.

applicability of the proposed method
the supervised as detection method proposed here is applicable to other organisms, provided that sufficient training data, i.e., est/cdna sequences, are available from genome annotations and sequence databases. already at moderate sequencing depth, ests and cdnas typically confirm sufficiently many exons and introns to derive ample training data for the exon-intron classification in the first step of the algorithm, and hence this should be applicable to a wide range of non-model organisms. the second step of our algorithm, which involves the training of svm classifiers on known as events, depends much more on comprehensive annotations. however, a statistical test could replace the supervised approach here, and this slightly modified strategy would also be applicable to species that are poorly annotated with respect to as. conceptually, our method could also be applied to focused array designs provided that intron probe sets are available. if exon-exon junction probes were integrated on the employed array platform, the respective hybridization signals could be incorporated as additional connectivity features supporting the condition-dependent inclusion or exclusion of an exon in mature mrna transcripts. analogously, exon-intron junction probes could be utilized for the detection of retained introns. however, the analysis of exon arrays is not directly possible, because our method requires intronic signal levels for the estimation of single-sample inclusion probabilities.

validation of tiling array-based as predictions relative to est/cdna sequences, rna-seq data, and the genome annotation
as most studies of as have the goal to discover new as events for which by definition no sequence-evidence exists, it has become a common practice to independently validate predictions by reverse-transcriptase pcr  experiments  <cit> . this validation method provides an accurate means for assessing the confidence in predicted, as yet unknown as events, but is typically only used to confirm a few dozen cases. instead of performing biological validation experiments, we adopted an alternative strategy of evaluating our predictions on a set of known, sequence-confirmed as events, derived from large collections of publicly available transcript sequences. such a comparison can easily be based on thousands of cases, but there are caveats to the interpretation of the results. first, the number of as events contained in our scs test set is constrained by the number of available est and cdna sequences, which mostly cover highly expressed genes. therefore, our evaluation set is biased toward high expression levels, which limits the generalizability of the results for genes expressed at low levels. second, as the tair annotation as well as sequence databases are incomplete with respect to as at present, an unknown number of constitutively labeled segments in our test set may actually undergo as, and these mislabelings may distort evaluation results, particularly the estimation of false positives. to partially overcome these limitations, we complemented this first evaluation strategy by a comparison against ultra-high throughput sequencing data. these data were generated by filichkin et al., who recently published a study of as, for which they profiled several a. thaliana tissues and diverse stress conditions  <cit>  using rna-seq. the comparison of as events inferred from tiling arrays to those independently derived from rna-seq data showed a highly significant overlap between both sets of results  . interestingly, even though rna-seq is already replacing splicing-sensitive microarrays as the method of choice for studying as  <cit> , the rna-seq data presently available for a. thaliana does not appear to more accurately reflect annotated cases of as . although these data set comparisons do not allow us to accurately estimate the performance of our tiling array-based inference, the large number of predictions supported by either rna-seq-derived or annotated ir events  and the considerably smaller relative overlap between these two sets makes it plausible that many more of our predictions are valid  and that the extent of as is still likely to be underestimated.

a catalog of newly identified as events will enable future research
the compilation of array-based predictions generated in this study adds to our current knowledge of the prevalence of as in a. thaliana  <cit>  and provides new insights into tissue- and stress-specific regulation of as. the fact that our predictions were made with respect to a large, but well-defined panel of plant organs, developmental stages, and stress treatments is an advantage over sequence-based as databases, for which sample origin information is typically difficult to map. since we studied the tissue-dependent occurrence of isoforms, our work constitutes a starting point for functional characterization as well as for studying regulation of differential alternative splicing. the latter task could be approached based on correlation of expression patterns of known splicing regulators with the putatively targeted, "co-spliced" exons and introns, showing consistent splicing profiles across tissues. furthermore, putative splicing factor binding sites could be detected, based on a search for overrepresented motives in the flanking sequences of co-spliced exons or introns.  <cit> . finally, a splicing-regulatory network integrating the predicted relationships between splicing factors and target exons and introns could be inferred for a. thaliana. to provide a basis for studying the mechanisms governing as regulation and its physiological implications on a systems level, future research focusing on the elucidation of the regulatory interactions between trans-acting splicing factors and their cis-acting pre-mrna motives appears promising.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we describe a supervised machine learning-based method for large-scale detection and profiling of alternative splicing from a quantitative tiling array platform.

while limited amounts of known as events are available, which serve as labeled training data for supervised as detection methods, the number of reliably annotated constitutive exons and introns is very large. we therefore designed a two-stage classification procedure which first learned to discriminate constitutive exons and introns in single samples and subsequently integrated scores across samples to obtain predictions of as. specifically, we trained ten svms in the first stage, which were specialized to appropriate ranges of gene expression, and discriminated exons from introns, based on diverse features derived from the corresponding hybridization pattern and position in the transcript. the predicted svm scores were in turn transformed to probabilistic confidences which served as an estimator for the probability that a given exon or intron is contained in the mrna of a gene expressed under a particular environmental condition. in the second step the single-sample inclusion probabilities were combined across samples for each exon and intron. the resulting all-sample score proved to be an appropriate means for the discrimination of constitutively and alternatively spliced segments and was found to be more accurate than the outcome of statistical tests when benchmarked against known as events. we thus applied the all-sample svm-based prediction score in a genome-wide screen to discover novel ir events. comparisons to a recently published comprehensive rna-seq data set  <cit>  and the latest genome annotation directly validated almost 40% of our genome-wide predictions and suggest that our method re-discovered as events present in these benchmarking sets with an accuracy that is comparable to that of the presently available rna-seq data.

