BACKGROUND
functional modules are observed at various levels in biology, ranging from sub cellular to the ecosystem. a general definition that holds across these different levels is that a functional module is a discrete entity whose function is separable from those of other modules  <cit> . one straightforward example of such a module in the cell would be a distinct pathway mediating a certain physiological response. besides the classical biochemical characterization of such pathways, recent analyses have identified many possible modules using multiple high-throughput data sources  <cit> . analyses of various biological connectivity data have found therein patterns that are overrepresented and might correspond to small modules  <cit>  . discovered mostly from connectivity and co-expression data, it is not clear whether these "structural" modules correspond to real functional modules that are possibly conserved over evolution  <cit> . so far, it has been only possible to test the functional role of such "discovered" modules in case of few motifs  <cit> .

while such efforts to discover and characterize distinct pathways constituting functional modules continue, we still lack a clear understanding of how modularity emerges in biological systems of multiple interacting proteins. theoretical studies in linear systems suggest that modularity might emerge as a byproduct of selection for dynamical stability  <cit> . however, the use of a purely mathematical description of stability  in these studies might limit extending their findings to biological pathways that are known to have non-linear dynamics. another possibility is that modularity in complex systems is selected for, because it allows a fitness benefit under varying environments  <cit> . this is in contrast to the simpler explanation that modularity emerges neutrally as a result of evolutionary processes and does not require presence of any complex selection . first put forward in a "thought experiment", to explain modularity in regulatory pathways and bacterial diversification  <cit> , the neutralistic explanation is also supported by theoretical studies with simple models of regulatory networks  <cit> .

here, we give a detailed treatment of the role of evolutionary processes in the emergence and maintenance of functional modules in signaling pathways. we assume that signaling pathways have evolved from a simple ancestral pathway containing few non-specific proteins, some of which acted as effectors and receptors. the fitness benefit for an organism to mediate separate  responses to different signals would exert a constant selective pressure on such a pathway for achieving specific signal-response relations. we propose that such a constant selective pressure would then drive pathways to evolve modular structures. to test this hypothesis, we use mathematical models of signaling pathways and evolutionary simulations. results of these simulations show that pathways evolve readily distinct sub-pathways or modules that mediate specific signal-response relations. further analyses highlight duplications and protein recruitment as key mutational processes facilitating modularity. on the other hand, mutations leading to new interactions among existing proteins in a pathway destroy functional modules and lead to crosstalk and complex pathways. the relevant rates of these different mutational processes that shape pathway topology, and the distribution of such topologies in the topology space emerge as the key determinants for the evolution of modularity.

RESULTS
to test the hypothesis that modularity in signaling pathways emerges as a result of evolution towards mediating distinct responses to different signals, we use mathematical models of such pathways and simulate their evolution . these simulations start with a homogenous population of an "ancestral" pathway that contains two effectors , one receptor and one intermediary protein. both of these proteins are assumed to be non-specific; the receptor has equal affinity towards all ligand molecules present in the medium, and equally activates the two effectors, while the intermediary protein acts as a "global" deactivator inhibiting both the receptor and the two effectors with equal strength. figure  <dig> shows this ancestral pathway and its response  to two distinct ligand molecules . during the course of evolution, each generation is created from the previous one by selecting pathways randomly with replacement and allowing them to replicate with a probability proportional to fitness. here, we use a fitness function that represents a constant selective pressure on pathways to mediate distinct responses to the different signals presented. it rewards pathways ability to respond through effector one  in presence of signal a , and not in presence of signal b  .
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaacpc6xni=xh8vivgi8gi=heeeu0xxdbba9frfj0xb9qqpg0dxdb9aspei8k8fii+fsy=rqgqvepae9pg0db9vqaivgfr0xfr=xfr=xc9adbaqaaegacagaaiaabeqaaeqabiwaaagcbagaemyrau0aa0baasqaaiabigdaxaqaaiabdgeabbaaaaa@2f0e@ and e1b
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaacpc6xni=xh8vivgi8gi=heeeu0xxdbba9frfj0xb9qqpg0dxdb9aspei8k8fii+fsy=rqgqvepae9pg0db9vqaivgfr0xfr=xfr=xc9adbaqaaegacagaaiaabeqaaeqabiwaaagcbagaemyrau0aa0baasqaaiabigdaxaqaaiabdkeacbaaaaa@2f10@) and effector  <dig>  are evaluated . proteins labeled as two and three correspond to a receptor and "global deactivator"  respectively. interaction coefficients are shown as a matrix, listing the actions of other proteins on a given protein row-by-row.

to better understand how such modularity emerges in these simulations, we analyze the evolutionary processes that shape pathway structure. here, we consider duplication and loss of proteins, loss and formation of interactions, and adjustment of kinetic rates as such processes . formation of new interactions can result when point mutations  on a protein lead to a new binding surface for recognizing another protein or signal, as observed in vitro  <cit> . considering that there are many proteins in an organism that are not participating in a given pathway, it is much more likely that such mutations would lead to formation of a new interaction between a protein that is already participating in this pathway and one that is not . this intuition leads to the assumption that formation of new interactions among existing proteins in a pathway are negligibly rare compared to new protein recruitment. results shown in figure  <dig> are obtained under such an assumption .

relaxing this assumption, we run additional simulations with decreasing probability for protein recruitment in expense of new interactions forming among existing proteins. figure  <dig> shows the frequency of different pathway types in the final populations obtained from these simulations. we find that allowing interaction formation among participating proteins in a pathway diminish the chances of modularity emerging and lead to complex pathways or crosstalk . this effect is still visible in simulations run with smaller population size, although modularity is maintained more frequently in such small populations . the latter observation is in line with theoretical predictions resulting from studies of simple models of gene regulatory pathways  <cit> .

analysis of the distribution of pathway types over the entire evolutionary simulation, we get a clearer picture of the relation between mutational events and modularity. as shown in figure  <dig>  modular pathways emerge relatively quickly in the population regardless of the relative rate of protein recruitment and interaction formation. however, in presence of the latter process modular pathways are quickly replaced by pathways with crosstalk or complex pathways. note that while the distribution of modular pathways change in the population, the average fitness remains high . analyzing the effects of different mutational processes on pathway structure, we find that transitions from modular pathways to pathways with crosstalk are extensively caused by interaction addition . the reverse transitions, resulting in modular pathways, are solely driven by protein and interaction loss. hence, the emergence and maintenance of functional modules is mostly determined by the relevant rate of these different mutational processes.

another key mutational process is duplication of proteins already participating in the pathway. without duplication, there is no possibility of functional modules emerging. for example, new receptors can only be created through duplication in the model . furthermore, duplications push pathways to grow in size and make it possible for the pathway structure to be rearranged towards modularity via other mutational events. pathway growth  occurs despite the higher frequency of protein loss mutations because duplications, and to some extent protein recruitments, are less costly in terms of fitness . as shown in figure  <dig>  the average fitness cost of duplications remains low over the entire evolution and does not depend on pathway size. on the other hand, negative fitness effects of other mutational events, especially of mutations leading to protein loss from the pathway, are more pronounced when pathways are smaller. these findings are inline with previous studies analyzing pathway growth in similar models  <cit> . similarly, employing a high fitness cost for additional proteins in the model prohibits pathway growth and emergence of modularity .

to summarize, results from these evolutionary simulations suggest the following scenario for the evolution of functional modules. simple, non-specific pathways that arose early in evolution would grow in size due to low fitness costs associated with protein duplication and recruitment events. as pathways grow, mutations leading to loss of proteins or their interaction would lead to rearrangement of the pathway structure resulting in the emergence of functional modules. this process happens surprisingly easily and does not require a complex selective pressure. in fact, we find that functional modules emerge even with an alternative fitness function that is simply based on the ability of the pathway to respond to two signals . this supports a neutralistic view for the emergence of modularity, as envisioned in regulatory pathways  <cit> . once emerged, functional modules would then be maintained depending on the frequency of mutations leading to formation of new interactions among proteins participating in the pathway. this process causes modular pathways to drift towards complex pathways and crosstalk, which provide equally fit solutions as their modular neighbors.

the results leading to this scenario are obtained under the assumption that evolution starts with a specific ancestral pathway structure. to analyze how this initial pathway structure affects the emergence of modularity, we run additional simulations with an initial heterogeneous population composed of  <dig> random pathways that contain two, three or five intermediary proteins. as before, we assume that interaction formation mutations between proteins already participating in the pathway can be neglected . we find that the exact structure of the ancestral pathway does not have a large effect on the emergence of modularity as long as the pathway is small . for larger pathways, it becomes more difficult for mutational events to restructure them towards modularity as the topology space available to a pathway increases exponentially with pathway size. as seen from the high variance in the results of these simulations, the outcome of the evolution for such larger pathways depends highly on the location of the initial pathway in the topology space and the distribution of functional pathways  in this space. this indicates an important role for such neighbor relations in the evolution of system level properties and is inline with previous theoretical studies  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides a simple and biologically plausible explanation for the emergence of modularity in biological signaling pathways. according to this explanation, functional modules specializing in processing one of the multiple signals an organism could encounter emerges readily under a constant selective pressure. the driving processes behind such emergence are protein duplication and recruitment events leading to pathway growth, and loss of proteins and their interactions leading to rearrangement of pathway topology. once arisen, the probability that such functional modules will be maintained will depend on the frequency of mutations leading to formation of interactions among proteins already participating in the pathway and the fitness of resulting pathways. in other words, the extent of modularity in a specific pathway will mainly depend on the relevant rates of different mutational mechanisms and how functional pathway topologies are distributed over the entire topology space for a given function.

these findings are highly relevant for our understanding of modularity in biological systems, and for applying such understanding to mimic biology in engineering applications . firstly, they validate the previous arguments that modularity can emerge readily in biological pathways  <cit>  without any need for complex selective pressure. here we focus on simple mutational processes to provide a mechanistic explanation for the emergence of modularity. we note that more complex processes like horizontal gene transfer, that we did not consider here, could facilitate such emergence as it is found that most of such events involve transfer of entire receptor-effector pairs rather than individual proteins in bacteria  <cit> . secondly, the results indicate that although modularity can emerge easily, it is difficult to maintain, as nonmodular pathways  can be equally capable of achieving functionality. examples for both types of pathways are abundant in biology with two-component signaling pathways of bacteria providing a particularly well-studied case. a systematic study of these systems in the model organism escherichia coli show that the core element of these pathways, the histidine kinase – response regulator pair, can be highly specific  or not, allowing crosstalk among different pairs   <cit> . here, we specifically looked at how the relevant rates of different mutational processes and the distribution of pathway structures in topology space affect this balance between maintenance of modularity and emergence of crosstalk. an equally important role could be played by the secondary fitness benefits of modularity, such as increases in evolvability  <cit>  or robustness.

the presented scenario for the evolution of signaling pathways is in its essence similar to the one put forward for the evolution of metabolic pathways. according to that theory, current day metabolic pathways with specialized enzymes have evolved, from an ancestral pathway containing non-specific ones, under constant selective pressure for high metabolic yield  <cit> . similarly, we find that distinct signaling pathways , specific for processing a single signal, can emerge from an ancestral system containing non-specific receptors, phosphotases and kinases. the resulting modular pathways are underlined by high specificity among components and little or no crosstalk. such specificity is achieved by different mechanisms in nature including kinetic preference  <cit> , scaffolding  <cit> , and spatial localization  <cit>  and allows biological systems to ensure signaling fidelity. we believe that combining the knowledge on such molecular-level mechanisms with evolutionary studies of system level properties  <cit>  will be crucial for achieving a complete system level understanding in biology.

