BACKGROUND
recent work has highlighted the role of phenotypic plasticity in evolutionary divergence  <cit> . the ability to express alternative phenotypic characters in response to a range of environmental stimuli such as predators, rivals, or abiotic environmental properties can both expose and protect genetic variation across environments, effectively strengthening or diluting selection on individual traits  <cit> . by studying the phenotypic plasticity of traits expressed by individual genotypes across a range of environments, we can determine both the extent of trait plasticity, the genetic variation supporting it and the constraints that arise through specific genotype-by-environment interactions   <cit> . this can indicate the driving factors behind patterns of phenotypic variation across environments and help to explain within-species patterns of divergence in morphological, behavioural or physiological traits  <cit> .

the well-known relationship between temperature and body size, known as the temperature-size rule, provides a useful framework for examining phenotypic plasticity in nature  <cit> . this is because body sizes produced from phenotypically plastic responses to environmental temperatures can become genetically fixed over time  <cit> . individuals from populations experiencing different climates then demonstrate fixed differences in body sizes, even under standard laboratory conditions  <cit> . temperature-size relationships that exist across latitudinal or altitudinal gradients are known as bergmann clines and are typically characterized by larger body sizes at cooler temperatures, i.e. higher latitudes or altitudes  <cit> . however, the converse bergmann cline, where individuals in cooler climates  mature at smaller sizes has also been observed  <cit> . converse bergmann clines may be adaptive, for example to accommodate a shorter growing season than that available to tropical conspecifics, or represent a conflict between developmentally plastic responses to temperature and adaptive responses to seasonal variation  <cit> . opposing environmental and genetic influences on phenotypic traits, known as countergradient variation, may result in very little observable phenotypic variation across the geographic range of a species  <cit> . direct conflicts between environmental effects and adaptive selection on influential traits such as body size may lead to correlated traits being constrained or even maladapted in different populations of species occupying large geographic ranges  <cit> . for example, female body size can be directly linked to fecundity and survival and play a large role in the success of populations occupying challenging environments, such as northern populations that endure long overwintering periods  <cit> . body size can also influence the mating success of males, which may impact on the genetic variation in populations of different densities  <cit> . body size can also affect the ability to tolerate desiccation and cold-stress which may ultimately determine species distribution patterns  <cit> . temperature-size relationships and bergmann clines in widely distributed species therefore represent an ideal framework within which to examine the evolutionary role of phenotypic plasticity.

here we examine temperature-size relationships in drosophila pseudoobscura. the geographic range of this fruit fly extends from canada at the northern end of north america, through the usa into guatemala . previous work has shown that phenotypic plasticity in body size occurs in this species  <cit> . experimental work has also demonstrated the potential for evolutionary divergence between populations as plasticity in body sizes can stabilize over time under laboratory conditions  <cit> . additionally, strong latitudinal distributions of other traits, such as sex ratio distortion and polyandry in this species have been observed but not yet conclusively explained  <cit> . one potential explanation is that phenotypic plasticity in body size, driven by temperature, underpins the latitudinal patterns already established in other traits. for example, larger females developing in cooler climates may produce substantially more offspring, requiring multiple matings to gain sufficient supplies of viable sperm for complete fertilization. our aims are to investigate the variation in body size due to environmental, genetic, and genotype-by-environment  influences. to achieve this, we examined  <dig> isolines representing three populations spanning a 1770 km latitudinal section of the geographic range across the usa. these populations experience an average of 5°c difference in mean monthly peak temperatures .figure  <dig> 
mean monthly temperature at each collection site. mean monthly temperatures in the three geographic locations relative to the experimental temperatures used in the experiment. climate data from 1981– <dig> is from the archives of the national climatic data centre .



RESULTS
we measured wing sizes in a total of  <dig> flies from  <dig> isolines across four temperatures. summary statistics for wing sizes at different rearing temperatures and in different isolines are given in table  <dig> and displayed in figure  <dig>  a full explanation of data analysis is included in the methods section. briefly, wing length  was scaled to standard deviation units prior to analysis and then modelled as: wl = μ + year + t + pop + t. pop + t. year + iso + t. iso + ε.table  <dig> 
summary statistics for wing sizes  in  <dig> isolines of flies reared at four temperatures



variable
n
min
max
mean
se

temperature
females

population
isolinesmean wing size of three populations at four temperatures. mean wing size  scored across four developmental temperatures in three populations of flies. lewistown  = black lines/square markers; show low  = grey lines/circle; chiricahua  = grey lines/triangle markers.



where, μ is the mean, year is a 2-level fixed factor , t is a linear effect of temperature in °c , pop is a 3-level fixed factor  and year.pop and t.year.pop are interaction terms. our mixed model analysis showed that, after controlling for a small but significant year effect and a marginally non-significant t.year interaction effect, there was evidence for plasticity and among-population genetic variance in wing length . average wing length decreases at a rate of  <dig>   standard deviations units  for each degree of temperature rise. however, there was no statistical support for among-population gxes . likelihood ratio tests provided evidence of significant within-population  genetic variance  and gxe . under the full model  the  variance parameters  were estimated as: vr =  <dig>  , viso_int =  <dig>  , viso_slp =  <dig>   and coviso_int.slp = − <dig>  , the latter scaling to an intercept-slope correlation riso_int.slp of − <dig>  . note that since t was mean centred and the raw data scaled to unit variance, viso_int can be directly interpreted as the proportion of observed phenotypic variance in wing length attributable to genetic differences among isolines at an average temperature . overall we conclude that variation in wing sizes is primarily influenced by environmental temperature, with a smaller influence due to genetic variation expressed as significant isoline responses. there were no substantial influences on mean plasticity between populations due to gxe effects, but significant gxe isoline differences.table  <dig> 
fixed effect estimates from linear mixed effect model of wing length



effect
factor level
coefficient
f
df
p

μ

year

t

pop

t.pop

t.year
nb. the predicted mean  is for a chiricahua fly in  <dig> at mean temperature .
reaction norms for wing sizes  of each isoline, with temperature as a continuous variable. lewistown  = dashed black lines; show low  = solid grey lines; chiricahua  = dashed grey lines.



discussion
we examined temperature-size relationships in isolines of d. pseudoobscura collected across a latitudinal transect to establish the relative contributions of phenotypic plasticity and genotypic variation to variation in body size across the species geographic range. the strong relationship of body size with temperature can explain latitudinal patterns of species distributions via its close links with many aspects of fitness  <cit> . this can potentially also explain geographic patterns of variation in other traits  <cit> . overwhelmingly, we found that environmental rearing temperature had the greatest effect on wing size. the substantial environmental influence of temperature on body size corroborates work in this and other drosophila species that repeatedly show temperature-size relationships consistent with classic bergmann clines – larger body sizes at lower temperatures  <cit> . our absolute measures of wing sizes also closely resemble those measured using identical methods in other populations of d. pseudoobscura, suggesting that the overall range of phenotypic responses to specific temperatures has been well conserved over time in this species  <cit> . there are a multitude of theories to explain the enduring nature of temperature-size relationships, including metabolic rate and development rate  <cit> . the near-universal impact of temperature observed across all of the  <dig> genotypes suggests that the plastic response to temperature has remained constant across all three populations with little evolutionary divergence across the geographic range examined.

we also found evidence for genetic differences among isolines  in wing sizes. however, an entirely unexpected feature to emerge from our analysis was evidence consistent with a converse bergmann cline, as flies from the northern population of lewistown, which experience the coolest year-round climate, were genetically smaller than flies from the southern populations of show low and chiricahua when reared at the same temperature. this is somewhat counter to evidence from sokoloff, who found that body sizes of d. pseudoobscura derived from locations around the usa and mexico did not show a clear relationship with latitude or local temperatures when reared at a standard temperature in the laboratory  <cit> . opposing environmental and genetic variation in traits, known as countergradient variation and formally denoted by negative covariance between genetic and environmental sources of variance, can produce phenotypic similarity across different environments  <cit> . given that we found significant phenotypic variation in body sizes across different environments, it is unlikely that countergradient variation alone is sufficient to explain patterns of body sizes in this case. further, since we have data from only three populations from the potentially hundreds across the entire geographic distribution we refrain from making firm conclusions on this point. interestingly, d. pseudoobscura tends to differ from the consensus pattern of adaptive distributions found in other traits in drosophila species. for example, kellermann et al. reported that global distributions of  <dig> tropical and cosmopolitan drosophila species could be explained by genetic variation in cold-stress with tropical species effectively confined to their lower latitudes by lack of suitable genetic variation in their ability to tolerate cold-stress  <cit> . in contrast, d. pseudoobscura from colder climates are equally as tolerant of hot conditions as those originating from warmer climates, and those from warmer climates are better at tolerating cold shocks than those from colder sites  <cit> .

one possibility is that the unique system of third chromosome inversions in this species has influenced the genetic diversity available within populations that enables them to respond effectively to environmental conditions  <cit> . in our populations, individuals heterozygous for inversion sequences are more common in our northern laboratory populations, which may have preserved small body sizes in this population  <cit> . however, we note that the closely related d. subobscura also has chromosome inversions and yet shows the more common pattern of larger body sizes at lower temperatures due to selection for efficient wing loading at different body sizes  <cit> . it is possible that by using a selection of isolines that were collected in  <dig> and  <dig> we have inadvertently measured laboratory adaptation in wing sizes and interpreted this as genetic differences between populations. however, we do not think this is likely as the purpose of inbreeding from isofemale lines immediately after capture from the field is to prevent laboratory adaptation and preserve the genetic variation available  <cit> , but see  <cit>  for cases where laboratory adaptation occurred in isofemale lines. we also specifically accounted for the effect of ‘year’ in our analyses and found no evidence that year of collection is driving the effects observed. alternatively, body size may be under indirect selection by being closely linked with other fitness related traits, which may themselves have no relationship with temperature  <cit> . for example, the relationship between body size and mating success or fecundity may differ in northern and southern populations of d. pseudoobscura, which may prevent convergence between environmental and genetic determination of body sizes.

we also found significant genetic variation in plasticity  between isolines within, but not between, populations. in other words, looking among populations there is no more gxe than expected given each population itself was comprised of a unique mixture of isolines. thus there is no evidence that mean plasticity has diverged among populations due to local selection. interestingly, we observed from the reaction norms that the isolines in our experiment deviated most from each other at the coldest temperature , suggesting that genotypes began to show differences in the ability to grow and develop at this temperature. this indicates that some genotypes may be more susceptible to cold stress than others, but that cold-tolerance does not appear to differ between populations.

the relative contributions of phenotypic plasticity  and genetic variance to body size variation closely resemble work by gupta & lewontin, who compared the number of thoracic bristles in natural populations of d. pseudoobscura reared at 14°c, 21°c and 26°c  <cit> . they also compared reaction norms and found that all individual genotypes conformed to a narrow range close to the average response across all temperatures, suggesting that a range of morphological traits in d. pseudoobscura are liable to show plastic responses to temperature and with only limited influence of gxes. gxes have been posited as a key component to the maintenance of genetic variation  <cit> . so, while it is possible that small, but significant, gxe effects could promote or disrupt adaptation to different environments, in this case, the influence of environmental temperature over any genetic effects suggests that these populations of d. pseudoobscura have not significantly diverged into separate ‘specialist’ populations.

CONCLUSIONS
temperature is the strongest influence on body sizes in d. pseudoobscura and can result in significant differences in adult flies inhabiting different climates with flies reared in cooler temperatures being significantly larger. however, there is also significant genetic variation for body size at both among- and within-population levels. among populations, genetic effects on body size run counter to the environmental influence as genotypes from the southern populations grew larger at all temperatures than those from the northern population. this could be driven by unique systems of chromosome inversions, or due to indirect selection on body size via correlated traits. genetic variance in plasticity is present within populations, but there is no evidence of local adaptation in plasticity itself.

