BACKGROUND
cd4+ t-cells and macrophages are the major targets for hiv- <dig> infection in vivo <cit> . unlike t-cells, macrophages can survive for long periods of time following infection, potentially serving as reservoirs of infectious virus  <cit>  that may facilitate the spread of virus to other target cells and to the brain  <cit> . previous work has shown that in monocyte-derived macrophages  differentiated in culture and infected with hiv- <dig>  new virus particles assemble on intracellular membranes variously suggested to be derived from the golgi apparatus  <cit>  or endosome-associated compartments  <cit> . however, recent studies have shown that hiv assembly in mdms takes place on membranes that are connected to the plasma membrane  <cit> . in hiv-infected mdms, these intracellular plasma membrane-connected compartments  appear to be the primary sites of virus assembly, as budding profiles, immature and mature virus particles can be seen within the ipmc structures, but are only rarely observed at the cell surface  <cit> . electron microscopy  has revealed ipmcs to be complex networks of membranes comprising tubules and vacuoles that can be connected to the cell surface via narrow channels  <cit> . although the function of ipmcs in mdms is currently unclear, their presence in uninfected cells  <cit>  indicates that they are not solely involved in virus replication but are likely to have other function in macrophages.

although well described morphologically, mainly in fixed samples, little is known about the formation, function or dynamics of ipmcs. here, we used the membrane dyes fm 4– <dig> and cellmask to investigate ipmcs and to further understand their links to the cell surface. in addition, using a green fluorescent protein -tagged pleckstrin homology  domain from phospholipase cδ , a probe that binds specifically to the lipid phosphatidylinositol  <dig> -bisphosphate p2), we could label ipmcs and monitor their behavior in living mdms. one characteristic feature of ipmcs is the presence of areas of electron-dense coat material on the cytoplasmic side of the limiting membrane, close to meshworks of cytoskeletal filaments  <cit> . these coats are related to focal adhesion plaques, containing the integrins αm/αx β <dig> , together with the focal adhesion proteins talin, paxillin and vinculin that link to the actin cytoskeleton  <cit> . we therefore also investigated the role of the actin cytoskeleton in the organization of ipmcs and the release of mature, ipmc-sequestered hiv- <dig> 

RESULTS
imaging of ipmcs with lipophilic membrane dyes
for the most part, ipmcs have been studied with regard to their role in hiv- <dig> replication in macrophages. however, previous work has suggested that ipmcs are also present in uninfected mdms and can be identified by immunostaining for membrane proteins such as cd <dig>  cd <dig> or the hyaluronic acid receptor cd <dig>  <cit> . as ipmcs are thought to be continuous with the plasma membrane, we investigated the ability of lipophilic dyes added to the cell media to label these compartments.

because ipmcs in mdms have been shown to develop with time in cell culture  <cit> , we used 14-day-old mdms for all of the studies described here. uninfected mdms were incubated with fm 4-64fx, a formaldehyde/glutaraldehyde-fixable analog of fm 4– <dig>  a lipophilic dye that fluoresces intensely on binding to the outer leaflet of lipid bilayers . labeling was carried out on ice to prevent endocytosis, through which the dye might access intracellular membranes by vesicular carriers  <cit> . subsequently, the cells were fixed and imaged. this allowed rapid and specific labeling of the cell surface plasma membrane. in addition, fm 4– <dig> labeling was seen in prominent intracellular structures reminiscent of cd9-, cd81- or cd44-labeled ipmcs . in three-dimensional reconstructions of fm 4-64fx-labeled cells from optical sections, the ipmcs appeared as clusters of interconnected vacuoles with occasional direct contacts to the cell surface . because the cells were stained on ice in the absence of endocytosis, and we saw no labeled vesicles resembling endocytic organelles , we assume that these connections allowed the dye to access the ipmcs. to confirm that ipmcs labeled with fm 4– <dig> correspond to the compartments where hiv assembles, we expressed the hiv structural protein gag linked to gfp , which is also targeted to cd81- and cd44-positive ipmcs in mdms , and stained these cells with fm 4-64fx. in transfected mdms, both gag-gfp and fm 4– <dig> co-localized in ipmcs .

in an alternative approach, we used cellmask plasma membrane stain, a negatively charged amphipathic molecule reported to undergo only slow internalization, to label mdms. cells were incubated with the dye for  <dig> minutes at 37°c or  <dig> minutes at 4°c, fixed and analyzed by confocal microscopy. as with fm 4-64fx, cellmask labeled the cell surface as well as surface-connected ipmcs . because the labeling showed the same pattern at both temperatures , we labeled cells for  <dig> minutes at 37°c for all further experiments with cellmask. the slow internalization of this dye also allowed us to observe ipmcs in living cells by spinning disc confocal microscopy for up to  <dig> minutes before uptake of the dye into endosomes became apparent. this allowed us to image whole cells and ipmcs in three dimensions while avoiding possible changes associated with fixation and without simultaneous labeling of endosomes and/or lysosomes . together these studies indicated that ipmcs in uninfected mdms can contain several interconnected vacuole-like structures with connections to the cell surface, though the numbers of connections varied for individual cells. for example, in  <dig> different three-dimensional reconstructions of cellmask-stained mdms, three ipmcs had a single connection to the cell surface, while eight had two or more. similarly, in five fm 4-64-labeled mdms, four ipmcs showed two or more connections to the cell surface.

we also used cellmask to label 14-day-old uninfected mdms and equivalent cells  that had been infected with hiv- <dig> for  <dig> days . most of the cells showed labeling of intracellular compartments, although there was significant cell-to-cell variability in the size and morphology of the ipmcs . to determine whether hiv infection induces the de novo formation of ipmcs, we inspected single optical sections such as those shown in figure 1g, h and counted the numbers of cells with prominent cellmask-labeled ipmcs  in the uninfected and hiv-infected mdms. in this analysis,  <dig> ±  <dig> % of the uninfected and  <dig> ±  <dig> % of the cells in the infected mdm cultures contained ipmcs , indicating that hiv infection does not itself induce the formation of ipmcs. as cellmask staining does not survive detergent extraction, co-staining for virus was not possible. however, independent labeling of mdms for the hiv- <dig> matrix protein  showed that approximately  <dig> ± 5% of the cells were producing mature virus , with most viral staining located in the ipmcs. together, these studies show that ipmcs, similar to the previously described hiv assembly compartments, are present in uninfected as well as hiv- <dig> infected cells, connected to the cell surface, and exhibit high cell-to-cell morphological variability.

ipmcs contain pip2
the phosphoinositide pip <dig>  which is located primarily in the cytoplasmic leaflet of the plasma membrane  <cit> , is essential for targeting of hiv- <dig> gag to the plasma membrane prior to virus assembly  <cit> . because hiv assembly in mdms takes place in ipmcs, we asked whether pip <dig> is also present in these compartments. uninfected mdms were nucleofected with an expression construct encoding the ph domain of phospholipase cδ fused to gfp , which specifically binds pip <dig>  after  <dig> hours, the cells were fixed and stained for cd <dig> or cd <dig>  ph-gfp was detected at the cell surface plasma membrane and also in ipmcs , where it co-localized with cd <dig> and cd <dig> . as with the membrane-impermeable dyes, ph-gfp outlined the membranes of ipmcs, revealing complex interconnected membrane structures with larger, vacuole-like components linked by fine membrane tubules or channels that also occasionally connected them to the cell surface . furthermore, the compartments outlined by ph-gfp were morphologically variable, even between cells from the same donor; most of the mdms contained one single complex ipmc but others showed more dispersed smaller ipmcs , and many of the ipmcs had more than one connection to the cell surface. by contrast, in mdms nucleofected to express a double-fyve domain construct fused to gfp , which binds specifically and with high affinity to phosphatidylinositol 3-phosphate , vesicles were seen with a distribution that was clearly distinct from the structures stained with ph-gfp, cellmask or fm 4– <dig> dye and that did not overlap with the cd81-labeled ipmcs .

to confirm the presence of pip <dig> in the ipmcs, we labeled mdms with the mouse monoclonal anti-pip <dig> antibody 2c <dig>  <cit>  using two different labeling protocols . labeled ipmcs were rarely seen on saponin-permeabilized cells, but after permeabilization with triton x- <dig>  most ipmcs were strongly stained by the pip2-specific antibody .

we also infected 7-day-old mdms with hiv- <dig> and  <dig> days later, nucleofected them with the ph-gfp expression construct. after  <dig> hours the cells were fixed and labeled for the viral matrix protein p <dig>  in the infected cells expressing ph-gfp, both ph-gfp and p <dig> clearly co-localized in ipmcs . however, mdms containing both ph-gfp and p <dig> labeling were rare, suggesting that hiv-infected cells may be more difficult to transfect or, possibly, that the ph-gfp might compete with hiv- <dig> gag for pip <dig> binding, though this has not been tested directly.

the presence of pip <dig> on ipmcs, together with our previous data showing the plasma membrane markers cd <dig> and cd <dig> as well as the endocytic clathrin adaptor complex ap <dig> on ipmcs  <cit> , further supports the notion that ipmcs are intracellularly sequestered domains of the plasma membrane present in uninfected and hiv-infected mdms.

live cell imaging of ipmcs
expression of ph-gfp allowed us to study the behavior of ipmcs in living mdms by spinning disc confocal microscopy. all analyzed ph-gfp-labeled ipmcs appeared stable during the recording periods , though the structures were dynamic, and, in some cases, connections to the cell surface were observed .

to investigate the dynamic behavior of ipmcs, we used fluorescence recovery after photobleaching  and fluorescence loss in photobleaching  techniques on mdms expressing ph-gfp . for the frap experiments, the entire ipmc within a cell was photobleached and the recovery of fluorescence was monitored. fluorescence recovered quickly in the bleached areas, with a mean half time of recovery of  <dig>  seconds  and mobile fraction of 70% . similar recovery half times and mobile fractions were observed in frap studies when we compared the cell surface plasma membranes and ipmc membranes . for the flip experiments, the cell surface membrane was repeatedly bleached with  <dig> millisecond pulses of laser illumination and the decay of the fluorescence signal of the corresponding ipmc was measured by acquiring an image of the sample after each photobleaching pulse. there was a clear decrease in the fluorescence signal in the ipmcs as the cell surface plasma membrane was bleached . similarly, in experiments where the ipmc was bleached within the cells, we observed a loss in the cell surface plasma membrane fluorescence intensity . together, the frap and flip data support the notion that ipmcs can exchange ph-gfp through lateral diffusion or cytosol-membrane exchange or a combination of both. these experiments show, for the first time, the behavior of ipmcs in uninfected, living mdms and demonstrate that they are stable but dynamic structures.

the actin cytoskeleton maintains the integrity of the ipmc
our recent em analysis of hiv-infected mdms revealed a meshwork of actin filaments adjacent to β2-integrin-containing electron-dense membrane coats on hiv-containing ipmcs  <cit> . similar filament meshworks can be seen in figure 5a . we confirmed the presence of actin near the ipmcs by staining with alexa fluor 594-phalloidin and co-labeling for cd <dig> on uninfected mdms , or with anti-p <dig>  identifying mature virions, on hiv-infected cells .

to investigate whether actin plays a role in maintaining the integrity and organization of the ipmcs, hiv-infected mdms were treated with the actin polymerization inhibitor latrunculin. immunofluorescence staining showed that, in control cells, p17-containing mature hiv was located in large ipmcs and associated with actin . after  <dig> hours of latrunculin treatment, actin was largely depolymerized and accumulated in the nuclei , as previously described for latrunculin-treated mast cells  <cit> . at the same time, the staining for intracellular virus  was dispersed throughout the cells . a similar effect was observed when actin was depolymerized by cytochalasin e or d . to quantify this effect, we counted the numbers of mdms with compact, dispersed, or mixed  ipmcs in control mdms or in cells treated with latrunculin, cytochalasin e or cytochalasin d. perturbation of the actin cytoskeleton led to a statistically significant decrease in the number of cells with compact ipmcs  and a concomitant increase in the number of cells with dispersed compartments . immuno-em analysis of latrunculin-treated, hiv-infected mdms demonstrated that hiv and immature budding particles were still found in intracellular compartments, although the ipmcs appeared more dispersed throughout the cells .

to study the structure of the ipmcs in latrunculin–treated cells more directly, infected mdms were labeled with the cellmask dye. this again revealed that latrunculin treatment caused the dispersal of the usually compact ipmcs into smaller structures . cellmask labeling demonstrated that these smaller, more scattered ipmc structures were accessible from the cell surface; indeed in three-dimensional reconstructions, some connections to the cell surface were apparent . likewise, when mdms were transfected with ph-gfp for  <dig> hours and then treated with latrunculin, the labeled compact ipmc dispersed to a network of membranes with several connections to the cell surface . these observations suggest that actin depolymerization causes the usually tightly packed ipmc membranes to open up, giving rise to a more reticular network of membranes throughout the cell.

we also studied the behavior of ipmcs in the presence of hiv- <dig> gag-gfp and the effect of disrupting the actin cytoskeleton by live cell imaging. mdms were nucleofected to express gag-gfp and monitored by spinning disc confocal microscopy. accumulations of gag-gfp, presumably virus-like particles and/or gag-gfp protein clusters, were seen in intracellular structures resembling the ipmcs that appeared stable for over one hour without any significant rearrangements . occasionally gag-gfp was also seen in thin channels emanating from the ipmcs , perhaps equivalent to the virion-channeling tube-like structures described by bennett et al.  <cit> .

in experiments where mdms were nucleofected to express gag-gfp together with lifeact-ruby to label actin  <cit>  and monitored for  <dig>  hours after addition of latrunculin, the compact ipmcs initially seen in most cells  became more dispersed after  <dig> minutes of latrunculin treatment. the gag-gfp appeared more mobile in latrunculin-treated cells , and, over  <dig> minutes, the ipmcs in latrunculin-treated cells scattered into smaller structures; this coincided with morphologically visible changes to the actin cytoskeleton . we conclude that actin polymerization is necessary to maintain the morphological integrity of ipmcs.

perturbation of actin enhances hiv- <dig> release from mdms
although hiv assembly in mdms occurs primarily in ipmcs  <cit> , analysis of the media from hiv-infected mdms by immunoblotting indicates that hiv- <dig> can be released from ipmcs . given the changes we observed in the appearance of ipmcs when the actin cytoskeleton is disrupted, we asked whether disruption of the actin cytoskeleton would affect hiv- <dig> release. hiv-infected mdms were treated with media containing latrunculin or dimethyl sulfoxide  for  <dig> hours, and virus released into the medium during this time was detected by immunoblotting. we observed increased levels of capsid p <dig> and matrix p <dig> proteins in media from latrunculin-treated mdms compared to control cells . by contrast, hiv-transfected hek293t cells, which do not develop ipmcs and where virus assembly takes place at the cell surface, did not show significant changes in hiv release over this time period . analysis of the media from hiv-infected mdms by p24-elisa also revealed enhanced virus release from mdms treated with latrunculin, cytochalasin d or cytochalasin e .

to confirm that latrunculin treatment affects virus release rather than the rate of viral protein synthesis or virus assembly, we inhibited virus maturation in mdms using the hiv- <dig> protease inhibitor amprenavir and simultaneously treated the cells with latrunculin. if disruption of the actin cytoskeleton stimulates viral protein synthesis or the rate of assembly, the viruses released in the presence of latrunculin and amprenavir should be mainly immature . by contrast, if hiv assembly and gag processing happen prior to the latrunculin and amprenavir treatment, the released virus would be mainly mature . we detected the release of p24/p17-containing mature virus particles from control cells after treatment with the hiv- <dig> protease inhibitor, sugzgesting that this virus had accumulated in ipmcs before the inhibition of virus maturation. in latrunculin- and amprenavir-treated cells, we again detected enhanced virus release, and most of this was in the form of mature virus particles, suggesting that latrunculin induced the release of preformed virus particles from ipmcs .

together, these experiments demonstrate that perturbation of the actin cytoskeleton causes the tightly packed ipmc membranes to become more dispersed and may lead to the opening of the narrow channels connecting the compartments to the cell surface, and that this can enhance the release of hiv from the compartments.

discussion
for some time, it has been known that in human mdms, hiv- <dig> buds into and accumulates in surface-connected intracellular compartments, or ipmcs . although their origin, organization and function is poorly understood, much of our current knowledge of these compartments derives from em studies, in which various techniques, including serial sectioning, electron tomography or ion abrasion scanning electron microscopy  <cit>  have indicated that ipmcs consist of complex intracellular networks of membranes, with interconnected vacuole-like and tubular components, and channel-like connections to the cell surface. however, these morphological techniques are limited to the analysis of small portions of the total volume of fixed cells and do not provide information on the dynamics of the compartments in real time. here we have used fluorescent membrane labels - fm 4– <dig>  cellmask and the pip <dig> probe ph-gfp, in combination with confocal z-series imaging, three-dimensional volume reconstructions and live cell imaging - to study the properties of ipmcs. in agreement with and extending previous studies  <cit> , we show that both uninfected and hiv-1-infected mdms contain morphologically similar ipmcs that appear as dynamic networks of vacuoles of various sizes, connected to each other and to the cell surface by thinner tubules or closely apposed membrane sheets. furthermore, we show that the normal morphology of ipmcs is dependent on the integrity of the actin cytoskeleton and that disrupting this integrity can stimulate the release of mature, ipmc-sequestered hiv- <dig> 

em analysis has previously shown individual hiv-containing vacuoles and/or cd81-, cd9- or cd44-labeled structures within mdms, suggesting that a single cell may contain several ipmc structures  <cit> . our live cell imaging studies, which avoid fixation-induced fragmentation of membrane compartments, indicate that these vacuoles are in most cases sub-domains of single, larger ipmcs. moreover, although most mdms contained a single ipmc, three-dimensional reconstruction of complete cells and ipmcs highlighted the complexity and extensive cell-to-cell variability in the size and morphology of ipmcs. the rapid labeling of ipmcs , even at 4°c when endocytosis is inhibited, and the visualization of at least one, and frequently more, connections from ipmcs to the cell surface provides additional evidence supporting the notion that the compartment is continuous with the cell surface and accessible to small molecule tracers, as suggested by previous work  <cit> . thus, the term ipmc accurately reflects the fact that these compartments are connected to the cell surface and that the ipmc membrane can be regarded as a sub-domain of the plasma membrane. although accessible to small tracer molecules, it has been suggested that ipmcs are not accessible to antibodies and that this might protect ipmc-sequestered virus from recognition by neutralizing antibodies  <cit> . however, in our hands at least, ipmcs are accessible to antibodies fed from the cell surface at 37°c  <cit>  and we find that many ipmcs can be accessed by high concentrations of antibodies or the fluid tracer horseradish peroxidase when incubated for  <dig> hour at 4°c .

significantly, many of the studies described here were performed on uninfected mdms, demonstrating that ipmcs are not induced by hiv infection, although, as previously shown, the compartment expands in size upon hiv- <dig> infection  <cit> . ipmcs are therefore likely to have some as yet unidentified function in uninfected macrophages  <cit> . hiv appears to use pre-existing ipmcs for assembly, suggesting that there is an advantage to the virus to exploit these compartments or that key components required for virus assembly are located within these plasma membrane sub-domains. currently, it is not clear how hiv targets ipmcs, though the lipid pip <dig>  which binds directly to the hiv matrix basic domain and plays a key role in gag recruitment to the plasma membrane, is likely to be involved  <cit> . we analyzed the distribution of pip <dig> in mdms, either using the ph-gfp probe or immunostaining with a pip2-specific antibody  <cit> . ph-gfp labeled the cell surface as well as ipmcs, indicating that pip <dig> is abundant in these locations. labeling of ipmcs with anti-pip <dig> antibody required permeabilization with triton x- <dig>  and was poor after saponin treatment, perhaps indicating the presence of detergent-resistant membranes in ipmcs.

given that the ph-gfp probe strongly stained ipmc membranes, it could be used to follow the compartment in live cell imaging studies. this allowed, for the first time, studies of the behavior and dynamics of ipmcs in uninfected macrophages. ipmcs labeled with ph-gfp were essentially stable throughout the time of recording, that is, for at least one hour. similar observations were made with mdms transfected with gag-gfp, where ipmcs also appeared stable, though we could occasionally observe changes in the subcellular distribution of gag-gfp in ipmcs and in ipmc-associated channels. our studies therefore complement previous analyses with gag-gfp or biarsenical-tetracysteine-tagged fluorescent gag  <cit> , where accumulations in mdms were also seen to be comparatively stable. frap and flip analyses of the ph-gfp probe demonstrated that ipmc membranes are able to rapidly exchange ph-gfp with surrounding membranes and therefore they are dynamic structures. interestingly, we did not observe any kinetic differences in the behavior of plasma membrane or ipmc-bound ph-gfp in our experiments.

because ipmcs are coated with actin filaments and, in mature mdms, the structure of the ipmcs is at least in part stabilized via β <dig> integrin-containing focal adhesion-like complexes linking to the actin cytoskeleton  <cit> , we investigated the role of actin in the organization of the ipmcs. inhibitors of actin polymerization  caused the intracellular accumulations of hiv particles to disperse into smaller pockets of viruses, an effect similar to that seen after depletion of β <dig> integrins in mdms  <cit> . a similar effect was previously described in dendritic cells  <cit>  and may explain the reduction in intracellular gag accumulation after cytochalasin d treatment of 7-day-old mdms  <cit> . staining with cellmask demonstrated that, although dispersed, the ipmcs remained connected to the plasma membrane in the drug-treated cells. in addition, when mdms were transfected with ph-gfp and treated with latrunculin, the ipmcs appeared as a meshwork of membranes with clear connections to the cell surface . we also showed that latrunculin treatment did not inhibit virus assembly in mdms, but instead enhanced the release of preformed hiv- <dig> particles, presumably through the dispersed membrane channels. together these experiments suggest that an intact actin cytoskeleton is required both to maintain the structure of ipmcs and regulate the release of hiv from mdms. a recent study showed that microtubules also affect the distribution of vccs in mdms, and suggested that kinesin family-3a complexes may drive ipmcs toward the plasma membrane and stimulate virus release  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have demonstrated the complexity and plasticity of ipmcs involved in hiv assembly in mdms. we show that these structures are resident compartments of mdms and that in uninfected and hiv-infected cells the integrity of ipmcs is maintained and regulated through the actin cytoskeleton. although the function of ipmcs in mdms is unclear, similar intracellular compartments have been seen in dendritic cells, where they are involved in the formation of virological synapses and in the trans-infection of t-cells by hiv and perhaps other viruses  <cit> . in this context, remodeling of the actin cytoskeleton may facilitate the recruitment of ipmcs to the sites of cell-cell contact that form virological synapses and may thus be involved in the spread of virus to susceptible target cells.

