BACKGROUND
breast cancer is a heterogeneous disease, both with respect to cells of origin and the underlying course on the molecular level  <cit> . variable series of cellular events may lead to the formation of malignancy, but to date the nature and sequence of many of the processes that go awry during tumorigenesis remain elusive. the value of such knowledge cannot be overestimated for understanding the disease and outlining the effective treatment.

with this aim in mind, we devised a novel bioinformatics approach, taking advantage of the abundance of available functional genomics data. integration of heterogeneous data allows extraction of knowledge that is not evident when examining data of different types separately and provides a holistic view on the functioning of the biological system on multiple levels  <cit> . our approach goes beyond traditional microarray analysis, because it considers protein interaction network modules as gene groups in a joint differential expression-differential coexpression analysis.

first, we use protein interaction network  modules to delineate biological processes as an alternative to 'textbook pathways'. several approaches for partitioning a bio-molecular network of interactions into sensible and coherent functional units have been proposed  <cit> . here we define modules as the densely interconnected regions in the pin, i.e., groups of proteins in the network that are distinguishable from the neighborhood due to a much higher density of interactions among them than with other proteins in the network. proteins heavily interconnected by a network of mutual interactions are likely to be involved in the same biological process  <cit> . such topology-based designation of modules is not constrained by existing annotation of pathways, and allows finding novel disease-specific modules. this network-guided approach is especially useful in the study of cancer, since this disease proceeds through step-wise accumulation of defects in biological processes, whose nature is often not known  <cit> . in constantly evolving cancerous cells, signaling and metabolic pathways might be disrupted or modified to better serve the cells' needs and particular genes might trade their usual housekeeping function for a different one; some natural control mechanisms might be turned off, while others could be triggered. these events can be reflected in changes of the level and cohesiveness of gene expression profiles of affected processes. therefore we subjected the network modules to differential expression and differential coexpression tests, in search of not only the processes that alter their intensity, but also the ones whose degree of coregulation differs between the disease stages.

the identification of network elements whose altered activity is associated with disease has been pursued in several recent studies. choi et al.  constructed coexpression networks specific for cancer and normal tissue and identified pairs of gene ontology categories most often represented by the pairs of differentially coexpressed genes  <cit> . a similar approach was adopted by xu et al. , who integrated topological features of coexpression networks with differential coexpression analysis to identify network modules activated in cancer  <cit> . knowledge of protein interaction network served to identify network markers - subnetworks differentially expressed in breast cancer  <cit> , while mani et al. took advantage of the b-cells' interactome and expression data to identify interactions disrupted in lymphoma  <cit> . none of those studies however explore the possibilities offered by combining protein interaction network and gene expression data together with joined differential expression and differential coexpression analyses.

we applied our approach to the expression data from the study of mouse model of mammary gland tumor by li et al.  <cit> , in which the tumor was induced by the expression of the fusion oncogene etv6-ntrk <dig> in epithelial cells. the etv6-ntrk <dig> oncogene encodes a chimeric tyrosine kinase  <cit> , whose expression leads to the formation of the human secretory breast carcinoma  <cit> . tumor development was monitored by measurement of gene expression from healthy, through hyperplastic  to more aggressive carcinoma stage. a particular advantage of these data for our present study is that they are cell specific. in contrast to many studies of gene expression in solid tumors, in which gene expression measurements reflect averages over different cell types, the use of a molecular marker allowed li et al. to separate the oncoprotein-expressing epithelial cells from healthy cells before rna extractions.

we tested for the differential expression of the pin-derived network modules and for changes in the correlation within the modules, associated with transition between disease states. additionally, we investigated a possible role of micrornas . since mirnas form an integral part of cellular regulatory network, they could contribute to the disruption of the vital cellular processes  <cit> . there is growing evidence of an important function of mirnas in cancer-related processes, such as differentiation, proliferation and apoptosis  <cit> . the mechanisms of mirnas functions fall mainly into two classes - oncogenic mirnas, upregulated in cancer, and mirnas with tumor suppressor activity, downregulated in cancer  <cit> . in the present work, we identified mirnas that target genes in modules with altered expression, thus being potentially responsible for the observed expression differences.

RESULTS
modules in protein interaction network
the mouse protein interaction network from intnetdb  <cit>  contains  <dig>  proteins connected by  <dig>  interactions. we partitioned this network into areas that are highly interconnected by interactions by applying the markov graph clustering algorithm . the mcl algorithm has been shown to be robust towards network inaccuracies  <cit> . mcl is based on flow simulation in the graph and in an unweighted graph the clustering results depend only on its topology. the size and number of identified clusters depend on the value of the inflation parameter. the clustering has been performed with different settings of the inflation, from  <dig>  to  <dig> . to select the partition with the most biologically-relevant meaning, the clustering results were scored based on the correspondence between the genes associations with gene ontology  attributes and their groupings into clusters. the strength of this correspondence was quantified by calculating the total mutual information between clustering and the go attributes according to steuer et al.  <cit> . the clustering has high mutual information  if the individual clusters contain genes associated with similar go terms, and these sets of go terms vary between clusters. as seen in additional file  <dig>  two inflation values,  <dig>  and  <dig> , resulted in clusterings of the highest relative mi, respectively  <dig>  and  <dig> . we selected the  <dig>  inflation value, as it allowed for retaining more genes than the other one. with this setting,  <dig> clusters were produced with sizes ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> proteins. short description of the function has been assigned to the resulting modules, based on the enrichment of the go terms .

differential expression of the network-defined modules
the aim of expression profiling across different disease states is to identify transcripts whose levels differ between these states. this is traditionally performed by applying a test for differential  expression on the gene-by-gene basis. subsequently, techniques like the gene ontology terms enrichment allow for identification of the biological processes represented by differentially expressed genes. however, processes in which changes in transcript levels are widespread albeit subtle may be missed by traditional analysis, while they could still be detected if the group of genes involved in such a process were considered as a whole  <cit> . this observation led to development of gene set enrichment analysis  <cit>  and related approaches like sam-gs  <cit>  and ease  <cit> , that switch the focus of differential expression test from single genes to groups of genes. such gene groups may be defined based on their function, localization of the product, previously observed association with the experimental condition, chromosomal localization or other premises. molecular signatures database  and other depositories for the gene sets have been created.

in the present study, the genes in the modules obtained from the partition of the mouse intnet network served as gene sets and have been analyzed for differential expression between samples from three disease stages: healthy , hyperplastic and tumor. the results are summarized in fig.  <dig>  most of the pairwise comparisons between samples are associated with a decrease or increase of activity of several  modules.

the transition from the healthy to the hyperplastic state is accompanied by a lowering of the intensity of gene expression in one module, associated with cell adhesion and communication , and the increase in intensity of eight modules, representing lysosome , protein transport , integrin complex , adaptive immune response , monooxygenase , oxidoreductase activity , dynein complex  and collagen degradation . with the progression from hyperplastic to tumor state, seven modules decrease their expression. these are associated with atpase activity , apoptosis , integrin complex , adaptive immune response , metabolic processes , receptor activity  and rotamase . in comparison with healthy cells, signaling and angiogenesis  and monooxygenase  are more active in tumor tissues, while a module associated with heme biosynthesis  is downregulated. in both disease states module  <dig>  is expressed higher than in healthy cells.

the observed expression changes agree well with what is known about the progression of tumorigenesis. on the way to full malignancy, tumor cells must overcome defense mechanisms of the host organism. this is achieved through a series of stepwise acquisitions of key abilities, such as disrupting signaling pathways, inactivating control mechanisms like apoptosis and the immune response, gaining access to unlimited proliferating factors as well as acquiring mobility and the potential to colonize new tissues  <cit> . consistent with that model is our finding that the modules that mark the differences between disease states represent processes such as adhesion, apoptosis, cell migration, creation of new blood vessels, immune response, growth factor receptors and signaling pathways, validating our network module-oriented approach. lower intensity of cell adhesion in the diseased tissues allows cancer cells to brake apart from attachment to the extracellular matrix in their place of origin and travel to another location with the blood or lymph stream in the process of metastasis. elevated expression in hyperplastic tissue of the collagen degradation processes and of integrins, proteins that participate in sensing and modulation of cell attachment  <cit> , might also contribute to increasing the mobility of carcinoma cells.

like the integrin complex, the immune response module, enriched in antigen processing and presentation functions, is upregulated in hyperplastic cells relative to both wt and tumor cells. initial stages of tumor usually trigger response from the immune system that dispatches t-cells and intensifies producing the antibodies  <cit> . in oncogene-caused tumors, as in this case, an oncoprotein expressed by tumor cells could serve as an antigenic agent  <cit> . upregulation of the blood vessel development module in cancer signifies the neovascularization process that is necessary to provide the growing tumor tissue with nutrients.

differential coexpression
even if the average expression level of a gene does not change between the conditions, its relation to the expression levels of other transcripts could . genes might be coexpressed in one condition and not in the others, changing their alliances according to the dynamically arising demands of the organism that recruits and dissolves teams of coregulated genes for currently required tasks. we identified modules which lose or gain correlation between the disease states using the coxpress r package for differential coexpression analysis  <cit> , modified to perform the analysis on pre-defined clusters. coxpress declares gene groups 'differentially coexpressed' between two conditions if in one condition the statistic summarizing pairwise correlations in the group is significantly different from what is expected by chance , while it is not different from random in the other condition.

three patterns of coexpression change are shown in fig.  <dig> . in the first type, a module whose members have correlated expression profiles in the healthy tissue, loses the correlation in the course of disease . this pattern likely represents processes that are disordered in the developing tumor. in the second type, coexpression between genes in the module is not present in the healthy tissue, but it appears in the diseased states . these patterns might signify processes that are invoked in the developing tumor, either by the defending host organism or triggered by the evolving and adapting cancer. in the third scenario, modules are correlated  only in the hyperplastic state, indicating processes that are specifically activated or deactivated in hyperplastic cells .

the patterns of differential coexpression identified in our analysis represent all of the above scenarios . two modules that are dysregulated in tumor samples are enriched in cell adhesion  and growth factor-related genes .

network modules whose coexpression differs between disease stages. average value for pearson's correlation coefficient in the module, and corresponding p-value in healthy , hyperplastic  and cancer samples  are shown . significant coexpression was declared based on the p-value .

immune response-related processes found to gain coexpression in the disease samples  suggest the induction of the communication between the tumor cells and the immune system. tumorigenesis and the immune response are necessarily intertwined; the immune system tries to eliminate the abnormal cells, while tumor cells learn to evade the constant surveillance of immune system and also to use it to its own benefit . tumor cells might thus express immune response-related genes that are either involved in attraction of immune system cells, genes activated through a cascade of events mediated by the immune system-specific cells, or whose products act on other tumor cells. module  <dig> contains genes for several cytokines, which are usually expressed at a wounded site by t-cells and macrophages to evoke inflammatory response. production of cytokines has been also observed in tumor cells  <cit> . the immune response induced by cytokines provides the tumor cells with factors facilitating proliferation and attack on surrounding tissues. module  <dig> contains genes involved in the acute inflammatory response and humoral immune response. also coregulated in diseased tissues are processes that modulate cell attachment, motility and survival, thus influencing cell invasiveness, represented by modules  <dig>  and  <dig>   <cit> .

processes specifically disrupted in hyperplastic tissues seem to include several protein biosynthesis-related functions . immune response  is among processes coregulated in hyperplastic tissues. this module contains several interferon-activated genes, possibly pointing to the kind of response that is evoked early in the disease stage.

module  <dig>  although not deemed to be differentially coexpressed, is an interesting example of gradual decrease in coregulation. it is coexpressed both in wt and hyperplastic tissues but the correlation in hyperplastic is much lower than in wt , and diminishes even further in tumor . this module is enriched in genes from wnt and hedgehog signaling pathways, whose abnormal function has been associated with tumorigenic action conveyed by the oncogene etv6-ntrk <dig> in the study by li et al, from which the expression data originates.

for most of the differentially coexpressed modules, the mean expression level is similar in healthy and diseased cells. these groups would not be identified with only the classic differential expression analysis. in a few cases however, the same modules are both differentially expressed and differentially coexpressed. we further investigated the interplay between these two forms of differential behavior in gene expression during tumor progression.

dynamics of differential expression and differential coexpression
for seven modules, the two forms of differential behavior of mrna, differential expression and differential coexpression, are intertwined with each other. this is illustrated in fig.  <dig>  in which the green and red graphics represent coexpression status of the module in each disease stage, and the slope of the line between stages indicates up- or downregulation of the mean expression of the module genes. modules  <dig>  and  <dig>  represent processes that are activated in the course of tumor progression . these two modules have a particularly interesting pattern of expression, with the highest relative level in hyperplastic cells. the higher expression level in hyperplastic tissue relative to the healthy one is accompanied by a higher correlation between the genes. such pattern suggests that processes represented by these modules are specifically necessary in hyperplastic cells, and so the suitable genes are upregulated and coregulated to serve their need. seventeen genes in the immune response module are annotated as involved in "antigen processing and presentation" , indicating the module function in recognizing the tumor cells as foreign and activation of the adaptive immune response  <cit> . in the course of the disease, the immune response may gradually weaken as the tumor cells evolve to avoid or deactivate it in many ways  <cit> . the integrin complex represented in module  <dig> signifies the effort of tumor cells to gain the motility and invasiveness. again, the intensity of these processes may be highest in initial stages of tumorigenesis and diminish later.

genes in module  <dig>  associated with cell adhesion, are coexpressed in both healthy and hyperplastic samples, while they are expressed at higher levels in healthy tissue . with the transformation of cells into cancerous ones, the expression remains on similar level, but the correlation is lost. such pattern suggests gradual deactivation of the cell attachment mechanism, consistent with increasing potential for metastasis in more aggressive stages of the disease. in another example of gradual deactivation, the biosynthetic processes in module  <dig> become disordered in hyperplastic cells while the high expression level is preserved, only to go down in the later stages of tumor.

the patterns exhibited by modules  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , in which correlation is transiently lost in hyperplastic tissues, are more challenging to interpret . one possible explanation for the observed decrease in correlation, in spite of the high expression levels, could be that the genes that formed a functional module  in healthy and tumor states are reassigned to different tasks in hyperplastic cells. in agreement with this hypothesis, hierarchical clustering of the hyperplastic gene expression data reveals that several genes for sugar hydrolysis and other hydrolytic enzymes from module  <dig>  in hyperplastic samples belong to clusters enriched in stress response genes, immune response or cell differentiation. participation in multiple response programs, depending on the stimulus, is characteristic for stress-response genes, which are not usually specialized for particular kind of stress  <cit> .

the above data reveals the dynamics of activation or deactivation of cellular processes. the activity of integrin complex and the immune system response is tuned up through upregulation and coregulation. on the other hand, the adhesion and biosynthetic processes are deactivated by a combination of downregulation and dysregulation. clearly, integration of such a complementary combination of tools as differential expression and differential coexpression analyses offers new insight into the mechanism by which the activity of biological processes is modulated. we were able to identify pathways which are being turned off by downregulation and dysregulation, and others that are being induced via upregulation and coregulation. it also delivered another important insight: increasing the intensity of expression of the pathway genes, although commonly interpreted as an indication of involvement of this pathway in the examined condition, if accompanied by a decrease in correlations, might merely signify a change in functional assignment of constituent genes. and vice versa, downregulation of a process that increases correlation might indicate trading the intensity and promiscuous activity for a higher commitment of the genes in module.

furthermore, the modules identified in our analysis were also found significant in other cancer datasets. the analysis of data from two additional studies - one comparing mammary control gland with mammary tumor  <cit> , and one comparing the immune-susceptive tumor cells with immune-resistant tumor cells - confirmed that many of the modules we identified in the li et al. data are also involved in other cancer models .

mirnas
a variety of regulatory mechanisms might stand behind the observed expression changes in the network modules during tumorigenesis. one possibility is that the expression levels in the module are controlled by the same small regulatory rna  whose activity changes between conditions. the altered expression of a mirna gene, due to mutation or epigenetic event, might in turn result in the disordered expression of the modules enriched in its targets  <cit> . involvement of mirna molecules in pathway dysregulation in cancer is increasingly recognized  <cit> . to verify whether mirnas might be indeed responsible for the observed differences in expression, we tested for overrepresentation of their potential targets among the genes in the modules. the mirnas were then scored for the specificity of their association with sets of modules differentially expressed in a particular comparison, or with differentially coexpressed modules .

a single mirna with statistically significant association with the differentially expressed modules was found: hsa-mir-200b. it is predicted to target modules upregulated in tumor . this mirna has been linked previously to several types of cancer  <cit> . in particular, it has been reported to be down-regulated in drug-resistant breast cancer  <cit>  and to regulate epithelial-mesenchymal transition  <cit> . epithelial-mesenchymal transition is a crucial event in the malignancy process, allowing the tumor cells that undergo this transformation to become invasive and motile  <cit> . thus, both the mode of action and the function of has-mir-200b agree strongly with our prediction.

in a set of differentially coexpressed modules, five mirnas have been predicted to be significantly associated , suggesting their involvement in breast cancer. four of these mirnas represent minor forms of the mature sequence and have not been studied widely. to our knowledge, no function has been reported for any of these mirnas, our study delivering the first hypothesis for their role in breast cancer.

for each set of differentially expressed or differentially coexpressed modules, a score s was calculated, measuring how specific is the association between mirna and its targets within modules in a given set, relative to targets of this mirna in other modules. p-values for s score are based on  <dig> permutations of the mirna - target predictions relationships, i.e., the mirna names were reshuffled in the table of target predictions. see the methods section for the details of calculations.

CONCLUSIONS
integration of gene expression and protein-interaction data has been recently receiving a lot of well-deserved attention. traditional forms of microarray analysis result in long lists of significant differentially expressed genes or arbitrarily specified pathways and do not consider differential co-expression dynamics; rather they only focus on mean expression levels. here we propose, as an approach complementary to traditional analysis, using gene set enrichment and differential coexpression analyses for network-defined modules. the benefit of our network oriented approach is that it results in a list of subnetworks associated with mammary tumorigenesis, which are formally defined, based on a combination of network connectivity and go information, and are not constrained by existing annotations of pathways. differential co-expression analysis offers a complementary value to differential mean expression analysis by providing another insight into the dysregulation of biological processes. combination of these methods results in a sensitive tool, able to pinpoint the processes that change their intensity and to detect varying assignments of genes to functional modules, as the interplay between the developing tumor and the host organism creates new challenges and tasks for both. we would envision growing demand for this kind of analyses in future, when constantly improving experimental techniques will produce high-throughput data monitoring the tumorigenesis at higher resolution.

