BACKGROUND
since the development of the b-cell hybridoma technology for the generation of monoclonal antibodies  in  <dig> by kohler and milstein  <cit> , mabs have become molecular tools of great value. due to their high specificity, mabs are used throughout biology for the characterisation of protein function and distribution. besides their usage in research, mabs are also widely utilised as diagnostic and therapeutic agents  <cit> . due to this wide range of applications the generation of mabs became a standard procedure. however the generation of mabs against protein antigens can still be problematic, since for studies in physiological settings, it is important that the mabs recognise the target protein in its native conformation.

frequently, mabs are raised against synthetic peptides derived from the predicted sequence of the target protein. unfortunately, these abs, though strongly reactive with peptide, frequently fail to recognise the native protein  <cit> . another standard procedure to generate mabs uses purified recombinantly expressed proteins. prokaryotic expression systems are the most widely used expression hosts. but when studying mammalian surface proteins it is often necessary to use mammalian expression systems, as they are more likely to produce functional proteins with the appropriate disulfide-bonds and posttranslational modifications  <cit> . although introduction of affinity tags simplifies purification, it often remains difficult to obtain recombinant protein in native conformation and in sufficient yield and purity. this applies most notably to membrane and membrane-associated proteins, as they are likely to lose their native structure during the purification processes  <cit> .

when attempting to generate mabs capable of recognising the native protein, it is also critical to use the target protein in its native conformation not only in the immunisation step but also for the screening procedure. many standard hybridoma-screening protocols make use of recombinant proteins immobilized on solid supports, which may significantly alter protein conformation  <cit> .

with the objective of generating mabs specifically recognising membrane-associated proteins in their native conformation, we applied a methodology that bypasses any need for purified recombinant protein. this strategy utilises antigens expressed on the surface of stably transfected mammalian cells both for immunisation of mice and for immunoassays, such as testing seroconversion, hybridoma selection and mab characterisation.

in the present study, we applied this approach for three predicted gpi-anchored proteins of plasmodium falciparum. p. falciparum is the causative agent of malaria tropica, which claims 300- <dig> million clinical cases and more than  <dig> million deaths each year  <cit> . malaria is transmitted to humans by the bite of an infected female anopheles mosquito. the inoculated sporozoites infect hepatocytes where the parasites undergo schizogony resulting in the rupture of the infected liver cell and release of free merozoites, which infect erythrocytes. upon intra-erythrocytic schizogony red blood cells rupture and release more merozoites. some of these differentiate into gametocytes, which, when taken up by a feeding mosquito bring about the sexual cycle, resulting in the development of sporozoites located in the salivary gland of the mosquito. highly specific cell-cell interactions between the invasive forms of the parasite and the corresponding host cells are pivotal steps in the complex life cycle of p. falciparum, which depend on specific molecular interactions of cell surface molecules. being exposed to potentially parasite inhibitory antibodies makes parasite proteins involved in cell-cell interactions of particular interest with respect to vaccine development. most proteins that coat the surface of the extracellular forms of p. falciparum are known or presumed to be gpi anchored  <cit> . we anticipated the generation of mabs against hypothetical proteins of p. falciparum predicted to be a gpi-anchored membrane protein in order to get a tool to characterize their properties and potential as vaccine candidate antigens. based on being predicted to be expressed in invasive stages and to contain a gpi-anchor motif, three hypothetical proteins were selected: pff0620c, pfd1130w and pf14_ <dig>  for pfd1130w and pf14_ <dig> published transcriptional analysis data showed elevated expression levels in late stages of the asexual blood stage cycle  <cit> . for both predicted proteins no function can currently be assigned as no significant homology to functional domains of other characterized gene products could be identified. pff0620c contains two s48- <dig> sexual stage antigen-like domains, which are characterized by the presence of  <dig> cysteines. other members of this protein family have been shown to be located on the surface of the parasite and some of them are known to play a role in cell-cell interactions  <cit> . mass spectrometry data indicate expression of pff0620c at the sporozoite stage  <cit> .

to achieve surface localisation of the recombinant p. falciparum proteins on mammalian cells despite potential differences of the secretory machinery between plasmodium and host cells, the p. falciparum coding sequences were altered in several ways. the endogenous secretion signal sequences and gpi-attachment sites were replaced with the signal peptide of bee venom melittin and the transmembrane domain of mouse glycophorine a, respectively. to allow assessment of surface localization, antibody-tags were introduced on both sides of the transmembrane domain.

we expect that this entirely cell-based system, capable of generating mabs against membrane-associated antigens, is applicable for a wide range of cell-surface proteins.

RESULTS
expression of predicted gpi-anchored p. falciparum proteins on the cell surface of mammalian cells
the three predicted open reading frames  pff0620c, pfd1130w and pf14_ <dig> of p. falciparum were expressed on the cell surface of hek cells using the expression plasmids pcdna <dig> _bvm_pff0620c_flag_glp_his, pcdna <dig> _bvm_pfd1130w_flag_glp_his and pcdna <dig> _bvm_pf14_0325_flag_glp_his, respectively . to ensure expression on the cell surface, the predicted orfs were modified in several ways: i. the endogenous p. falciparum sequences were codon-optimised for expression in mammalian cells; ii. the endogenous secretion signal sequences were replaced by the secretion signal sequence of bee-venom melittin; iii. for membrane anchoring the transmembrane domain encoding sequence of mouse glycophorin was used instead of the predicted gpi-attachment signal sequences; iv. to allow expression analysis, a flag tag was inserted n-terminally of the transmembrane domain and a hexa-his tag was placed at the c-terminus. the two tags were positioned just before and after the transmembrane domain to facilitate verification of the extracellular localisation of the recombinantly expressed malaria antigens .

hek-derived cell lines expressing p. falciparum pff0620c, pfd1130w and pf14_ <dig> were established by stable transfection. expression of recombinant proteins was confirmed by western blot analysis using anti-his tag and anti-flag tag antibodies. while protein bands appeared when lysates of the three stably transfected cell lines were analysed, no staining was obtained with non-transfected hek cells . also in immune fluorescence analysis  transfectants showed strongly increased staining both with anti-his tag and with anti-flag tag antibodies .

to obtain highly expressing cell lines, transfectants were separated into high-expressing cell-pools by fluorescent-activated-cell-sorting after surface staining with anti-flag tag antibodies. after several days in culture the mean fluorescence intensities of the high-expressing cell pools of the transfectants pff0620c-hek, pfd1130w-hek and pf14_0325-hek, were ten, seven and three times higher compared to non-transfected hek cells .

live-cell staining of pff0620c-hek, pfd1130w-hek or pf14_0325-hek cells with anti-flag tag antibody yielded strong signals. in contrast, staining with anti-his tag antibody gave strong signals on methanol fixed cells but not on living cells . from these results we deduced that pff0620c, pfd1130w and pf14_ <dig> were expressed and anchored in the cell membrane with the flag tag located extracellularly and the his tag intracellularly.

development of malaria antigen specific antibodies in mice immunised with transfected hek cells
the high-expressing cell pools pff0620c-hek, pfd1130w-hek and pf14_0325-hek were used to immunise nmri mice. mice received intravenous injections of  <dig> cells on three consecutive days and another suite of three daily injections two weeks later. development of serum antibody titres was analysed by flow cytometry comparing immune-staining of the corresponding transfectants with that of non-transfected hek cells . the fluorescence intensity observed with transfectants was two- to four-fold higher than that of non-transfected control hek cells. this indicated that the mice had mounted an antibody response against the recombinant malaria antigens expressed on the surface of the transfected hek cells.

spleen cells of mice immunised with the transfected hek cells were fused with pai myeloma cells to generate b cell hybridomas. fused cells were distributed in  <dig> microtitre culture plate wells. to identify hybridoma cells that produce malaria antigen specific antibodies a two-step screening procedure was used that completely obviated the requirement for purified recombinant proteins. first all culture wells were tested for igg production by elisa. between  <dig> and 29% of the tested wells were igg positive . in a second step all wells positive for igg production were screened by ifa for antibodies binding to transfected cells. transfected and non-transfected hek cells spotted onto multiwell glass slides were stained with individual hybridoma supernatants and analysed by fluorescence microscopy . non-transfected hek cells served as a negative control for each sample. in all three fusions numerous culture supernatants positive on the transfected cells were also positive on non-transfected cells. however, each fusion yielded also numerous wells containing antibodies strongly reactive with transfectants but not reactive with untransfected hek cells. among these, eight wells were identified that contained antibodies reactive with an epitope present on all three transfectants but not on untransfected hek cells. most likely, these antibodies are specific for the flag tag or the membrane anchor domain. all other culture supernatants reactive with transfectants, but not with untransfected hek cells were specific for the transfected cells used for immunisation and did not stain the two other transfectants . from wells of this category,  <dig>  nine and two hybridoma clones  were derived by recloning from the pff0620c, pfd1130w and pf14_0325-fusion, respectively.

a for each fusion hybridoma supernatants of  <dig> 96-well-plates were analysed for the presence of mouse igg by sandwich-elisa

b wells screened positive by igg elisa were tested for binding to the corresponding transfected and the non-transfected hek cells by ifa

c number of wells analysed by elisa

d number and percentage of all tested wells that were igg positive

e number and percentage of igg positive wells that were analysed by ifa

f number and percentage of all wells tested by ifa that showed no reactivity in ifa

g number and percentage of all wells tested by ifa that only stained the transfectant cell line used for the immunisation of mice

h number and percentage of all wells tested by ifa that stained both transfected and non-transfected hek cells by ifa

i number and percentage of all wells tested by ifa that stained all three transfectants, but were negative for non-transfected hek cells

hybridoma
hybridoma
hybridoma
nd = no data

the specificity of the monoclonal antibodies was further confirmed by western blot analysis . with the exception of one anti-pff0620c mab, all  <dig> mabs stained the corresponding recombinant protein in the lysate of the transfectant used for immunisation, but not in lysates of the other transfectants or of untransfected hek cells . interestingly, in western blot analysis anti-pff0620c mabs only bound to the non-reduced form of the recombinant protein. in contrast, anti-pfd1130w and anti-pf14_ <dig> mabs bound both to the reduced and non-reduced recombinant proteins .

reactivity of the generated monoclonal antibodies with the endogenous target antigens
to determine whether the generated mabs selected against ectopically expressed pff0620c, pfd1130w or pf14_ <dig> would bind to the endogenous proteins of p. falciparum parasites, we performed ifa and western-blot analysis using cultivated blood-stage parasites and mosquito salivary gland-derived sporozoites . all nine generated anti-pfd1130w mabs recognised a discrete band of about  <dig> kda, corresponding to the predicted molecular weight of the pfd1130w protein. furthermore all nine mabs stained blood-stage parasites in ifa, resulting in a distinctive staining pattern . both anti-pf14_ <dig> mabs were western-blot positive on blood stage parasite lysate and stained specifically late blood stage parasites in ifa . thirteen of the seventeen mabs specific for pff0620c reacted in ifa with mosquito salivary gland sporozoites, but not with blood stage parasites in ifa . no reactivity was seen in western blot with sporozoite lysate.

discussion
membrane proteins, including membrane associated proteins, are the gatekeepers of the cell and selectively mediate the flow of information and nutrients between the outside and inside of the cell. functions of membrane proteins include: transport of substances across membranes, enzymatic activity, signal transduction, intercellular joining, cell-cell recognition, attachment to the cytoskeleton and extracellular matrix. even though only 25% of all proteins are membrane proteins, about 60% of today's approved drug targets are membrane proteins  <cit> . also for subunit vaccine design cell surface associated proteins, which can be accessed by antibodies, are of prime interest. nonetheless the basic knowledge about these proteins lags far behind that of soluble proteins. this is due to difficulties in ectopic expression, purification and protein stability. therefore investigation of membrane proteins is a demanding undertaking and generation of mabs against membrane proteins represents a difficult task.

here we described a procedure to generate mabs specific for cell-surface associated proteins, which completely bypasses any need for purified antigen. this is highly desirable as it supersedes the laborious task of antigen purification and ensures presentation of target proteins in their native conformation. in a study using antigen expressing transfectant cells to generate single chain antibodies it was shown that cell-based selection was far more efficient in generating abs cross-reactive with the native endogenous protein than selection with purified recombinant protein  <cit> .

the principal steps of the applied procedure are the following:  generation of stably transfected mammalian cells, expressing high levels of the target antigen on their surface in a native conformation;  immunisation of mice with transfected cells;  hybridoma cell generation;  selection of hybridoma cells by a two step screening procedure involving an anti-igg elisa and an ifa with transfected and non-transfected cells. only one single transfected cell line is required for the whole process including immunisation, serum analysis, screening of hybridoma cell lines and antibody characterisation. furthermore the very same cell line may also be utilised for the study of receptor-ligand interactions.

in contrast to other entirely cell-based strategies to generate monoclonal antibodies  <cit>  our procedure used a dual tagging strategy to be able to assess surface expression of the recombinant protein. in the case of all three transfectants, the his tag was only accessible upon fixation with methanol in ifa, whereas the flag tag was accessible on live cells. from these results we deduced that all three cell lines presented recombinant protein on their cell surface. flow cytometric analysis showed that the staining intensity with the anti-flag tag and anti-his tag ab was varying between the three different transfectants. the finding that transfectants showing the lowest staining with the anti-flag tag ab showed the strongest staining with the anti-his tag ab could indicate that the percentage of correctly orientated protein molecules is varying between the different transfectants. however, differences in accessibility of the two tags in the context of the different core proteins could also be the reason for these differences. especially accessibility of the flag tag, which is positioned between the transmembrane domain and the parasite-derived part of the protein, could depend on the structural features of the parasite protein sequences.

in order to generate recombinant proteins with natural conformation, it is most favourable to use expression hosts of the same biological kingdom, since they likely produce the same post-translational modifications and recognise the same signals for synthesis, processing, and secretion as the organism, which the sequence was originally derived from. as we were dealing with plasmodium proteins, this objective could not be fulfilled, because currently no apicomplexa-based expression system is described. anticipating surface expression and natural conformation, the protein encoding sequence was genetically modified in several ways. firstly codon-usage was optimised for mammalian cells, as the plasmodium genome is extremely a+t-rich. the overall  composition is  <dig> %, and rises to 90% in introns and intergenic regions  <cit> . furthermore the endogenous gpi-attachment signal sequence was replaced by a transmembrane alpha helix of mouse glycophorin-a to ensure c-terminal membrane anchoring despite potential phylogenetic differences in the gpi-attachment machinery  <cit> . whether recombinantly expressed proteins will contain the same posttranslational modifications as the endogenous protein was uncertain. plasmodium species have undergone a process of gene loss that has removed much of their capacity to produce glycosylated proteins other than gpi-anchored proteins  <cit> . therefore recombinant expression of p. falciparum proteins in mammalian cells takes a risk of generating glycosylated forms of the protein, which are not found in the parasite. generated mabs might therefore not be capable of recognising the unglycosylated endogenous protein. however, in the study presented here  <dig> out of  <dig> generated mabs were capable of recognising the endogenous protein in ifa. therefore potential differences in the glycosylation status of recombinant and endogenous protein were inconsequential for antigen-antibody interactions. beside protein glycosylation, disulfide bonds play an important role in the folding and stability of proteins, especially for proteins secreted to the extracellular medium. pff0620c is predicted to contain two s48/ <dig> domains. these domains are known to contain six position-conserved cysteine residues, resulting in a conserved set of disulfide bonds  <cit> . generated anti-pff0620c mabs only reacted with recombinant pff0620c when analysed under non-reducing conditions, indicating that pff0620c expressed in hek cells contained disulfide bridges. as  <dig> out of  <dig> mabs recognised endogenous pff0620c in ifa, disulfide bridge formation in hek cells is likely to have resulted in endogenous protein-like structures.

to our knowledge, the present study shows for the first time that antigen-expressing tranfectants of xenogenic origin can well be used for immunisation of mice to efficiently generate antigen-specific mabs. in the described procedure we used a human derived cell line  for immunisation of mice. usage of hek cells has the advantage that they are easy to grow, transfect very readily and are capable of expressing large amounts of recombinant proteins  <cit> . in contrast, our attempts to express the three plasmodium proteins in nih/3t <dig> cells using a pcdna <dig>  or a pef <dig> expression vector were not successful . one might expect that mice immunised with cells of xenogenic origin generate an excess of antibodies against hek cell derived antigen, thereby repressing antibody generation specific for the parasite proteins of interest. indeed we saw strong antibody reactivity against hek cells. however, this procedure generated also mabs against the target antigens at high frequencies . on the other hand one could speculate that immunisation with xenogenic transfectants possibly results in a stronger activation of the immune system than immunisation with allogenic cells. interestingly, the percentage of transgene-specific clones generated in the three individual fusions correlated with the malaria antigen expression level of the corresponding transfected cells used for the immunisation of mice. this indicates that high expression levels of the target antigen are needed. it remains to be elucidated in more detail how expression strength and cell line origin affect the efficiency of mab generation by this procedure. anyhow, our results indicate that any kind of cell line, which expresses the antigen in decent amounts, can be used for the generation of mabs by the described procedure.

the two-step screening procedure consisting of an igg-elisa followed by ifa of transfected cells was quick, and the readout straightforward. in other studies using antigen-expressing cells for immunisation and hybridoma selection, either hybridoma supernatants have been analysed by flow cytometry or a reporter cell line has been used  <cit> . these screening strategies represent alternatives to the two-step screening procedure described here. this would have the advantage that hybridoma supernatants are screened for reactivity to living transfectants and not against cells that had undergone a fixation processes. however, both for flow cytometric and for reporter cell analysis, antigen-expressing cells need to be available in appropriate quality and number over the extended and not entirely predictable time period when hybridomas are ready for primary and secondary screening. in contrast, the described ifa-screen can be performed with slides prepared prior to the fusion and stored at -80°c.

CONCLUSIONS
these results demonstrate that our cell-based system of immunisation and hybridoma selection offers a rapid and efficient mean of obtaining mabs reactive with the native form of membrane-associated proteins. the strategy may easily be extended to a wide range of cell-surface proteins.

