BACKGROUND
recent studies have shown that plant genomes have potentially undergone rampant horizontal gene transfer   <cit> . in plant parasitic systems hgt appears to be facilitated by the intimate physical association between the parasite and its host  <cit> . hgt in these systems has been invoked when a dna sequence obtained from a parasite is placed phylogenetically very near to its host rather than with its closest relatives  <cit> . studies of hgt in parasitic plants have focused largely on single or few genes, and relied mostly on the fortuitous discovery of gene phylogenies that indicate hgt. no broad, systematic, genome-wide search for hgt has been undertaken in parasitic systems where it is most expected to occur. one parasitic plant clade that appears to be prone to hgt is rafflesiaceae sensu stricto, which belong to the order malpighiales  <cit>  and whose members produce the largest flowers in the world. rafflesiaceae are endophytic holoparasites, which lack leaves and stems. they parasitize a small number of species of tetrastigma  hosts, on which they rely exclusively for their nutrition. the many reported host-to-parasite gene transfers from tetrastigma to rafflesiaceae make this system especially intriguing for more in-depth investigation  <cit> . moreover, the association of tetrastigma and rafflesiaceae provides one of the best opportunities to study hgt in plant parasitic systems because i.) the parasites have a very narrow host specialization range, ii.) complete genomes are available for close relatives of the parasite  and its host , and iii.) the host and parasite are separated by at least  <dig> million years of evolution  <cit> . these three factors make it easier to distinguish horizontally from vertically inherited gene regions.

to better understand hgt in this host-parasite plant system, we generated transcriptomic data for both the parasite  and its obligate host . these data were analyzed using phylogenomic approaches that included whole-genome sequences from nine other plant model organisms. our results show that several dozen actively transcribed, largely nuclear, genes are of host origin. these results are above false positive rates and establish for the first time a substantive number of hgts in a plant host-parasite system. moreover, we find that hundreds of vertically inherited genes in these parasitic plants exhibit codon usage properties that are more similar to their hosts than to their closest relatives, which may help to explain the increase of hgts in these parasitic plants.

RESULTS
phylogenomic evidence for elevated rates of hgt in rafflesia
we constructed and sequenced  <cit>  complementary dna  libraries for rafflesia cantleyi solms-laubach additional file  and its obligate host, tetrastigma rafflesiae miq.  <cit>  additional file . these cdna transcripts were analyzed with protein-coding dna sequences from nine other species whose whole genomes have been sequenced . each rafflesia and tetrastigma transcript was placed into one of the following three categories on the basis of its phylogenetic position and support: vertical gene transfer , hgt, or unassigned. transcripts whose placements were concordant with accepted species tree relationships were best explained as a result of vgt. vgt was inferred when rafflesia or tetrastigma transcripts were placed with ≥50% bootstrap support  with their closest organismal relatives . similarly, hgt was inferred when rafflesia or tetrastigma transcripts were placed with vitis and manihot/populus/ricinus transcripts, respectively. transcripts that did not meet the criteria above, and were instead placed with the remaining included taxa, were left unassigned.

not unexpectedly, the largest fraction of rafflesia and tetrastigma transcripts were found to have phylogenetic placements consistent with vgt . we also found dozens of rafflesia transcripts that have phylogenetic placements consistent with hgt , but far fewer tetrastigma transcripts that have placements consistent with hgt . we further examined five different bs thresholds between 50% and 70% ; the percentages of putative hgt transcripts inferred for rafflesia and tetrastigma are similar across all thresholds . thus, our results are robust and are not sensitive to different levels of phylogenetic support.

although striking discordance between gene trees and species trees can be indicative of hgt, gene trees can be incongruent with species trees due to a variety of factors other than hgt, including incomplete lineage sorting, incorrect orthology assessment , small taxon sampling, and elevated substitution rates  <cit> . in order to assess the contribution of these factors, we first estimated the percentage of transcripts for manihot esculenta and ricinus communis that have placements consistent with hgt as defined above for rafflesia . these two species are the closest relatives of rafflesia and are not expected a priori to be prone to rampant hgt. thus, they provide an estimate of the non-hgt related factors that may contribute to phylogenetic discordance. our results indicate that only  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the transcripts in manihot and ricinus, respectively, have placements defined as hgt . thus, the very small number of tetrastigma transcripts whose phylogenetic placements are consistent with hgt is comparable to background rates in these non-host, non-parasitic taxa. we also compared nucleotide substitution rates between rafflesia hgt and vgt transcripts, and with their homologous sister lineages . although rafflesia transcripts show elevated substitution rates overall , rafflesia hgt transcripts are not evolving significantly faster than rafflesia vgt transcripts , nor to homologous vitis transcripts . both the background hgt rate assessment and nucleotide substitution rate assessment indicate that our estimates of hgt in rafflesia are robust.

in addition, most putative rafflesia hgt transcripts showed their closest affinity to vitis in our blast searches , which is consistent with these phylogenetic conclusions. thus, we conclude that the observed rafflesia transcripts show evidence that they originated via hgt from their obligate hosts. this is indicative of elevated rates of unidirectional host-to- parasite gene transfer in this system. furthermore, our results suggest that rates of hgt in this eukaryotic parasitic system are on par with some prokaryotic organisms  <cit> . moreover, our estimates of hgt are likely to be conservative because our transcriptome was built from a single organ from one developmental stage.

genomic integration of rafflesia hgt transcripts
since host-to-parasite exchange of rna is known to occur via translocation in the phloem  <cit> , we used a multi-pronged approach to confirm that our results cannot be attributed to host contamination . importantly, if our sample preparations were contaminated, we would not expect the high degree of sequence divergence we observed between putative hgt transcripts of rafflesia and homologous transcripts of tetrastigma. of the  <dig> hgt transcripts from rafflesia that could be directly compared with tetrastigma, sequence divergence ranged from  <dig> %– <dig> % . this indicates that some period of evolution has elapsed since the time of gene transfer. furthermore, assuming synteny between tetrastigma and vitis, the rafflesia hgt transcripts most likely originated from multiple chromosomes in the host , which suggests a series of episodic hgt events.

to further verify genomic integration of these rafflesia hgt transcripts, we also sequenced the genomic dna  from the same floral organ used for rafflesia cdna library construction. our next-generation sequencing of rafflesia gdna verified a large percentage of the transgenes  identified from our cdna analyses, independent of the bootstrap support threshold  or transcript length . the percentage of hgt transcripts verified to be integrated into the genome of rafflesia was nearly identical to the percentage of verified vgts . thus, our identification of putative hgts does not appear to be due to contamination of the mrna pool. additionally, of the  <dig> rafflesia hgt transcripts verified from our next-generation sequencing of genomic dna,  <dig> show the presence of an intron . although only two introns were covered in their entirety by our gdna sequencing, all introns possess the characteristic gt or ag splice site  <cit> . this suggests that the source of many of these integrated hgts at the time of transfer was likely genomic dna, rather than processed mrna transcripts. together, these results indicate that the hgts identified here are indeed integrated into the rafflesia genome.

gene location and function of rafflesia hgt transcripts
most previous reports of parasitic plant hgts appear to involve only the movement of gene regions that reside in the mitochondrial genome  <cit> . our results confirm recent findings in the parasitic plant striga that some horizontally transferred genes likely reside in the nucleus  <cit>  and indicate that perhaps many of these transgenes originated from the nuclear genomes of their hosts. homologues of nearly all hgt regions inferred in rafflesia are localized in the nuclear genomes of the other reference genomes examined here .

these hgts represent a wide range of cellular functions as determined by gene annotation data, including roles related to respiration, metabolism, mitochondrial translation, and protein turnover, to name a few . a natural extension of these results is to examine the extent to which these transgenes are functional in their recipient species. many previously reported transgenes in plants appear to be non-functional and often coexist with a native, functional homologue  <cit> . although some studies have shown that a small number of transgenes are likely transcribed  <cit> , none have been convincingly demonstrated to be functional in their recipient lineages. in contrast, we find that rafflesia hgts are expressed at levels comparable to vgts . this suggests that these hgts likely have functional promoters and therefore may play a role in cellular function. in addition, only  <dig> of the  <dig> hgts had homologous vgts expressed in the same transcript pool , which suggests that the hgt may have replaced the vgt function in some cases. the observed expression levels of the hgts further rules out the possibility that the hgts are due to contaminating rna, which would not be present at native levels, and confirms that hgts have been integrated into the rafflesia genome.

convergent coding properties of rafflesia vgt transcripts
codon and dinucleotide usage patterns  are phylogenetically conserved within clades  <cit> , but it has been demonstrated that the successful integration of foreign genes may depend on the extent to which they possess compatible coding properties with a recipient genome at the time of transfer  <cit> . in light of this, we investigated whether genomic convergence may have also occurred in rafflesia. we characterized coding properties in all vgts for malpighiales . we found that a significant percentage of rafflesia vgt transcripts  have coding properties more similar to a vitis gene in the same cluster than to any gene from their closest relatives, manihot or ricinus . in contrast, manihot and ricinus are most similar to vitis only  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the time, respectively. additionally, the expression level of rafflesia vgts is positively correlated with similarity to vitis-like coding patterns , suggesting that the convergent host-like coding patterns we identify in some rafflesia vgts are biologically meaningful. although results from these analyses should be interpreted cautiously, especially due to our inability to assess causality, one explanation of our results is that a substantial number of vgts in rafflesia may have evolved convergently to more closely match their hosts’ translational requirements. strikingly similar patterns of convergent host-parasite codon usage have also recently been reported for honeybees and their associated viral pathogens  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the elevated rate of unidirectional gene transfer from tetrastigma to rafflesia and the apparent pattern of convergent host codon usage in vertically inherited rafflesia genes raises the possibility that there may be a fitness benefit to rafflesia for maintaining genes that are more host-like. a critical component of a parasite’s ability to maximize resource extraction is to minimize the ability of the host to detect and mount a defense response to the parasite. the bacterium that causes legionnaires’ disease in humans appears to have acquired dozens of eukaryotic proteins via hgt that alter host cell functions to its advantage  <cit> . similarly, in plants the obligate bacterial pathogen of citrus trees encodes a gene that was horizontally transferred; its product mimics a host protein that has been shown to limit the host’s defense response  <cit> . our demonstration of hgt and vgt host codon usage convergence in rafflesia raises the possibility that it may similarly express host-like genes to manipulate its host to its advantage. our hypothesis that rafflesia may be engaged in such genomic deception requires further experimental work and examination in rafflesiaceae and in other plant parasitic systems.

