BACKGROUND
abiotic or environmental stresses such as drought, heat, salinity and cold are major impediments to plant survival and productivity in many parts of the world. plants respond to abiotic stress conditions through diverse biochemical and physiological processes such as accumulation of osmolytes and proteins, reduction in stomatal conductance, increase in photorespiration and general reduction in growth rate. osmotic adjustment is one of the common mechanisms of plant response to abiotic stress signals. water availability is the limiting factor common to all abiotic stresses. as the water potential of the soil water decreases, plants accumulate solutes to reduce the osmotic potential and to maintain water uptake  <cit> . several inorganic solutes such as k+, na+, cl- and organic solutes such as total soluble sugars, proline, glycine betaine and mannitol are involved in osmotic adjustment. stress conditions also lead to accumulation of harmful reactive oxygen species  such as hydroxyl radicals, singlet oxygen, hydrogen peroxide  and super oxide . antioxidant enzymes such as superoxide dismutase , ascorbate peroxidase  and catalase help protect plants cells from the harmful effects of ros  <cit> . expression of several detoxification enzymes was shown to increase under stress conditions  <cit> .

several studies of transcriptional responses to abiotic stress using microarrays  <cit>  have identified stress inducible genes that often belong to one of two groups, based on the functions of their gene products. genes belonging to group  <dig> are mainly involved in water transport , cellular membrane protection and integrity under stress conditions , scavenging of free oxygen radicals , and protecting macromolecules . the second group consists of genes that encode regulatory proteins  and proteins involved in signal transduction  <cit> . stress induced transcription factors are classified into two classes, aba dependent and aba independent. the aba dependent transcription factors include myc/myb and aba responsive element binding/aba binding factor  and the aba independent transcription factors are dehydration responsive element binding/c-repeat binding factors  belonging to the ethylene responsive factor/apetala <dig>  family  <cit> . the other transcription factors responding to abiotic stress conditions are basic-domain leucine-zipper  <cit> , wrky binding  <cit>  and nacs  <cit> .

while microarray analyses are useful in revealing genes that are responsive to different conditions, identification of allelic variants from genes showing differential expression may enable their application in breeding by marker-assisted selection. recent developments in sequencing technology are making it possible to combine gene discovery with identification of allelic variation. transcriptome sequencing or rna sequencing  is an approach for quantifying transcripts, in which rna samples are converted to cdna and sequenced, typically using high throughput methods. the resulting reads are then mapped against a reference genome sequence or assembled de novo to produce genome-scale transcriptome maps consisting of the structure and abundance of each gene  <cit> . the abundance of each transcript is determined by counting the number of sequences mapped to the corresponding gene thus providing digital estimate of gene expression. the main advantages of rna-seq over microarray analysis are a). as rna-seq is based on counting sequences, cross hybridisation problems associated with microarrays are avoided b). rna-seq has high dynamic range of detection i.e. very low and very high abundance transcripts can be detected with rna-seq while microarrays lack sensitivity to detect genes expressed at either high or low levels. using this technique zenoni et al. <cit>  detected several genes expressed during berry development in vitis vinifera. similarly several protein coding genes related to xylem formation were identified in an eucalyptus plantation tree using rna-seq  <cit> . rna-seq is also useful for identifying and estimating transcript abundances from alternatively spliced variants  <cit> . by sequencing several individuals from different populations it is also possible to identify single nucleotide polymorphisms  from genes showing differential expression.

in addition transcriptome sequencing can also be used to study the evolutionary selection patterns of genes by estimating nonsynonymous to synonymous substitution  ratios. novaes et al. <cit>  have shown that most of the genes are under purifying selection by sequencing rna from different tissues bulked from several individual trees in e. grandis. combining gene discovery with analysis of selection signatures may provide insights into natural selection patterns under drought stress.

eucalyptus camaldulensis is one of the most widely planted tree species in the world  <cit> , and is grown extensively in plantations for pulp production in the tropics of south and south east asia  <cit> . water availability is the most important factor determining the establishment and composition of tree species in the dry tropics  <cit> . the seedling stage is the critical period for survival and establishment of trees  <cit> . in this study we analysed the physiological responses of seedlings of three e. camaldulensis populations subjected to water stress. rna extracted from leaves of these seedlings was used in rna-seq analysis to study gene expression patterns under well watered and water stressed conditions. the main objectives of this study are to identify genes differentially expressed under control and stress conditions, to identify allelic variants from these genes and to study the evolutionary signatures of selection.

RESULTS
effect of water stress on physiological traits
effect of water stress on several physiological and growth traits was analysed by comparing well-watered and water-stressed plants. two-way anova revealed significant differences between control and stress treatments for all the physiological and biomass traits except for root to shoot ratios . while the treatment effect was significant, the population effect was not significant for any of the traits. similarly no significant interaction between the treatment and population was observed for any of the traits. pair-wise comparisons between the populations for traits were also not significant .

wp-water potential; op-osmotic potential; tp-turgor pressure; sc-stomatal conductance; tdm-total dry matter; te-transpiration efficiency; r/s-root to shoot ratio. sampling  <dig>  water relations were analysed.

p-values of population, treatment - control vs stress and interaction effects from a two-way analysis of variance of traits.

water stress significantly affects leaf water relations and stomatal conductance
leaf water relations were measured on samples collected  <dig> days  and  <dig> days  after the imposition of stress treatment. between the two sampling periods, measurements of water relations  were very similar in control seedlings . however, in stressed seedlings highly significant differences were observed for these traits between the two sampling periods. within a treatment at both sampling periods, no significant differences were observed between the populations for any of the water relation traits measured . the differences between control and stressed seedlings were much more pronounced  <dig> days after the imposition of the stress treatment . after  <dig> days pre-dawn water potentials had decreased to − <dig>  mpa in stressed seedlings compared to − <dig>  mpa in controls. by  <dig> days pre-dawn water potentials had fallen to − <dig>  mpa and negative turgor pressures were observed in stressed seedlings while in controls these traits were similar to those in sampling  <dig> 

mean stomatal conductance was higher in control seedlings  than in water stressed seedlings . reduction in the stomatal conductance of the katherine population is higher compared to the other two populations , however, as with water relations, the stomatal conductance of the three populations were not significantly different .

water stress significantly reduces biomass production under stress treatment
water stress had a significant effect on all traits related to biomass production . there was a significant decrease in the amount of water transpired and consequently there was a significant reduction in total dry mass  produced by stressed seedlings . the amount of transpiration fell from  <dig>  kg  to  <dig>  kg under stress treatment and total biomass produced fell from  <dig>  g  to  <dig>  g under stress treatment. similarly transpiration efficiency  decreased from  <dig>  g/kg in control seedlings to  <dig>  g/kg in stressed seedlings. root to shoot ratios of the katherine and mt. isa populations increased while in the petford population they decreased under stress treatment however, these differences were not significant .

rna sequencing and differential gene expression
in total,  <dig> million reads were generated from  <dig> samples. reads per sample ranged from two to nine million with an average of  <dig> million reads per sample. reads from high throughput sequencing were analysed with tophat package to develop gene models. reference-guided mapping was used to predict gene models by mapping the reads against the e. grandis reference genome sequence without using e. grandis annotations. by using the coordinates from the predicted gene models we identified the e. grandis genes mapping to the predicted gene regions e. camaldulensis'. while several of the predicted gene models map to e. grandis gene models there were however several predicted gene models e. camaldulensis that did not map to e. grandis gene models. we used e. grandis gene names wherever the predicted models mapped to the e. grandis models. where there are no e. grandis annotations mapping to the predicted gene models we used the gene names with a “cuff” prefix. the coordinates of these genes are presented in additional file  <dig> 

reference-guided transcriptome mapping
reads from all the  <dig> libraries were mapped against the eucalyptus reference genome sequence to generate gene annotations using the tophat and cufflinks packages. a total of  <dig>  transcripts were predicted including a large number of alternatively spliced transcripts. the identity of the transcripts was investigated by blast searches against the arabidopsis protein database. this analysis revealed  <dig>  unique genes from the total transcripts. read counts mapping to the gene annotations generated by reference-guided transcriptome mapping were used for testing differential expression of the genes between control  and stress  treatments using the edger package. before testing for differential expression, diagnostic tests were performed to test the consistency of the data between the populations. a high correlation was observed in gene expression between the three populations from a given treatment as measured by the read counts. the pearson’s correlation coefficient between the read counts of the three populations before stress treatment  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  and the correlation coefficient between the three populations of control plants at the end of the experiment  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . similarly in the stress treatment  the correlation coefficients between the populations ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  . this is further reflected in clustering analysis. multi-dimensional scaling  plot of the count data clearly separated the  <dig> libraries into three groups . the six libraries from the three populations before treatment  were clustered together. similarly the three populations of control plants  at the end of the treatment clustered together while populations from the stress treatment  formed another cluster. as there is a high degree of similarity between the populations from a treatment, reads from each population from a treatment were used as biological replicates in testing for differential expression.

identification of genes responding to water stress conditions
to identify genes responding to stress treatment, samples from control  and stress  treatments taken at the end of the stress treatment were analysed for differential gene expression. analysis of differential gene expression revealed a total of  <dig> transcripts  that were significantly  differentially expressed between the control  and stress  treatments . read counts from the three libraries within each treatment are very similar . a heatmap of gene expression of the top  <dig> genes is shown in figure  <dig>  variance stabilized data obtained with deseq pacckage was used to generate the heatmap. the gene expression patterns between the treatments are distinct while within each treatment they are similar. gene identities of the most differentially expressed transcripts are shown in table  <dig>  several heat shock proteins, cell wall genes such as expansins and drought stress related transcription factors  are among the most strongly differentially expressed genes.

m = mt.isa; k = katherine; p = petford; c1- control; s1- stress; logfc – log fold change; fdr-false discovery rate.

read counts of top  <dig> most differentially expressed transcripts under control  and stress conditions . e. grandis gene names are used when the predicted genes are mapped to e. grandis gene coordinates otherwise the predicted gene names are used with a pre-fix ‘cuff’.

1the arabidosis information resource.

gene models predicted from reference-guided mapping were blast searched against arabidopsis protein data base. arabidopsis homologs of top significant genes are presented. e. grandis gene names are used when the predicted genes are mapped to e. grandis gene coordinates otherwise the predicted gene names are used with a pre-fix ‘cuff’. “cuff” gene coordinates, read counts and gene identities of all significantly  differentially expressed transcripts are presented in the additional file  <dig> 

gene ontology enrichment analysis
in order to determine the biological function of differentially expressed genes between control  and stress  treatments, gene ontology  based enrichment tests were performed. the top most significantly differentially expressed genes  were tested for enrichment using a web-based tool . arabidopsis homologs of the predicted gene models were obtained by blast searches. a total of  <dig> gene categories were found to be significantly enriched among the genes that were differentially expressed between control  and stress  treatments. of these,  <dig> categories were down-regulated, while  <dig> categories were up-regulated under stress treatment. within the categories that were up-regulated, most of them were involved in stress response. for example, four of the most significantly enriched gene categories are response to chemical, temperature, heat and abiotic stress stimulus . similarly most of the down-regulated genes belonged to gene categories involved in metabolic processes and cell wall organisation .

gene ontology categories of up-regulated and down-regulated genes under water stress conditions  among the most significantly differentiated transcripts. total genes is the number of genes in a category, changed genes are the number of gene showed differential expression and fdr  is the one-sided fisher’s exact p value corrected for multiple comparisons.

identification of growth related genes
to identify genes relating to growth and development we compared the gene expression between five plants from each population sampled at the beginning of the treatment  and the same five plants sampled at the end of the treatment. gene expression analysis revealed a total of  <dig> genes with significant  differential expression between c <dig> and c <dig> samples. to study the expression patterns of these genes under stress conditions we compared the expression of significant genes  from this analysis with those showing significant differential expression between control  and stress  treatments. in total there were  <dig> genes common between the two analyses. a significant and negative correlation  was observed in log fold change of the gene expression between the two analyses indicating down regulation of several of the growth genes under stress treatment. genes showing large fold changes in c <dig> versus s <dig> and c <dig> versus c <dig> comparison are shown in table  <dig>  while several photosynthetic and metabolic process related genes exhibited opposite signs in fold change, basic chitinase, nac transcription factor and homeo box genes exhibited positive sign between the two comparisons. gene ontology analysis reflected the down regulation of growth genes under stress conditions. several metabolic process related gene categories such as ‘phenylpropanoid_metabolic_process’, ‘secondary_metabolic_process’ and ‘flavonoid_biosynthetic_process’ were up-regulated in c <dig> versus c <dig> comparison  and the same gene categories were down-regulated in c <dig> versus s <dig> comparison . however several stress response gene categories were up-regulated under both the comparisons.

1logfc- log fold change.

fold changes in the significantly differentiated genes between samples collected at the beginning  and at the end of the experiment  are compared with the fold changes in the significantly differentiated genes between control  and stress  treatments. e. grandis gene names are used when the predicted genes are mapped to e. grandis gene coordinates. otherwise the predicted gene names are used with a pre-fix ‘cuff’.

differential allelic expression
to study the regulatory variants responding to water stress treatment we measured allelic expression. for this the ten individuals sampled at the beginning of the treatment  and the same ten individual sampled at the end of the stress treatment  were used. allelic expression of an individual should remain the same even when the total expression of a gene changes. any change in the allelic expression may indicate the influence of regulatory variants. we observed several snps as ten individuals in each population were sequenced. to increase the coverage and confidence of the snp calls, we combined the reads of the three populations from each treatment . using a minimum coverage of  <dig> reads and a minimum frequency of  <dig> , we identified  <dig>  snps within s <dig> samples and  <dig>  snps within the same samples under the stress treatment . there were  <dig>  snps common to both treatments. most of the unique snps from either treatment generally had low coverage. allele frequency differences between s <dig> and s <dig> treatments were used to identify differential allelic expression . this analysis revealed  <dig>  snps  with significant differences in allelic expression between the two treatments . among these snps 68% were transition substitutions while 32% were transversion substitutions. chitinase, zinc finger, plastocynin and cellulose synthase had large differences in allelic expression between the two treatments . allelic expression of 52% of snps  correlated with differential gene expression suggesting that these may be the cis-acting regulatory variants controlling gene expression. genes with significant differences in allelic expression and total gene expression include chitinase, heat repeat containing protein, and dehydrin. allelic expression of the remaining 48% of the snps  did not correlate with total gene expression. several heat shock protein genes were present among this group . the number of variants showing differential allelic expression was generally biased towards genes with high coverage and alleles with large expression differences between the treatments.

1freq – frequency of allele-a.

snps with significant differential allelic expression between samples at the beginning  and at the end of stress  treatment. genes with these snps also showed significant differential gene expression between control  and stress  treatments. e. grandis genes overlapping snp positions are shown. gene annotations are based on arabidopsis homologs of the eucalyptus transcripts. more details are shown in additional file  <dig> 

using e. grandis gene annotations we classified the snps as three-prime, synonymous, nonsynonymous, five-prime and intronic snps. synonymous and nonsynonymous snps were annotated using popoolation package  <cit> . while most of the snps were from coding regions, there were however several snps from intron regions  suggesting that some of these snps may be from unspliced pre-mrna. the intronic snps may also represent incomplete annotations of e. grandis. ten of the intronic snps were within the splice sites.

go analysis of genes showing differential allelic expression
we used go enrichment analysis to identify the functional categories enriched among the genes that showed significant differential allelic expression. go enrichment tests were performed separately for genes that showed significant differential allelic expression as well as total gene expression between control  and stress  treatments and genes that showed only significant differential allelic expression but similar total gene expression between control and stress treatments. genes that showed both allelic and total gene expression were enriched in stress and metabolic process gene categories  as identified previously . interestingly, several stress-related gene categories  were also enriched among the genes that showed differential allelic expression but no change in total gene expression .

identification of genes under selection
to study the evolutionary selection patterns among the genes we analysed the nonsynonymous to synonymous substitution  ratios. to estimate the ka/ks ratios we combined the reads from all the populations before and after the stress treatment. we identified  <dig> snps from coding regions of  <dig>  genes using ‘popoolation’package <cit> . these snps were annotated as nonsynonymous or synonymous using the ‘popoolation’ package. annotations of these variants were further confirmed by visually inspecting the tracks in integrative genomics viewer igv  <cit> . the proportion of nonsynonymous to synonymous mutation rates  among the genes has ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  with a mean of  <dig>  among  <dig>  genes . genes with ka/ks ratios below  <dig>  were treated as under purifying selection while gene with ka/ks ratios above  <dig>  were treated as under positive selection. most of the genes  were under negative selection with the ka/ks ratios below  <dig> . in contrast the number of genes under positive selection or under diversifying selection was small. only 2% of the genes  were under positive selection with ka/ks ratios above  <dig> . to identify the gene categories enriched among the genes we conducted go enrichment tests separately for negatively and positively selected genes. while several gene categories relating to different biological processes were enriched among the negatively selected genes , gene categories enriched among the positively selected genes were primarily related to apoptosis and cell death .

differential gene and allelic expression of positively selected genes
ninety genes which showed differential expressed between control  and stress  treatments were among the positively selected genes with ka/ks ratios more than  <dig>  . while several known genes and drought stress related transcription factors such as nac, erf <dig> and wrky were among the positively selected and differentially expressed genes there were however several unknown genes among the positively selected genes showing differential expression. twenty seven snps from  <dig> positively selected genes showed differential allelic expression between s <dig> and s <dig> samples . of the  <dig> snps with differential allelic expression, 78%  of them were nonsynonymous. of the  <dig> genes which showed differential allelic -expression, four genes were differentially expressed between control  and stress  treatments. in three snps from two genes  expression of one of the two alleles was completely suppressed in s <dig> samples while both the alleles were expressed in s <dig> samples.

1nonsynonymous length 2synonymous length 3nonsynonymous sites 4synonymous sites.

discussion
we observed several  genes differentially expressed between control and water stress conditions. the large numbers of genes observed in this study compared to other studies could be due to the higher sensitivity of rna-seq compared to microarray analysis. the high correlation in gene expression between three populations in both control and stress treatments may be due to the same factors that led to the similarity of physiological and biomass traits observed between the populations in both the treatments .

go analysis reveals biologically relevant genes
gene ontology-based tests revealed more than  <dig> gene categories enriched among the top most significantly differentially expressed genes. while several drought stress genes were induced by stress treatment, several cell wall and photosynthetic genes were down regulated under stress conditions. several growth and development genes identified by comparing the control samples taken at two intervals were down regulated under stress treatment. up-regulation of several metabolic process genes between the control samples and down regulation of these gens under stress treatment may reflect the reduction in growth under stress conditions suggesting that these genes play a role in normal plant growth and development. these genes may therefore be used as candidate genes for growth and biomass production.

in addition to the previously reported water stress related genes, we observed several novel and/or unknown genes showing differential expression between control and stress treatments. these form a new source of candidate genes for water stress tolerance. functional analysis of these genes may reveal novel pathways of genes responding to water stress. the new gene models predicted with reference-guided mapping which are not present in e. grandis annotations  may be useful for improving the annotations of e. grandis gene models.

differential allelic expression is common
in addition to studying gene expression patterns, rna sequencing can also reveal differences in allelic expression. allelic expression analysis can reveal functional regulatory variants. within an individual both alleles are subjected to same environmental conditions and feedback control. any bias in the expression of two alleles indicates presence of nearby cis-variants. in rna sequencing experiments read counts at the polymorphic sites provide allelic abundance and simple statistical tests of differences in read counts at polymorphic sites allow the detection of biases in allelic expression  <cit> . allelic expression imbalance  is generally measured by genotyping or sequencing snps in individual cdna samples  <cit> . however, high throughput sequencing methods have recently been used for studying aei  <cit> . while sequencing individual samples for aei analysis is a powerful approach for detecting subtle differences in allelic expression, it is expensive to sequence individual samples separately. next generation sequencing of pooled samples provides cost effective method for estimating allele frequencies at genome-wide scale  <cit> . pooling and sequencing rna samples is an efficient way to detect cis-regulatory polymorphisms at genome-wide scale  <cit> . sequencing rna samples pooled from  <dig> adipose and islet tissues of f <dig> mice, babak et al..  <cit>  found several genes showing aei. they found a significant overlap between the genes showing aei and cis-eqtl genes obtained from microarray analysis of the same f <dig> population, indicating the robustness of this approach. while differential allelic expression from rna sequencing of pooled samples may not indicate the presence of cis-acting variants, the correlation of allelic expression with total gene expression may indicate the presence of nearby cis-acting variants.

we used pooled rna samples to identify snps in this study. allelic expression of about  <dig> % of significant variants correlated with differential gene expression between control  and stress  treatments. these variants therefore may represent cis-acting regulatory variants controlling gene expression or these variants may occur in high ld with regulatory variants in adjacent intronic, untranslated and promoter sequences. recent genome-wide association studies have demonstrated that genetic variation in regulatory regions is more important than coding regions in affecting complex traits  <cit> . identification of regulatory polymorphisms is therefore crucial for understanding the control of complex traits.

allelic expression was shown to influence gene expression and phenotype in several plant species. drought stress was shown to induce allele specific expression in barley hybrids  <cit> . allelic expression may also by caused by differential methylation of alleles. in a recent study we showed that a single nucleotide polymorphism  in a cis-regulatory element affects tree phenotypic traits  through changes in allelic expression caused by differential methylation of alleles  <cit> . snp markers within regulatory elements can therefore affect traits by influencing the expression of genes, and could potentially be used in breeding programs to improve complex traits such as drought tolerance, growth and wood quality traits.

enrichment of several stress responsive gene categories among the genes showing dae and similar total gene expression between control and stress treatments indicates that these variants may be the trans-acting variants or variants influenced by mutations to transcriptional network. similar results were reported by tuch et al. <cit> . by comparing gene expression patterns between tumour and normal tissues they identified several genes with differential allelic expression but similar total gene expression between the two types of tissues. gene ontology tests with allelically imbalanced genes indicated enrichment of several gene categories common to the set of differentially expressed genes between tumour and normal tissues. these results indicate that allelic expression analysis may be helpful in identifying candidate genes even when total gene expression differences between the treatments are subtle.

while sequencing pooled samples is a cost effective method, pooling different samples may however introduce different biases. to verify the allelic expression results from this study these snps need to be sequenced or genotyped in independent samples. similarly, the pooling method used in this study does not allow for the detection of causal variants. sequencing or genotyping of individual samples is required to identify the causal regulatory variants  <cit> .

evolutionary signatures of selection among the genes
to explore the evolutionary selection patterns among the genes and to identify the mechanisms of natural selection under water stressed conditions we studied the selection signatures using ka/ks estimates. most of the genes examined in this study are under negative or purifying selection with a mean ka/ks ratio of  <dig>  . similar results were reported in e. grandis <cit> . the average ka/ks ratio observed in that study was  <dig> . in the previous study, novaes et al. <cit>  have analysed  <dig> genes while in the present more than  <dig>  genes were analysed. this study thus provides genome-wide selection patterns among the genes expressed in the leaf tissue. most of the protein coding genes in plants and animals are in general under purifying selection indicating that these genes may have central functions and nonsynonymous mutations affecting their function have been removed by purifying selection  <cit> . gene ontology  enrichment tests have revealed gene categories belonging to several biological processes were enriched among the negatively selected genes . similar results were reported in e. grandis where genes encoding protein translation were the most significantly enriched among negatively selected genes  <cit> . in the present study however apoptosis and cell death categories were significantly enriched among the positively selected genes . nielsen et al..  <cit>  have also reported that apoptosis related genes were under strong positive selection among  <dig>  homologous genes between human and chimpanzee lineages.

apoptosis involves removal of cells damaged by stresses or pathogen infections through programmed cell death. several studies in plants have shown that disease resistance genes are under strong positive selection  <cit> . the role of apoptosis in defence mechanisms may be the reason for positive selection acting on genes relating apoptosis and cell death. genes relating to stress particularly disease stress evolve rapidly to adapt to changing conditions. maintaining different alleles will help the organisms to cope with the changing conditions  <cit> .

the estimates of ka/ks ratios in the present study are influenced by coverage of the genes. the results presented here should therefore need to be further validated. further studies using entire genome sequences of several closely related eucalyptus species should improve the knowledge of selection patterns among different genes. with the availability of eucalyptus reference genome sequence and the development of improved sequence analysis tools such genome-wide comparisons are now possible.

CONCLUSIONS
we identified numerous genes that are differentially expressed between control and water stressed e. camaldulensis seedlings. in addition to the previously characterised genes we observed several novel and/or unknown genes showing differential expression. functional analysis of these genes may provide novel insights into the genetic control of drought tolerance. we also identified several snps in the differentially expressed genes with allelic expression of several of these variants correlating with total gene expression. the correlation of allelic expression with total gene expression indicates that these variants may be the cis-acting regulatory variants or in ld with such variants. analysis of the selection patterns revealed enrichment of apoptosis and cell death categories among the positively selected genes. the variants identified from differential allelic expression form a valuable resource for further studies such as association studies to identify markers for drought resistance. through this study we show that rna-seq can be used to reveal functional markers and evolutionary selection patterns in addition to candidate genes.

