BACKGROUND
sequence homology searches have been the workhorse of bioinformatics for the past  <dig> years, providing the means to study the function and evolution of genes and proteins. recent technological advances in large-scale measurements of protein-protein interactions  such as yeast two-hybrid screens  <cit>  and protein co-immunoprecipitation assays  <cit>  have allowed us to shift our perspective from single genes and proteins to more complex functional units, such as protein pathways and complexes. studying the function and evolution of protein modules underscores the importance of extending homology search tools from the single gene level to the network level.

in contrast to the vast research on gene and protein homology detection, there are only a few studies on homology detection at the network level, including studies on ppi networks  <cit> , metabolic networks  <cit> , and gene expression networks  <cit> . most of these studies have focused on the identification of network regions that are conserved across several species. initial attempts at the problem of query searches, i.e. searching for instances of a query subnetwork within a given network, have been made by kelley et al.  <cit>  and pinter et al.  <cit>  but both methods were limited in their applicability. the pathblast algorithm of kelley et al. was designed to compare two protein networks and identify conserved pathways . by constraining one of the networks to be a single pathway, pathblast was also applied for query searches. the use of the pathblast algorithm in this context has several drawbacks:  proteins may occur more than once in an identified matched pathway, which is biologically implausible;  the algorithm provides limited support for identifying non-exact pathway matches, supporting no more than a single consecutive deletion of proteins from the query pathway and no more than a single consecutive insertion of proteins to the matched pathway; and  the running time of the algorithm involves a factorial function of the pathway length, limiting its applicability to short pathways . pinter et al. have recently developed a pathway alignment tool called metapathwayhunter and applied it to mine metabolic networks. the algorithm enables fast queries of more general pathways that take the form of a tree . however, it is limited to searching within a collection of trees rather than within a general network. finally, leser has developed a query language for mining biological networks  <cit> .

here we give a novel comprehensive framework for querying linear pathways within a given network. our algorithm, qpath, searches for matching pathways composed of distinct proteins that are similar to the query proteins in their sequence and interaction patterns. the matched pathways are scored according to their level of variation from the query pathway in terms of protein insertions and deletions, the sequence similarity of their constituent proteins to the query proteins, and the reliability of their constituent interactions. we provide a computational method for estimating the weight of each of these terms in the overall score, so as to maximize the fraction of the functionally significant matching pathways identified.

we applied qpath to analyze the ppi networks of the yeast s. cerevisiae, the fly d. melanogaster, and human, aiming to address two coupled, fundamental questions motivated from sequence analysis:  can pathway homology be used to identify functionally significant pathways?  can one infer the function of a pathway based on pathway homology information? we provide positive answers to both questions. notably, our finding that matched pathways in fly tend to preserve the function of their corresponding query pathways in yeast, has enabled us to derive a first annotated map of protein pathways in fly that are conserved from yeast.

RESULTS
the qpath algorithm
we developed a novel algorithm for querying a given protein network with a linear pathway of interest. the algorithm searches for matching pathways that are similar to the query in their sequence and interaction patterns. it relies on efficient graph-theoretic techniques, allowing it to process long pathways  in minutes . while the algorithm can be applied to query any gene or protein network, we focus the discussion on its applications to mining ppi networks. qpath receives as input a query pathway consisting of a linear chain of interacting proteins; a ppi network with reliability scores for its interactions; and sequence similarity scores between the query proteins and the network proteins . similar to sequence alignment, the algorithm aligns the query pathway to putative pathways in the target network, so that proteins in analogous positions are sequence similar. each matched pathway may contain a  number of protein insertions, representing proteins not aligned to the query proteins, and protein deletions, representing omission of matches to some query proteins . the pathways are scored based on a sequence score, which measures their sequence similarity to the query pathway; an interaction score, which measures the reliability of their constituent interactions; and the number of protein insertions and deletions they employ. the top-scoring pathways are identified using a dynamic programming based algorithm that guarantees that matched pathways will be comprised of distinct proteins. the output of the algorithm is a set of non-redundant, significant matching pathways. the qpath program is available upon request.

pathway queries in the yeast and fly networks
to evaluate the utility of our algorithm in analyzing ppi networks, we applied it to the yeast and fly protein interaction networks, which are the largest and most well investigated networks in public databases  <cit> . as a first test of the algorithm, similarly to  <cit>  , we queried the yeast network with the yeast filamentous growth mapk cascade. the algorithm correctly recovered two known homologous mapk pathways as the top matches . next, we wished to perform a systematic evaluation of the algorithm's performance on the yeast and fly networks. since the yeast network is supported by many more large-scale experiments  <cit>  and, hence, expected to be more complete and accurate, we reasoned that by querying putative yeast pathways within the fly network we could reveal novel functional pathways therein, capitalizing on the more complete information in yeast.

to obtain a comprehensive set of putative pathways in the ppi network of yeast, we applied a modified version of the qpath algorithm to search the network for pathways that have high interaction scores . the search was limited to pathways consisting of  <dig> proteins to achieve reasonable running times when applying qpath to query those pathways while allowing for  insertions and deletions. we identified a set of  <dig> non-redundant pathways whose scores exceeded those of 99% of randomly chosen pathways . the full list of identified pathways appears on the supplemental website  <cit> .

we used two standard methods to assess the quality of these pathways :  functional enrichment – representing the tendency of the pathway's proteins to have coherent gene ontology  functions; and  expression coherency – measuring the similarity in expression profiles of the pathway's coding genes across different experimental conditions. in total, 80% of the yeast pathways were functionally enriched. in addition, the resulting pathways were significantly coherently expressed . the significant functional enrichment and expression coherency of the identified pathways suggest that these pathways are biologically significant. in agreement with the expected lower quality of the fly network, we observed lower rates of functional enrichment and expression coherency when analyzing analogously-computed high-scoring pathways in fly .

for each significant pathway in yeast we executed the qpath algorithm to search for matching pathways in fly. in total, 63% of the yeast queries had matches in fly with up to three insertions and deletions. given a yeast query, the probability of finding matching pathways in fly was highly correlated with the interaction score of the query . only few of the queries had matching pathways with no insertions or deletions, implying that the algorithm's support for insertions and deletions was essential for identifying matching pathways .

a query pathway potentially gives rise to multiple matching pathways, each with a different sequence score, interaction score and indel category, defined by the number of insertions and deletions employed by the pathway. in order to compare sequence and interaction scores for pathways from different indel categories, we normalized their scores by the number of proteins and interactions they contain, respectively. we found a statistically significant correlation between the functional enrichment of the matched pathways and their normalized interaction and sequence scores . furthermore, the indel category of a pathway was also found to be correlated with its functional enrichment: as expected, fly pathways exhibiting fewer protein insertions and deletions  tended to be more functionally enriched than more distant pathway matches .

motivated by these observations, we devised a scoring scheme that assigns each pathway a score reflecting its estimated probability to be functionally enriched given its inherent characteristics, i.e., the number of insertions and deletions it employs and its normalized interaction and sequence scores . for each yeast query we refer to the matched pathway with the highest obtained score and, hence, most likely to be functionally enriched, as the best-match pathway.

to assess the biological significance of the best-match pathways in fly, we compared their functional enrichment and expression coherency to that of fly pathways that are not the results of a query. in total, 51% of the best-match pathways were functionally enriched. within the set of 20% of the best-match pathways which were predicted to have the highest probability to be functionally enriched, 91% were indeed functionally enriched . in comparison, the percentage of functionally enriched pathways in a set of fly pathways with the same length and distribution of interaction scores was 5%, which is significantly lower . the expression coherency of the best-match pathways was also significantly higher than that of randomly chosen pathways . these results suggest that best-match pathways are biologically significant.

function conservation in yeast to fly pathways
next, we investigated whether pathway similarity may be used to infer the function of a matched pathway based on the known function of the corresponding query pathway. overall, out of the  <dig> yeast query pathways with an identified fly best-match pathway,  <dig> were functionally enriched and had a functionally enriched fly best-match pathway. moreover, for 64% of these queries, the fly best-match pathways preserved one or more functions of the corresponding yeast query pathways. in contrast, when randomly shuffling the matches between fly pathways and yeast queries, only 31% of the fly pathways exhibited conservation of function . interestingly, the pathway-based conservation of function was also much higher than the function conservation level among yeast-fly best sequence match proteins, which is estimated at 40%  <cit> .

we used the observed function conservation to derive a functional annotation of all fly best-match pathways, based on the enriched functions of their corresponding queries in yeast. figure  <dig> summarizes these results in an annotated map of conserved fly  pathways. the map exhibits a modular structure, where groups of pathways overlap to define distinct network regions with common functions ). to evaluate the statistical significance of these predicted annotations, we computed for each best-match pathway the prevalence of the predicted annotation among its proteins , and compared these statistics with results obtained after randomizing the matches between yeast and fly pathways. the predicted annotations were found to be significantly more prevalent .

querying known signaling pathways from yeast and human
to demonstrate the use of our algorithm in a blast-like manner to query known protein pathways, we applied it to search the fly network for matches to queries consisting of known signaling pathways from yeast and human. as a first example, we used a ubiquitin-ligation pathway in yeast to query the fly network . we identified a putatively homologous pathway in fly that is likely to be involved in protein degradation as well. three out of its five proteins were annotated as being involved in ubiquitin-dependent protein degradation: ubp64e is a putative ubiquitin-specific protease; morgue is annotated as a ubiquitin conjugating enzyme involved in apoptosis; and ago is a bona fide component of the scf ubiquitin ligase complex  <cit> . eye growth defects common to ubp64e and ago mutants, may suggest that this pathway functions in the regulation of growth and apopotosis.

as a second example, we used two signaling pathways in human as queries to the fly network: a mapk cascade and a hedgehog signaling pathway. the top-scoring pathway in each case agreed well with the known functional annotations in fly. the mapk query and its best-match are shown in figure 5b. as expected for a mapk-based signaling cascade, nek <dig> is a putative receptor signaling protein serine/threonine kinase. tsp is likely a growth factor, based on its egf-like domain, which could serve as a ligand for nek <dig>  dap <dig> and fur <dig> are experimentally proven to be involved in receptor processing and internalization, respectively  <cit> . although no experimental information is available for rgl, rap <dig>  epac and pkc98e, all available annotations fit into a g-protein coupled receptor protein signaling pathway: rgl is a putative ral gdp-dissociation stimulator, rap <dig> has putative gtpase activity, epac has putative cyclic nucleotide-dependent guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor activity, and both pkc98e and cdc2c are annotated as protein serine/threonine kinases. interestingly, rnai against cdc2c causes abnormal growth of cells in culture  <cit>  , and the phenotype of mutant nek <dig> implicates it in the regulation of mitosis  <cit> . taken together, these evidences suggest that the inferred pathway could be involved in a cell-cell communication signaling cascade that regulates cell proliferation.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
we have presented a novel framework for querying linear pathways in ppi networks, allowing both deletions of proteins from the query pathway and insertions of proteins to the matched pathway. matched pathways are assigned with scores reflecting their tendency to be functionally enriched, based on their variation from the query pathway, the sequence similarity of their proteins to the query proteins, and the reliability of their constituent interactions.

the effectiveness of the algorithm was demonstrated in querying the fly ppi network using protein pathways from yeast and human. when applying the algorithm to search for yeast pathway queries in fly, the matching pathways were significantly more functionally enriched compared to arbitrary pathways in the fly network. the resulting pathways tended to preserve the function of the original query pathways, demonstrating the applicability of our tool for predicting pathway function much in the same way as gene and protein functions are predicted using blast.

as with any ppi network study, it is important to deal with the vast amounts of noise present in the protein interaction data  <cit> . to handle false positive interactions we have assigned confidence scores to the interactions. to examine the contribution of the confidence scores for finding biologically-meaningful pathways, we repeated the functional enrichment and expression coherency analyses for sets of randomly chosen pathways from the yeast and fly networks obtained by discarding the interaction confidence scores. the percent of functionally enriched pathways and expression coherency rates found in these random sets were significantly lower than those found for high-scoring pathways . moreover, for both yeast and fly we found a statistically significant correlation between interaction scores and functional enrichment .

accommodating for false negatives is a difficult challenge, but qpath handles those to some extent by allowing the introduction of protein indels to the matching pathway. incorporating genetic interactions in the network may also help to tackle the problem of false negatives, as genetic interactions may indicate physical interactions between proteins  <cit> . in particular, for fly, the set of genetic interactions reported in flygrid  <cit>  has significant overlap with the physical network, with a hyper-geometric p-value of  <dig> e- <dig>  to test whether merging genetic and physical interactions contributes to the identification of functionally significant pathways, we applied qpath to re-query the human mapk pathway in the merged network of fly . the pathway identified is a variant of the egfr receptor-kinase-signaling cascade, and five out of its seven proteins appear in the curated homologous fly pathway in kegg  <cit> . the hypothetical signal is transmitted to the egf receptor, and further relayed through ksr and c3g, a proven kinase and an annotated ras guanyl-nucleotide exchange factor, respectively, to ras85d. the latter has been shown experimentally to activate phl  <cit> . the putative signal is further transmitted to the map kinase kinase dsor <dig>  and downstream to rl, an annotated nuclear map kinase which likely activates specific transcription factors. furthermore, ksr, phl, dsor <dig> and rl are all required for modulation of the egfr-mediated ras85d mitogenic response  <cit> . using genetic interactions is crucial for identifying this pathway as  <dig> out of its  <dig> interactions are genetic. this result suggests that merging both genetic and physical interactions may help coping with undetected protein-protein interactions.

we have only just begun to explore the world of protein networks, with the first drafts of the human ppi network just coming out  <cit> . with an ever increasing amount of genomes sequenced and protein interaction networks recovered, it is becoming increasingly important to develop tools for interpreting these data to provide detailed models of cellular machinery across organisms. we expect qpath to take a growing role in this exploration, giving essential means to use existing knowledge for inferring novel pathways and their function.

