BACKGROUND
compensatory reactions to sudden loss of balance involve the coordination of multiple body segments acting rapidly to restore stability. the mechanisms underlying these reactions likely reflect distributed neural networks ranging across spinal and brain stem regions up to higher cortical centres  <cit> . while postural regulation was historically regarded as sub-cortical in nature, more recent accounts include speculation about cortical contributions to the control of reactive balance  <cit> . in fact, even elements of neural function largely considered separate from posture, such as attention and working memory, reveal an interaction of postural control with higher executive networks  <cit> . although a cortical role in reactive balance is now more widely accepted, there remains a perspective that the very early corrective reactions are driven primarily via sub-cortical mechanisms, and only the later phases of these reactions are significantly influenced by cortical drive  <cit> .

recent work in our lab revealed that temporary suppression of the hand region of primary motor cortex  using a continuous theta burst stimulation  pattern of transcranial magnetic stimulation attenuated hand muscle responses during a compensatory reach to grasp  <cit> . focal suppression of rapid compensatory hand muscle activity indicated that m <dig> contributed to producing or at least scaling of the initial response. importantly, this same pattern of suppression was noted when reaching in response to an auditory cue suggesting that both perturbation-evoked and auditory-cued arm actions were mediated through a similar cortical network. these results extend upon previous work by gage and colleagues which revealed a preservation of spatial-temporal reach patterns during volitional and compensatory reaching  <cit> . remarkably, these authors noted that despite similar muscle activity and arm kinematics, perturbation-evoked reaches were approximately twice as fast. one proposed explanation for this phenomenon is that heightened arousal drives the same cortical networks involved in producing a cortically mediated reach at a much faster rate  <cit> .

in general, the recovery of balance can be achieved either by engaging muscles to re-establish a stable position over a fixed support base or to establish a new support base to catch a falling centre of mass . these strategies have been referred to as fixed support reactions or change of support reactions respectively  <cit> . in the two studies described above by gage et al.  and bolton et al. , subjects were perturbed while seated in a chair and prompted to grasp a secure handhold, therefore this represents a change of support reaction. although the previous results offered support for the role of m <dig> in this corrective action it is notable that hand muscles were activated at a later stage in the reaching response. this is consistent with change of support actions which tend to recruit muscles in a proximal to distal arrangement during the reach to grasp  <cit> . while these previous studies have revealed cortical contributions to compensatory reach to grasp, it remains unclear whether the earliest compensatory responses are similarly mediated by cortical pathways. in order to explore the earliest compensatory reactions one must focus on the earliest muscle responses during execution of fixed support reactions.

the present study explored the role of m <dig> in the earliest postural reactions during a fixed arm support paradigm. our specific goal was to investigate the contribution of m <dig> to the early compensatory arm response to rapid chair tilts while holding a fixed handle with both hands. by temporarily suppressing cortical excitability of the hand area of m <dig>  we hypothesized that the very early hand response would be diminished in the right hand during a fixed support reaction. moreover, given the established interaction between right and left m <dig>  <cit>  we investigated the potential impact on the contralateral  hand. there is evidence to suggest that the predominant influence of m <dig> onto the contralateral m <dig> is inhibitory, thus inhibition of m <dig> on one hemisphere may result in a facilitation of homologous muscles in the contralateral m <dig>  <cit> . some support for this idea comes from a recent study when faster reaction times for hand muscles were recorded when the contralateral m <dig> was temporarily suppressed  <cit> . although present results revealed some variety in the precise way ctbs influenced muscle activity across subjects, there was consistently a focal impact of ctbs on the stimulated hand muscles  while more proximal muscles were unaffected. overall, these results suggest that cortical networks contribute to early compensatory arm reactions following whole-body perturbation.

RESULTS
the sequence of muscle activity following perturbation revealed that wrist flexor  was the fastest responder for both the right  and left  limbs with the remaining muscles , abductor pollicis brevis , and biceps brachii ) engaged approximately 20 ms later . this sequence of muscle onsets  is consistent with previously mentioned fixed-support reactions where there is a distal to proximal order of muscle activation. moreover, the onset latency of about 150 ms for the fastest response muscle  is much faster than the earliest muscle onsets involved with rapid voluntary movements using similar speeded-limb response paradigms  <cit> . this provides support for the notion that the presently observed data represent reactive balance responses.

in order to probe our specific research question it was important to establish the efficacy of ctbs in suppressing cortical excitability over the stimulated hand region. to this end, our results showed a significant drop of 23%  in mep amplitude in fdi following ctbs in the  <dig> subjects where meps were collected .

the influence of ctbs on the fixed support balance reactions was determined by comparing difference scores  which revealed a statistically significant difference in the amplitude of perturbation-evoked responses comparing between hand and arm muscles . follow-up comparison revealed that handr response amplitudes were significantly different following ctbs compared to armr, , but there were no significant differences when comparing left side handl and arml .

while a clear group difference was observed, there was inter-subject variability in the specific impact of ctbs on hand muscles which we believe may reflect, in part, the specificity of the applied ctbs. figure  <dig> demonstrates an example where fdi and apb are both inhibited on the right hand, but no change in proximal muscle activation. the impact of ctbs on the stimulated hand muscles is depicted for each of the  <dig> subjects in figure  <dig>  overall,  <dig> of  <dig>  subjects revealed significant suppression of the fixed support reaction in one or both of the right hand muscles . in the remaining subjects there was no significant inhibition of the response amplitude in either of the muscles of the right hand.

comparison of emg latencies revealed a trend for an interaction on the stimulated right arm . follow-up comparison indicated that apb responses became marginally slower  post-ctbs in the stimulated right hand . there was a main effect of muscle  with wf having the earliest response in both arms, followed by fdi and bic at approximately the same latency, and finally apb. the onset time for each muscle is shown in figure  <dig> . theta burst stimulation demonstrated no significant impact on emg onset in most of the muscles tested . the general preservation of response onset following stimulation for all muscles is demonstrated in figure  <dig>  expressing post versus pre-ctbs onsets as a percentage.

discussion
the present study investigated the role of m <dig> in compensatory upper limb responses to whole body perturbation when holding a fixed support handle. to address this question ctbs was used to target cortical suppression over the hand area of the left m <dig> prior to the testing of perturbation-evoked compensatory fixed support reactions of the upper limb. our results indicated that early responses of distal muscles targeted by the ctbs were indeed altered following stimulation, in the form of suppressed fdi and/or apb activity of the right hand. it is noteworthy that the influence of ctbs on these early balance reactions was often complex and evident as an interaction between fdi and apb of the same hand . although cross-hand interactions were not as consistently observed, there were some subjects revealing an inverse relationship between distal muscle activity in the two hands even though muscles of the left hand were not the direct target of the applied ctbs. in contrast, the proximal muscles involved in the balance reaction were not similarly influenced by the applied ctbs suggesting that the impact of ctbs was limited to the stimulated hand muscles and in some instances to their homologous muscle pairs on the non-stimulated m <dig>  overall, our results provide evidence for m <dig> in contributing to the initial fixed-support arm response following whole-body perturbation. more generally, these results provide further support for a cortical role in the control of early compensatory arm reactions.

cortical role in early compensatory arm reactions
although cortical contributions to reactive balance are now more widely accepted, the stage at which cortical regions influence corrective postural activity is unclear. findings from reduced animal preparations demonstrate the presence of direction-appropriate righting mechanisms at sub-cortical levels  <cit> , and human studies have indicated that at least some very early postural responses are triggered prior to direct cortical involvement  <cit> . therefore the fact that sub-cortical networks are capable of producing highly coordinated corrective actions, along with transit times involved in traversing cortical sites has understandably shaped thinking that early compensatory actions are not significantly determined by cortical mechanisms.

indirect evidence suggests cortical contributions to reactive balance are not simply relegated to late-stage modifications of sub-cortically-initiated responses. as previously mentioned, gage and colleagues  observed identical motor patterns in the arm when reaching for a target handle during both compensatory and volitional reaching even though perturbation-evoked reaches were twice as fast. remarkably, this was true despite subjects receiving the same instructions to reach as quickly as possible in both conditions. while sub-cortical mechanisms can certainly trigger rapid arm actions following a loss of balance, grasping a small target handle at a defined spatial location obviates some degree of visual guidance over the reach. even with the prospect of descending priming over sub-cortical structures to selectively boost responsiveness  <cit>  cortical guidance over the reach trajectory is likely needed to secure the hand onto the target handle. to explain how similar neural pathways could be engaged to produce the same reach at such an accelerated pace it has been proposed that the threat associated with whole-body perturbation heightens arousal which allows the central nervous system to overcome limits normally imposed on voluntary reaction times  <cit> . thus the processing speed via cortical networks may be more rapid than would be normally determined from voluntary reactions. recently, a clear role for m <dig> in producing or at least scaling early compensatory arm responses was confirmed more directly by bolton et al.  where ctbs was used to suppress the hand area of m <dig>  <cit> . the results of that study demonstrated suppression of the emg responses in ctbs-targeted hand muscles of the reaching arm for both volitional and compensatory reaches offering further evidence for m <dig> as part of a common reaching network. present findings extend upon the past study by revealing a similar suppression in response muscles when these muscles are engaged earlier in the response pattern .

notably, our present paradigm focuses on the most rapid fixed support reactions that are evoked in response to postural perturbation from muscles of a limb that is already in contact with a support surface  <cit> . with the arms fixed onto the support handle the current paradigm is distinct from the previous compensatory reach-to-grasp, or change-in-support reactions. fixed support reactions do not require reach to target movements that are critical to change-in-support balance reactions, such as a reach-to-grasp. with the hands already in contact with a support surface the arms not only represent a means for righting the body but also provide sensory cues for the perturbation itself. this is an important distinction from our past work given that somatosensory cues offer critical signals to trigger the initial postural reactions  <cit> . studies involving rapid stretch of the thumb  <cit>  or of ankle extensors via rapid platform translation in standing subjects  <cit>  have demonstrated both sub-cortically and cortically mediated reflexive actions countering the imposed postural disturbance. in fact in a standing balance context taube et al.  noted cortical involvement in the leg muscle response at latencies <100 ms  <cit> . although such findings relate to cortical influences over postural responses it is important to recall that in these studies there is a direct stretch of the responding muscles, thus this cortical influence could potentially reflect a trans-cortical reflex loop acting through m <dig>  conversely, the muscle activity measured in the present study does not specifically arise from muscles undergoing direct stretch . therefore sensory cues originating from a variety of body regions, including cutaneous mechanoreceptors of the hands, may provide the trigger for the multi-joint upper limb balance reactions.

the specific role of m <dig> in the early compensatory arm reaction
although our aim was to probe the role of m <dig> in early compensatory arm responses generally, the manner in which these responses were influenced by the applied ctbs was complex. specifically, the interaction between fdi and apb within the same hand was unexpected. from our previous study using the change-in-support model, both hand muscles demonstrated a suppression of activity leading us to speculate that this would again be observed  <cit> . presently, although some degree of suppression was common in at least one of the muscles of the stimulated hand, there were a number of subjects revealing a different relationship between fdi and apb activity. one plausible explanation for these results is the phenomenon of surround inhibition where intra-cortical inhibitory connections influence neighbouring cortical territory  <cit> . surround inhibition has been demonstrated in a number of areas including m <dig> and has been suggested to account for discrete muscle activation thus allowing for fractionated movements of the hands  <cit> . surround inhibition has been shown to be modulated based upon movement context and this has been specifically demonstrated between fdi and apb within the same hand  <cit>  and has been shown to be quite variable between subjects  <cit> . therefore it is possible that our results may reflect an interaction between hand muscle representations within m <dig>  and the altered context for how the hands were used with a fixed-support versus a reach-to-grasp response may account for the variability in the present study.

an interesting finding was the relative preservation of response timing. this distinct impact of ctbs on response amplitude while leaving response onsets unaffected is consistent with our past results which focused on the change-in-support balance reactions  <cit> . previously, we had noted suppressed response amplitudes in fdi and apb of the stimulated hand muscles while the remaining arm muscles were unaffected. although the impact of ctbs on hand muscle activity is less consistent between subjects in the present study, a similar outcome was noted in that hand muscles were influenced in amplitude scaling but not onset. this may reinforce the idea that response scaling but not timing, is importantly influenced by activity within m <dig>  evarts noted that discharge from m <dig> neurons corresponded with the direction and amplitude of muscle forces required to produce movement  <cit> . conversely, the selection of a motor synergy has been suggested to arise from more intermediate cortical stages of movement production such as the parietal and premotor regions  <cit> . thus segregating the control of motor parameters in this way could result in preserving the onset of the compensatory arm pattern as a whole, while muscle amplitude is selectively diminished. of course it was interesting to note there was a trend towards slowing of apb in the stimulated hand post-ctbs which may indicate that our present lack of influence over response timing may be a consequence of a failure to suppress m <dig> activity adequately below a given threshold to impact timing.

CONCLUSIONS
present results provide support for a role of m <dig> in early compensatory arm reactions to whole-body perturbation. the application of ctbs over the motor region of the distal hand muscles led to a focal attenuation on the targeted hand responses with negligible impact on the proximal arm muscles. further, these results add to our recent data using a reach-to-grasp model and indicate that this role is apparent in both change-of-support, as well as fixed-support corrective reactions involving the upper limbs. the present fixed-support model extends previous work by revealing cortical interactions both within and between motor cortices and suggests that m <dig> is involved in shaping and scaling the early compensatory arm behaviour to whole-body disturbance. future studies will address how transferable these results are to standing balance paradigms and also compensatory responses involving the lower limbs.

