BACKGROUND
chromatin immunoprecipitation  followed by genomic tiling microarray hybridization  or massively parallel sequencing  are two of the most widely used approaches for genome-wide identification and characterization of in vivo protein-dna interactions. they can be used to analyze many important dna-interacting proteins including rna polymerases, transcription factors, transcriptional co-factors, and histone proteins  <cit> . indeed these genome-wide chip analysis approaches have led to many important discoveries related to transcriptional regulation  <cit> , epigenetic regulation through histone modification  <cit> , nucleosome organization  <cit> , and interindividual variation in protein-dna interactions  <cit> .

chip-chip first appeared in the literature about  <dig> years ago and was one of the earliest approaches to performing genome-wide mapping of protein-dna interactions in organisms with small genomes, such as yeast  <cit> . currently, various tiling microarray platforms of common model organisms are well supported by commercial vendors, and many bioinformatics tools have been developed for chip-chip analysis  <cit> . fueled by rapid development of the second generation high-throughput sequencing technologies in the past few years, chip-seq has emerged as an attractive alternative to chip-chip  <cit> . for instance, chip-seq generally produces profiles with higher spatial resolution, dynamic range, and genomic coverage, allowing it to have higher sensitivity and specificity over chip-chip in terms of protein binding site identification. further, chip-seq can be used to analyze virtually any species with a sequenced genome since it is not constrained by the availability of an organism-specific microarray. many current chip-seq protocols can work with a smaller amount of initial material compared to chip-chip  <cit> . moreover, chip-seq is already a more cost-effective way of analyzing mammalian genomes, and the cost effectiveness will likely become more apparent as the cost of high-throughput sequencing technology continues to drop. these factors have led to the rapid adoption of chip-seq technology.

however, despite the widespread use of both chip-chip and chip-seq, only a few small-scale studies have attempted to quantitatively compare these technologies using real data. euskirchen et al.  <cit>  compared the stat <dig> binding sites identified by chip-chip and chip-pet  and found that there was a good overall agreement between the two technologies, particularly at identifying highly ranked enrichment regions. they nonetheless noted specific discrepancies in regions associated with repetitive elements, which can be attributed to lack of microarray probe coverage or misalignment of chip-pet reads. more recently, a number of studies compared genome-wide transcription factor binding datasets generated from chip-chip with those generated from chip-seq  <cit>  . the general conclusions from these studies were that binding profiles generated from chip-chip and chip-seq were largely correlated at the genome-wide level, and that chip-seq had superior sensitivity and specificity over chip-chip in terms of binding site identification as determined by motif enrichment or quantitative pcr validation. it was also found that the strongest peaks were more likely to be detected by both technologies. however, only a few pairs of chip-chip/chip-seq profiles were analyzed in these studies, and their focus was mainly on the ability to identify narrow enrichment regions using specific peak calling algorithms. as shown previously  <cit>  and in this study, peak identification can be strongly dependent on the analysis algorithm, so other more general comparison metrics should be used.

in addition, little is known about the technology-specific variation for analyzing histone modification data. chip-based histone modification data is commonly used to reconstruct average signal profiles, or "epigenetic signatures," of key genomic regions such as the transcription start and end sites, but the impact of using chip-chip versus chip-seq data for constructing epigenetic signatures is largely unknown. furthermore, it is also important to understand technology-specific biases associated with high-throughput sequencing. recent studies indicated that the distribution of cross-linked and sonicated dna fragments  was affected by chromatin structure, copy number variation, occurrence of genomic repeats, mappability, genomic location, gene expression activity, and genomic gc content variation  <cit> . since input dna is commonly used as a background control for a chip-seq experiment, it is important to assess how such variation affects the analysis of chip-seq data.

therefore a thorough understanding of the technological variation between chip-chip and chip-seq is important in experimental design and data analysis. in this study, we compiled and analyzed  <dig> pairs of chip-chip/chip-seq profiles of technical replicates across eight immunoprecipitation  factors  at four developmental stages of the common fruit fly drosophila melanogaster  as part of the model organism encyclopedia of dna elements  project  <cit> . in addition, our compiled dataset comprises another  <dig> chip-chip profiles  in the same set of biological conditions , nine sequencing profiles of input dna, and four pairs of chip-seq/chip-seq replicates . agilent's tiling microarray  and illumina's genome analyzer ii platforms were used to generate the chip-chip and chip-seq data, respectively. all data used in this study were generated as part of the modencode project, and are accessible from ncbi geo . the goal of this study was to quantify reproducibility within and between profiles generated using chip-chip and chip-seq approaches, and to pinpoint the source of variation between the technologies, which ultimately should provide useful information for experimental design and data analysis.

for each combination of developmental stage and ip factor, three biological samples were profiled by chip-chip, and one of these samples was independently profiled by chip-seq. therefore we have three biological chip-chip/chip-chip replicates, and one technical chip-chip/chip-seq replicate pair for every biological condition. *although no independent microarray profiles of input dna were available, we extracted input dna profiles from the input channel  for each chip-chip profile. we therefore have  <dig> ×  <dig> =  <dig> input-chip profiles in this collection, where all input-chip profiles within each time point are technical replicates.

details of the four additional pairs of chip-seq/chip-seq  replicates analyzed in this study. the two ctcf chip-seq profiles were technical replicates, whereas all other chip-seq pairs were biological replicates.

RESULTS
analysis of input dna profiles
to understand the technological differences between sequencing-based and microarray-based chip data, we first analyzed the profiles of cross-linked and sonicated dna fragments  generated by microarray  and high-throughput sequencing . since the input dna profile should be independent of the antibody used for chip, this comparison can give insight into the specific differences between these two profiling technologies. we obtained input-chip data from the background channel of our two-channel microarray data. while this microarray platform uses competitive hybridization, the two channels in our agilent microarray have been shown to be relatively independent as saturation in either channel is very rare  <cit> . out of all the input-chip profiles that we extracted, we only present the analysis of eight representative profiles here  since most of the input-chip profiles are very similar . the eight input-chip profiles were then compared with the nine input-seq profiles collected in this study .

one of the most striking observations is that input-chip and input-seq profiles appear to be substantially different, even though the same input dna material was used for microarray hybridization and sequencing . the relative magnitude and location of the peaks seem to be consistent across the input-chip profiles from multiple experiments. however, the patterns in the nine input-seq profiles appear to be more variable. we can visually identify many regions that have inconsistent signal enrichment across multiple input-seq profiles . a clustering analysis was performed to quantify this observation. we found that all eight input-chip profiles clustered closely to one another . this result shows that the background dna distribution measured from microarray and high-throughput sequencing is different. all input-chip and seven out of nine input-seq profiles correlated positively with genomic gc content at the genome-wide level , as well as around the transcription start sites  and transcription end sites  . the strength of the correlation with gc is highly consistent among input-chip profiles, but highly variable among the input-seq profiles . notably, the input-seq profiles obtained at e-16- <dig> h  and e-20- <dig> h  do not correlate with gc content.

we also note that input-seq with higher sequencing depth  tend to cluster together more tightly than those with lower sequencing depth, suggesting that there may be a relationship between sequencing depth and input dna variability. to test this hypothesis, we generated  <dig> additional input-seq profiles by subsampling sequencing reads from the most deeply sequenced input dna sample  at different sampling proportion . as expected, profiles with higher sequencing depth tend to cluster more strongly together, and their correlation with gc content variation is more consistent. however, the gc content correlation only becomes much weaker only at a very low sequencing depth . this indicates that low sequencing depth is not the only factor affecting input-seq quality. moreover, some input-seq with relatively low sequencing depth  can give consistent input dna profiles. this implies that input-seq variability may also be attributed to other experimental factors. although further studies are required to dissect the full range of experimental factors affecting variability of input dna libraries, it could be affected by variations in the sample preparation , run-to-run variation of the sequencer, sequencer-to-sequencer variation for the same model, and a host of other variables in experiments. the high variability among input-seq profiles is indeed a critical issue, since large variability contributes to instability of density estimation in a chip-seq profile, which will affect downstream data analysis. as will be shown in subsequent sections of this paper, an input-seq with unusually weak correlation with gc content can impact construction of average profiles at important genomic locations. it is thus imperative to sequence the input dna to sufficient depth and to ascertain that the obtained profile is consistent with those from similar experiments.

genomic coverage is another key consideration when choosing between chip-chip and chip-seq. the genomic coverage of chip-chip is limited by the microarray probe design, and the coverage of chip-seq is dependent on sequencing depth. the genomic coverage achieved by our agilent microarray is about 70%. using the sub-sampled input-seq data, we show that input-seq generally provides higher genomic coverage at sequencing depth as low as one million reads. this trend constructed from the randomly subsampled data corroborates the observed genomic coverage of the other eight real input-seq datasets .

comparison of profile characteristics
we then compared the characteristics of chip-chip and chip-seq profiles. to compare the profiles generated by the two technologies, we divided the genome into  <dig> kb non-overlapping bins and defined the enrichment level at each bin as the average of log ratio of the ip channel over the input channel . we refer to a signal distribution of a chip profile as its distribution of enrichment values of all the bins. first, we aimed to characterize the average signal-to-noise ratio for profiles generated by the two technologies. we used the  skewness of the signal density profile after removing signals from the highest and lowest 5% of the distribution as a measure of signal-to-noise ratio of a profile. skewness is a measure of asymmetry of a distribution and a positive skewness indicates that the tail on the right side is longer, implying a good signal-to-noise ratio. in almost all cases, a chip-seq profile has a higher skewness than its corresponding chip-chip profile of the same biological condition . we note that the difference of skewness is dependent on the ip factor which could be due to different antibody quality and prevalence of histone modification or binding events. the same conclusion can be drawn even if a different bin size was used . our results confirmed the general observation that chip-seq usually produces a more distinctive signal profile than chip-chip.

next, we characterized the enrichment regions within each chip profile. to perform a fair comparison, we would like to use an algorithm that performs peak calling on chip-seq and chip-chip data using the same criteria. currently, many commonly used peak calling algorithms are specifically designed for analyzing chip-chip or chip-seq data, but not both. to overcome this limitation, we identified peaks from both chip-chip and chip-seq profiles using the same genome-scanning heuristic . our results indicate that we can almost always discover a larger number of peaks and narrower peaks using data generated from chip-seq compared to chip-chip when analyzing the same biological sample, and this conclusion is consistent regardless of the stringency of the identification criteria used . in practice, we can probably identify an even larger number of narrow peaks in chip-seq data if we explicitly make use of strand-specific information within the peak calling procedure , so the current analysis provides a lower bound on the effectiveness of chip-seq compared to chip-chip. taken together, our results demonstrate that chip-seq provides higher spatial resolution and signal-to-noise ratio.

genome-wide signal reproducibility within and between technologies
further, we estimated the reproducibility between chip-chip and/or chip-seq profiles at the genome-wide level . to avoid biases due to differences in genomic coverage and sequence mapping , we exclude genomic regions that do not contain any microarray probes and regions with unusually high variability across multiple input-seq profiles. the pearson correlation coefficient, r, was used as a measure of correlation, since it is more sensitive than the spearman correlation coefficient for comparing the tail of two signal distributions, which is particularly important in analyzing chip enrichment signal profiles. the correlation between chip-chip replicate pairs and between chip-seq replicate pairs is generally high , indicating that both technologies can produce reproducible results. as expected, the cross-platform correlation between replicate pairs of chip-chip and chip-seq profiles are more modest . similar conclusions can be reached even if we use different bin sizes for calculating inter-profile correlation . a representative scatter plot comparing each pair of technologies is shown in figure 3b-d. we also observe a positive correlation between the skewness and inter-profile reproducibility , suggesting more sensitive antibodies may produce more consistent profiles between the two technologies.

construction of average signal profile at tss and tes
construction of average chip signal profiles around important genomic features such as tss and tes is a common way to visualize signal enrichment around these features. therefore, we investigated the reproducibility of average tss and tes profiles  for every pair of replicate chip profiles . the average profiles of most replicate pairs are highly consistent. however, there are a few pairs that are significantly different, especially the profiles of h3k27me <dig> and h3k9me <dig> at both stage e-16- <dig> h and e-20- <dig> h . without external validation, it is impossible to determine whether the average signal profiles generated by chip-chip or chip-seq are more accurate. nonetheless, two lines of evidence led us to believe that the average signal profiles from chip-chip were more likely to be accurate. first, all three chip-chip replicates at these time points had very consistent average profiles. second, the chip-seq average signal profiles at these biological conditions resembled the trend of gc content variation at tss and tes . the unusually low correlations between gc contents and the input-seq profiles of e-16- <dig> h and e-20- <dig> h  prompted us to hypothesize that the observed discrepancy was due to a misrepresentation of gc content variation by the respective input-seq profiles. both h3k27me <dig> and h3k9me <dig> are repressive marks that are usually depleted at tsss and tess so any variation in background subtraction is likely much more pronounced than other histone marks that have strong signal enrichment at these genomic features. to test our hypothesis, we replaced the corresponding input-seq background with the input-seq from the adultfemale sample, since it has the highest correlation with gc content variation. after the replacement, the average signal profiles generated by chip-seq and chip-chip at these two developmental stages agree . this result is striking since it shows that using different input-seq as negative control of the same chip-seq profile can lead to substantially different interpretation of the data.

effect of using different input profiles in chip-seq data normalization
having observed the impact of input-seq in constructing average tss and tes profiles, we asked whether using different input-seq profiles for background normalization significantly affects chip-seq peak calling results. we used spp  <cit>  to call peaks for  <dig> of our chip-seq samples  where each chip profiles was normalized against four different input-seq as background . these input-seq profiles were chosen because they have different sequencing depth and correlation with gc content . a comparison of the number of peaks and median peak width is shown in figure  <dig>  we observed a large difference in number of peaks being called for any chip-seq sample when different input-seq was used as background. in the extreme case , the number of peaks can changes from zero to nearly  <dig>  at a fdr of 5% . in general, more statistically significant peaks  were detected when normalizing against a deeply sequenced input dna sample , although the absolute magnitude of the difference varies among chip datasets. the difference in peak number likely indicates a difference in detection power. for each chip sample, we calculated the proportion of overlap between each pair of peak sets generated by four different input dna background . we found that the mean proportion of overlap with respect to the smaller peak set is about 95%, indicating that the differences in number of detected peak is likely due to different power to call weaker peaks. we observed that the strong peaks  were more likely detected in different peak sets . the median width of the detected peaks is also affected by using different input-seq as background . this analysis showed that the normalization using different input-seq may have a significant, and underappreciated, impact on peak calling.

assessing variation due to the use of different peak callers
another important source of variation in analysis of chip-chip and chip-seq profiles originates from the use of different analysis algorithms. a large number of publicly available chip-chip and chip-seq analysis tools have been developed to date  <cit> , and all of them utilize different methods for tag shifting, profile normalization, smoothing, peak identification, and calculation of false discovery rate. it is therefore not too surprising to find that different peak callers can generate quite different results in terms of binding site identification, particularly when dealing with peaks with weak signals  <cit> . using our compendium of chip-chip and chip-seq datasets, we could assess how much variation in peak identification can be attributed to the use of different profiling technology and use of different peak callers. in this study, we analyzed our chip-chip profiles using two peak callers: ma2c  <cit>  and splitter  <cit>  and analyzed our chip-seq profiles using another two peak callers: macs  <cit>  and spp  <cit>  . these peak callers were chosen because they are widely used, publicly available, and generally show good performance in previous comparative studies  <cit> . we calculated the overlap of the top  <dig>  peaks of four of the factors  across multiple developmental stages. the four ip factors were chosen as they were representative profiles containing broad peaks  and narrow peaks . here, we only present the results of comparing the top  <dig>  peaks, since this is a biologically reasonable number of high-confidence enrichment sites in these profiles. the general conclusion of this analysis is robust against a variety of peak calling thresholds . concordance between two peak sets was measured by the average proportion of overlapping peaks. as shown in figure  <dig>  the comparisons based on profiles of h3k4me <dig> and h3k4me <dig> yielded expected results, in which the intra-platform concordance is higher than cross-platform concordance . however, the intra-platform concordance can be as low as the inter-platform concordance when analyzing the profiles of h3k27me <dig> and cbp, implying that variation in peak calling algorithms can be as large as the use of different profiling technologies for some ip factors. the observation that current peak calling algorithms produce less concordant results for chip profiles with broad domains  than those with sharp peaks  may suggest that they are less consistent at identifying broad enrichment regions, which may be an interesting subject for further investigation.

discussion
chip-seq is an attractive alternative to chip-chip due to its many practical advantages. however, to date there is a lack of systematic comparison between chip-chip and chip-seq based on a large dataset from multiple ip factors. using a compilation of replicate chip-chip and chip-seq datasets generated as part of the modencode project, we had an unprecedented opportunity to conduct such a systematic comparison. through comparing the characteristics of the profiles generated by chip-chip and chip-seq, we showed that chip-seq generates profiles with higher signal-to-noise ratios and a larger number of more localized peaks. this is consistent with many previous observations that chip-seq generates profiles with higher spatial resolution and dynamic range. not surprisingly, we found that inter-technology  reproducibility was lower than intra-technology reproducibility . we only had access to four chip-seq/chip-seq replicate profiles across two ip factors  in this study, so the estimate of intra-platform reproducibility of chip-seq may be less accurate than that of chip-chip. nonetheless, the overall magnitude of intra-platform reproducibility should still be instructive.

another important lesson was that variability due to the use of different peak callers can be as substantial as different profiling technologies. only a small number of representative peak callers were selected in this study, since it was not our primary goal to compare performance of different algorithms. instead, our goal was to estimate to what extent peak detection variability might be attributed to the use of different profiling technologies  and use of different peak calling algorithms. the observation that a higher variability in peak detection is associated with broad enrichment domains is interesting, and it requires further assessment using larger numbers of peak callers.

perhaps one of the most striking findings is that there is high variability among different input-seq compared to input-chip. the differences between input-seq profiles do not seem to correlate with the developmental stages, but rather to sequencing depth . nonetheless, sequencing depth alone does not account for all the observed variability. samples e <dig>  e <dig>  e <dig> and af all have low sequencing depth , yet af and e <dig> have strong correlation with gc content, whereas e <dig> and e <dig> have little correlation with gc content . this suggests that variation in experimental conditions may also contribute to such variability. our results demonstrate that it is important for the input dna background to capture technology-specific biases, such as gc content variation, as this may have impact on the construction of average signal profiles at important genomic sites. such average signal profiles have been used as features for building computational models of transcription factor binding or regulatory elements  <cit> , so it is important to ensure that the average signal profiles are accurate. in addition, we also show that the quality of input dna profile used for background normalization when calling peaks for a chip-seq dataset is critical . the observation that more peaks were being called when a chip-seq dataset was normalized against a more deeply sequenced input-seq suggests that increasing the sequencing depth in the input-seq data may lead to higher statistical power in chip-seq peak detection. currently the importance of input dna in chip-seq analysis is largely underappreciated and most researchers do not even bother to check for the consistency of the input profiles. this work provides quantitative evidence that the success of a chip-seq analysis may depend on the quality of input library as much as the quality of chip library. since using an appropriate input dna profile as background is critical, we believe that obtaining high quality and deeply sequenced input dna profile is necessary, and that input-seq quality should be assessed more carefully during data analysis.

we recognize there are several limitations in our study. first, we only compared chip-chip profiles generated from one commercial platform  with chip-seq profiles generated from one sequencing platform . although strictly speaking we can only make conclusion about these platforms, we believe that the key lessons learned in this study are instructive for analyzing data generated from other platforms. we note that the agilent platform uses long oligonucleotides as probes  and has relatively low noise level compared to other platforms  <cit> ; illumina's gaii sequencing platform is currently the most widely used platform for chip-seq, so our analysis should be of interest to many users. second, unlike previous comparative studies using transcription factor binding data  or "spike in" experiments  <cit> , we do not have external validation of the true enrichment regions, which prohibited us from assessing detection sensitivity and specificity. nonetheless, we believe that our conclusions, drawn from analyzing many pairs of replicate chip-chip/seq profiles, should be reasonably robust.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings highlight the differences between chip-chip and chip-seq, and show the variability that can arise from both technology and analysis methods. we demonstrate the importance of obtaining high quality and deeply sequenced input dna libraries for chip-seq analysis, which has fundamental implication to experimental design and data analysis.

