BACKGROUND
a typical property of human perception is its selective nature. only a limited amount of information from our environment reaches our awareness, indicating that our brain selects some objects for further processing, while ignoring others. it is generally assumed that the purpose of this selection is the more efficient processing of selected stimuli than would be the case if all stimuli were processed simultaneously. most attention research has therefore focused on the enhanced processing of attended stimuli, showing that attended stimuli are easier to detect and to identify. considerably less is known, however, about the fate of ignored stimuli. the main target of this study was to investigate whether information about ignored distractor stimuli becomes available in brain areas beyond typical object processing areas. specifically, we investigated whether phonological areas activate the phonological code of ignored distractors. accordingly, we gain insight in selection mechanisms both at a visual and a phonological level.

it is generally assumed that the necessity for selection depends on the limited processing capacity of our sensory systems, which prevents each stimulus to be represented to the full extent. according to the influential 'biased competition' approach, simultaneously presented stimuli compete for neural representation and behavioural control, and engage in suppressive interactions . for example, kastner et al.  <cit>  have shown that when participants viewed simultaneously presented stimuli, bold-signal change was reduced compared to sequential viewing of the same stimuli . these results support the view that simultaneously presented stimuli suppress each others' neural representation, and thereby reduce the magnitude of the bold response. however, competition can be biased in favour of a stimulus through bottom-up or top-down mechanisms. in such a case, this stimulus will be more successful in suppressing the representation of the others, and its neural representation will take precedence over that of the others. indeed, neural suppression effects diminished when one of the stimuli was very salient  <cit>  or when one of the stimuli was attended  <cit> , showing that these stimuli had succeeded in overcoming the suppressive effects of the distractor stimuli.

an issue that has occupied researchers for decades is what happens to the neural representation of the distractor stimuli. is the representation of these stimuli abolished, or do  representations exist beyond the areas in which competition takes place? according to early-selection accounts, attention selects certain stimuli from the environment at the perceptual level, while ignoring irrelevant distractor stimuli. since these distractor stimuli are filtered out at a perceptual level, the brain is unaware of their identity, and participants are typically unable to report many characteristics about these stimuli  <cit> . proponents of late selection theories, instead, argue that all stimuli are perceptually processed and identified, but that selection takes place at a higher-order level like working-memory representation or response selection. in this case, attention serves as a filter for determining which perceived objects reach awareness  <cit> . for example, when a judgment needs to be made about the identity of a target letter at fixation, responses are generally faster when ignored flanker items are congruent with the target letter than when they are incongruent, indicating that the flankers are identified  <cit> .

recently, some authors have tried to resolve discrepancies between these views and integrate early and late selection mechanisms  <cit> . these frameworks postulate that attention can filter distractor information either at an early or at a late level, depending on the available resources and task requirements. typically, attention acts at the perceptual level in cases where the perceptual system is overloaded and a selection needs to be made which information is further processed. when such selections are not necessary, however, irrelevant stimuli will also be processed by sensory areas, but attention prevents them from being represented in working memory, thereby blocking awareness of these stimuli. according to these theories, identification of irrelevant stimuli occurs in cases in which resource demands are low.

neuroimaging techniques provide a good method of choice to trace the processing of ignored distractors within the brain, since they enable the mapping of influences of stimuli throughout several cortical areas  without the need for a participant's overt response. some investigators have indeed detected activation traces associated with ignored distractors beyond early visual areas. for example, some studies have shown that the decreased bold response typically associated with stimulus repetition also occurs with repetition of unattended stimuli   <cit> . in line with load theory  <cit> , these effects disappeared when task demands were high  <cit> , suggesting that ignored stimuli are involuntarily processed in case task demands do not require all available resources. ruz et al.  <cit>  observed that erps differentiated between words and non-words even though attention was highly engaged by another task . according to the authors, these results indicate that, at least for highly learned stimuli such as letter strings, some processing resources are automatically dedicated even though participants are engaged in an attentionally demanding task.

the goal of the present study was to investigate whether cortical areas beyond visual areas engage in processing ignored stimuli. specifically, we investigated whether phonological relatedness between names of different pictures influences processing in regions that process meaning and phonology. finding such a result would imply that, despite being ignored, distractor pictures are represented in areas beyond visual cortex. the question then would be whether this effect was dependent on the location of attention and the task the participant is performing.

previous research suggests that the activation of semantic features of stimuli may occur automatically, even for ignored stimuli. in paradigms like picture-picture interference  or negative priming , participants view simultaneously presented stimuli, one of which is to be named and the other to be ignored. typically, they are slower in naming target pictures if the pictures within a trial are semantically related, compared to unrelated trials   <cit>  , or if the current target picture was ignored in the previous trial   <cit>  . importantly, np can even be observed if the ignored prime is a picture and the target is a word  <cit> , showing that the processing of the ignored picture involves at least the identification of semantic features. further support for a semantic locus of this effect was provided by the observation that the left anterolateral temporal cortex, which has been associated with processing of semantic knowledge  <cit> , is activated in trials in which np was observed  <cit> .

although phonological activation of ignored distractor words is fairly well-documented  <cit> , activation of phonological properties of ignored distractor pictures has only recently been observed. in ppi studies, faster reaction times have been observed when the ignored picture was phonologically related to the target  than when they were unrelated   <cit> . this finding implies that the phonological code of the distractor picture was activated, even though it was ignored.

the present study was aimed at detecting phonological-code activation for ignored distractor pictures with fmri. in order to investigate this, a modified version of a paradigm that has proven successful in visual attention research  <cit>  was employed. since we were also interested in whether linguistic processes would influence processing in visual cortex, the pictures were presented at separate peripheral locations. sets of pictures were presented simultaneously, while participants performed one of three linguistic tasks in which they attended one of the pictures, or a central task at fixation . of the three attended tasks, two focussed on phonological processing , and one focused on meaning . the fixation task aimed to withdraw attention from the pictures and involved visual line discrimination. whereas this design was previously employed to measure suppression effects between abstract, colourful stimuli in visual cortex, the present adaptation entails the use of concrete black-and-white line drawings. by assigning meaning to pictures, it becomes possible to measure haemodynamic responses to the pictures in cortical areas associated with semantic and phonological processing. moreover, we manipulated the amount of phonological overlap between the names of the simultaneously presented pictures. in the 'related' condition, the names of the pictures consisted of at least an identical first consonant-vowel construction, e.g. a picture of a "vos"  and a picture of a "vork" , see figure 1). in the 'unrelated' condition, there was no such phonological overlap  and a picture of a "hark" ). the underlying rationale is that if phonological processing areas respond differently to related sets than to unrelated sets, the phonological properties of both target and distractor pictures must have been identified. this would imply that, at least under these circumstances, even though visual attention is highly focused on a single object or location, attention attenuates the processing of unattended objects, rather than filter them out completely.

we expected to observe effects of phonological relatedness mainly in cortical areas involved with generating the pictures' names. specifically, we were interested in the left posterior superior temporal gyrus  and the left anterior insula, which are presumably involved in phonological code retrieval  <cit> , and in the left inferior frontal gyrus , believed to be involved in syllabification and phonological processing  <cit> . the left posterior stg , has been observed to show decreased activation in a picture-word interference paradigm when pictures were presented with phonologically related distractor words, compared to unrelated words  <cit> . assuming that the lower bold response is linked to a reduced amount of neural processing, this observation is in line with the observation that response times are generally faster in phonologically related trials  <cit> .

in addition to the question whether relatedness effects would be observed in phonological processing areas, we were interested in the interaction of this effect with the task a participant is performing. in particular, whereas it is quite straightforward to anticipate relatedness effects in the two phonological tasks, some authors have suggested that the level of representation of stimuli depends on the task demands  <cit> , suggesting that no phonological relatedness effects should be observed during non-phonological semantic categorisation, or during a visual line comparison task. in the onset-monitoring task, participants were asked to judge whether the name of the picture closest to the fixation point started with a certain letter. in order to carry out this task, participants had to internally generate at least the first part of the name of the picture. this task most directly aimed to test effects of distractor relatedness, as the experimental relatedness between target and distractor was realised at this onset-letter position. the offset-monitoring task was similar, but involved the decision whether the picture name ended with a certain letter. in order to perform this task, participants had to generate the entire name of the target, including the onset of the name, in which overlap exists with the onset of the distractor picture's name in related trials. the semantic task involved a category judgment in which participants responded to pictures belonging to a certain category . no explicit generation of the pictures' names was required for successful performance on this task. the control task  involved an attentionally demanding line-comparison task at fixation. this condition served as a visual control, with exactly the same physical stimulation parameters as the other tasks, but without participants attending one of the pictures.

in this design, areas that are involved in phonological encoding, such as the stg and the posterior ifg, were expected to be activated stronger in the phonological tasks than in the semantic or control task. the question was whether within those areas effects of phonological relatedness could be observed, indicating that the names of the ignored pictures are activated as well. furthermore, we investigated whether those effects were also visible in the same areas in non-phonological  tasks, indicating that name generation occurs even when phonological processing is not required. finally, we were interested in whether phonological relatedness effects would be observed in areas involved in semantic processing, such as the left prefrontal cortex and the left middle temporal gyrus , and visual processing, . this requires exact localisation of early visual areas and the lateral occipital complex, involved in object recognition  <cit> . therefore, standard retinotopy and loc localiser runs were included in the experiment. finding effects of phonological relatedness in these areas would imply that, presumably through top-down biasing signals, phonological features can influence picture processing in non-phonological areas.

RESULTS
behavioural data
reaction times associated with each condition are reported in table  <dig>  a repeated measures glm with the factors task and relatedness revealed a significant main effect of task on reaction time  =  <dig> , p < .001). post-hoc analysis revealed that reaction times were fastest in response to the semantic task , followed by the control task , the onset  and offset monitoring task , respectively. the difference between each of the tasks was significant . no effect of relatedness was observed  = . <dig>  p = .82), nor was there any interaction between relatedness and task  = . <dig>  p = .67). error rates were generally low  and did not differ across conditions.

fixed effects analysis
compared to baseline periods, the tasks reliably activated an extensive bilateral network of areas including parietal areas, occipital areas including early visual areas, inferior temporal areas including large parts of the fusiform gyrus, the posterior parts of the sts and the superior temporal gyrus , the insulae, bilateral ifg and middle frontal gyri , and the medial frontal gyri. within these areas, an extensive lateralisation of tasks was observed . the linguistic tasks  mainly activated left ifg and mfg, the posterior parts of the sts/stg, parietal and inferior temporal areas, and early visual areas, compared to the control task. this control task, on the other hand, mainly activated right ifg and mfg, parietal and inferior temporal areas and the right insula. phonological tasks activated the left inferior and superior parietal lobule, left insula, left mfg and ifg  and the medial frontal gyrus more strongly than the semantic task. the reverse was true for the anterior ifg  and large portions of the middle temporal gyrus.

the  contrast revealed some scattered areas throughout bilateral inferior temporal areas, the posterior parts of the sts/stg and parietal areas. however, inspection of the time courses within these areas revealed that most of these areas were only slightly activated during these tasks and that the differences between relatedness conditions seemed mainly caused by baseline differences between conditions. this was confirmed by a conjunction contrast  ∩  which revealed a main effect of relatedness in right inferior temporal areas and a posterior area of the right mtg.

due to the expected interaction between relatedness and task, we investigated relatedness effects in each task separately. in the onset task, the  ∩  contrast revealed only the middle part of the right central sulcus.

for the offset task, the contrast  ∩  revealed the left ifg  and an inferior part of the mfg , the posterior part of the sts/stg, bilateral precunei and bilateral inferior temporal cortices, the right cingulated gyrus and the inferior part of the left post-central gyrus .

no effects of relatedness were observed in the categorisation task. both the  ∩  contrast, and the reverse  ∩  contrast did not reveal any areas, nor did any areas show up in the simple contrast  or the reverse .

for the control task, the  ∩  contrast revealed bilateral anterior superior frontal gyri , as well as the posterior part of the left middle occipital gyrus. the reverse contrast,  ∩  activated the bilateral anterior parts of the insulae, bilateral mfg, bilateral medial frontal gyri, and some parts of bilateral inferior temporal cortex .

random effects analysis
the random effects  ancova with factors task  and relatedness  revealed a significant effect of task in bilateral inferior parietal lobules, the bilateral inferior temporal gyri, the left posterior mtg, the bilateral insulae, bilateral mfg and ifg, bilateral superior frontal cortex, and the left medial frontal gyrus  . post-hoc analyses showed that for the left-hemispheric areas, the linguistic tasks led to a higher activation than the control task, and for right-hemispheric areas the control task led to a higher activation than the linguistic tasks.

a main effect of relatedness was observed in the right inferior parietal lobule and at the most anterior tip of the right stg . no other areas showed a significant relatedness effect in the rfx ancova. an interaction between task and relatedness was observed in the left insula, the medial part of the right stg, and the right orbitofrontal cortex .

ancova contrast maps of the relatedness effects within each task revealed that for the control task the left anterior insula was more active in related than unrelated conditions . for the offset task, the medial part of the right middle and superior temporal gyrus was more active in unrelated than related conditions. no relatedness effects were observed in the onset and semantic task.

since we observed a relatedness effect in the fixed effects  glm in the expected left posterior middle and sts/stg and the left ifg, but did not find these areas in the rfx ancova, we decided to investigate these areas with a post-hoc rfx roi analysis. this revealed that the relatedness effect in left ifg in the offset task was consistent across participants  =  <dig> , p = .046). none of the other relatedness contrasts approached significance . similarly, in the area encompassing the posterior sts/stg, a significant relatedness effect was observed for the offset task  =  <dig> , p = .021). none of the other relatedness contrasts approached significance .

visual areas
ventral visual areas v <dig>  v <dig>  vp and v <dig> were localised for each of the participants by means of polar mapping runs. in addition, the lateral occipital complex  was localised with a separate run in which objects were contrasted with scrambled objects. participant-specific region of interest  analyses  revealed that, compared to baseline, areas v <dig>  vp, v <dig> and loc were consistently activated by all the tasks across participants ). area v <dig> did not exhibit a significant activation increase compared to baseline . a significant effect of task was detected in loc  =  <dig> , p = .017), where the linguistic tasks led to a higher activation than the control task  =  <dig> , p = .029). significant task effects were not observed in any of the other visual areas . in addition, the rfx roi ancovas did not reveal any effects of relatedness in any of the mapped visual areas, nor were any significant interactions observed between relatedness and task .

possibly, any effects of our experimental manipulations in visual areas were obscured by the procedure of looking at the area as a whole, whereas only a subset of vertices reflected stimulated areas in the visual field. we therefore repeated the analyses with the subset of vertices of an area that was activated in the linguistic tasks . again, rois were defined separately for each participant. this analysis revealed that for each participant, part of each of the ventral visual areas was activated by the stimuli in the linguistic task. task effects were observed in areas v <dig>  vp, v <dig> and loc , but not in v <dig> . post-hoc contrasts revealed that in the areas in which task effects were observed, the linguistic tasks led to a higher activation than the control task ). no relatedness effects were observed in any of these areas, nor were there any interactions between relatedness and task . a similar analysis based on the subset of vertices that was activated by the control task did not reveal any significant main effects or interactions in any of the areas.

discussion
the main goal of the present study was to investigate whether cortical areas beyond visual cortex have active representations of the phonological properties of stimuli that are to be ignored by participants. while lying in the scanner, participants viewed two simultaneously presented stimuli at peripheral locations. meanwhile, a task was performed either at fixation , or involving one of the pictures. in half of the blocks' the names of the two pictures were phonologically related to each other, in the other half they were unrelated. whereas indications of mental representations of ignored stimuli have previously been observed in higher-order visual areas such as loc  <cit> , inferior temporal cortex  <cit>  and ppa  <cit> , the present study is amongst the first to show effects of distractor processing in cortical areas involved in phonological processing, such as sts/stg, posterior ifg and the insula.

relatedness effects
we expected to observe relatedness effects during phonological tasks in areas that are involved in phonological processing, such as the left posterior ifg, left posterior sts/stg, and the left insula. in line with these expectations, unrelated conditions led to higher activations than related conditions in left ifg and sts/stg, when participants were performing the offset-monitoring task. these effects were significant in the ffx analysis, and confirmed by an rfx roi analysis. these results corroborate and extend earlier findings by de zubicaray et al.  <cit> , who observed similar effects in stg in a picture-word interference paradigm. they too, observed higher bold-signal changes when participants named pictures while ignoring superimposed unrelated words, compared to related words. in addition, we observed such effects in posterior ifg, which has also been implicated in phonological processing. it is often assumed that words are automatically processed or that they capture attention briefly even if they are supposed to be ignored  <cit> . the present study is the first to show effects of ignored picture processing in an fmri paradigm. our findings suggest that, under certain task conditions, distractor pictures that are to be ignored may also activate their phonological codes, implying that they pass through the attentional filter in visual cortex. in fact, distractor processing does not stop at visual processing areas, but proceeds well into the language system. in addition, the systematic variation of phonological relatedness and the observed effects clearly showed that the phonological codes of the distractor picture names were activated.

interestingly, we did not observe any significant relatedness effects in the onset- but a robust effect in the offset-monitoring task. possibly, the absence of the onset effect can be explained by the fact that in order to perform this task, the generation of only the first letter of a picture's name is required. some authors have proposed that the level of stimulus encoding depends on task demands  <cit>  and that the level of processing of ignored stimuli depends on the level or representation required by task demands  <cit> . the production of a word's phonological code is believed to occur in an incremental manner, that is, from left to right  <cit> . since the onset task requires only the generation of the first phoneme, participants may not be monitoring letters after the first one. they may be involved in error-monitoring, or preparing for the next trial, which would divert processing resources and attention away from our phonological manipulation, explaining the absence of the relatedness effect in the onset task, both in the behavioural and the fmri data.

the offset-monitoring task, on the other hand, requires the entire name of a picture to be activated and monitored in order to identify the last phoneme. in this case, the name of the picture, including all phonemes in which overlap with the distractor name exists, are more thoroughly processed, which may lead to an increased detection rate of the relatedness manipulation by phonological processing areas. this interpretation supports the idea that the phonological properties of distractor items are only activated, or at least their overlap with that of the target item only detected, when the task involves scrutinous monitoring of those properties  <cit> . this idea is further supported by the fact that no phonological relatedness effects were observed in ifg in the semantic judgment task, in which no explicit naming of the target picture is required. similarly, a recent erp study showed that semantic and phonological priming effects can be observed if participants were involved in an explicit naming task, but that only the semantic effects prevailed in a non-linguistic, natural size-judgment task  <cit> .

unexpectedly, we also observed a phonological relatedness effect in the control task . this effect was primarily observed in the anterior parts of the left insula. importantly, the relatedness effect in this area is reversed compared to the one observed in the offset task. that is, blocks with phonological related picture pairs led to higher activation than unrelated blocks. these findings cannot be explained in terms of stimulus differences between related and unrelated conditions for two reasons. first, each picture was repeated equally often in related and unrelated conditions and at the same position. second, since the exact same picture combinations were used across the tasks, any effects of the pairing of the stimuli should also have appeared in the linguistic tasks. we will discuss the finding of a relatedness effect in light of insular functions in the section below.

interestingly, no behavioural effects of relatedness were observed in the current study, which is at odds with previous picture-picture interference studies in which facilitation effects were observed in trials where the names of the pictures were phonologically related instead of unrelated  <cit> . the fact that we did not find any behavioural effects may indicate that our paradigm may not be sensitive enough to capture phonological facilitation effects. one reason for the lower sensitivity of our study may be the use of the phoneme monitoring task, which is more unnatural than e.g. a naming task. it involves direct attention to the sequence of single phonemes  <cit>  rather than to the entire string, and requires a different response  and hence may be less sensitive to phonological relatedness effects. it should also be noted that the amount of trials in which a response was needed was very low , perhaps too low to reliably estimate response time differences.

alternatively, it cannot be excluded that behavioural effect were absent because the name of the distractor stimulus was accessed after task execution. since stimuli were not masked, covert attention shifts to the distractor picture may have occurred after target identification. in that case, the neural modulations observed in some of the related conditions would be caused not by an interaction of phonological codes of simultaneously identified stimuli, but by the residual activation of the phonological code of the target when the distractor is subsequently identified. presumably, such a shift would not occur before enough information is present to prepare a response to the current task. phoneme monitoring is believed to take place after internal syllabification of the word  <cit> , which is completed around  <dig> ms after picture onset  <cit> . hence, the earliest time in which attention might be shifted to the distractor stimulus is around  <dig> ms, approximately  <dig> ms after stimulus offset. we believe that the actual limit is even higher, given the peripheral location of our stimuli, and the fact that they occupy separate locations. hence, covert, spatial attention shifts would be required, which take time to prepare and execute  <cit> . given the short stimulus duration and the rapid decay of information in the iconic store  <cit> , this leaves a very short interval in which the distractor stimulus must be identified.

hemispheric lateralisation and task-specific activations
in line with previous observations that in right-handed people, language processing is lateralised mainly towards the left hemisphere  <cit> , the linguistic tasks activated an extensive, left-hemispheric network compared to the control task. this network included the left mtg  and sts/stg , and the left insula, ifg and mfg .

it has been suggested in the literature that the ifg plays a role in both phonological and semantic processing, but that the anterior part  is specialised in semantic processing, whereas the posterior part  plays an important role in phonological processing  <cit> . corroborating previous studies, we observed that phoneme monitoring activated the posterior part of ifg stronger than semantic categorisation, whereas the reverse was true for the anterior part of the ifg. noesselt et al.  <cit>  proposed that the posterior part of ifg may be specialised for phonological processing, and that this is automatically activated in semantic tasks. in line with this proposition, we observed a significant activation increase in this area in the semantic task compared to the control task, indicating that phonological processing was taking place during semantic categorisation. however, the fact that this activation is consistently lower than that in the phonological task indicates that perhaps phonological processing is not as thorough in a semantic categorisation task, which could explain the absence of a relatedness effect in this condition. in addition, the semantic task significantly activated a large portion of the mtg stronger than the phonological task. mtg has been associated with the storage of long-term semantic memory, whereas the anterior ifg is believed to involve selection and control from that memory  <cit> . therefore, although these areas are activated in phonological tasks . interestingly, similar results were reported in a recent study in which successively presented pictures or words had to be named or read, which could be phonologically related or unrelated  <cit> . the observation that insula was activated more strongly if two successive words/pictures were related than when they were unrelated, closely fits the data pattern observed in the current study, and led these authors to conclude that the insula might be involved in discriminating competing phonological codes.

it is unclear, however, why we observed this effect in the control task, but not in the linguistic tasks. perhaps the control task  was not attentionally demanding enough to fully engage participants' attention. residual resources may have been employed to process the pictures, while the insula monitored the results of this attentional spill-over. it is also unclear, why the direction of the effect is reversed compared to the effect we observed in the ifg in the offset task and why the insula is insensitive for phonological relatedness in that condition. the absence of phonological relatedness effects in the insula in linguistic tasks implies that this monitoring only took place in non-linguistic tasks  or when task demands allowed additional resources to be diverted to distractor processing. in the insula, related picture pairs were associated with higher activation levels than unrelated ones . this implies that perhaps one feature of this monitoring process is the detection of salient features of linguistic stimuli, in this case the phonological relatedness between two peripherally presented stimuli. in this respect, it would be interesting to observe whether the insula is also involved in detecting salient stimuli in an unattended auditory stream, as occurs the cocktail party effect  <cit> . however, due to the unexpected observation of relatedness effects in the insula, the absence of such effects in the linguistic tasks, and the poorly understood role of the insula in language processing, additional research is required to elucidate its role in the processing and monitoring of ignored stimuli.

CONCLUSIONS
this study is the first to show that phonological properties of ignored pictures can be processed by phonological processing areas such as wernicke's area and the posterior ifg. these results implicate that ignored pictures can be identified beyond their physical properties. since effects of phonological relatedness were not observed in all task conditions, we suggest that the properties of a picture that are identified depend on task demands and depth of processing. whereas we addressed the identification of phonological properties of ignored pictures, future studies may address relatedness effects with other stimulus features, such as semantics.

