BACKGROUND
large conductance calcium- and voltage- activated potassium  channels are key determinants in the regulation of vertebrate neuronal excitability by controlling action potential duration, firing frequency, spike frequency adaptation and neurotransmission  <cit> . in the adult vertebrate nervous system bk channels are widely expressed and are located in both pre- and post- synaptic compartments including axon terminals, cell bodies and dendrites  <cit> . developing neurones in the central nervous system undergo dramatic changes in electrophysiological properties that may, at least in part, be attributable to changes in bk channel function  <cit> . increasing evidence suggests that bk channel expression is up regulated during vertebrate central nervous system  development, dependent on changes in gene transcription, trafficking of channel protein to the plasma membrane as well as posttranslational modification  <cit> . furthermore, developmental changes in the functional properties of bk channels, including differences in gating behaviour, calcium and voltage sensitivity, as well as regulation by cellular signalling pathways have been reported  <cit> . however, the molecular basis for changes in bk channel phenotype during cns development is poorly understood.

the pore-forming α-subunits of bk channels are encoded by a single gene that undergoes extensive alternative pre mrna splicing  <cit> . alternative splicing can dramatically modify the functional properties of bk channels including calcium and voltage sensitivity, cell surface expression and regulation by diverse intracellular signalling pathways. indeed, changes in bk channel alternative splicing in the developing xenopus, drosophila and aplysia nervous system have been associated with changes in bk channel properties and neuronal phenotype  <cit> . however, whether changes in expression of bk channel splice variants occur during mammalian cns development is essentially not known. in mammals, splicing of the stress regulated exon  is dynamically controlled by cellular excitability as well as circulating stress and sex hormones  <cit> . further, insertion of this exon results in channels with significant changes in bk channel phenotype, compared to the insertless  variant , when expressed in heterologous systems  <cit> . in this manuscript, we have exploited quantitative real-time rt-pcr taqman™ analysis of bk channel splice variants  <cit>  to test the hypothesis that alternative splicing of the strex exon is regulated during development of different regions of the murine cns.

RESULTS
bk channel mrna expression in the murine cns
we first examined whether total bk, and splice variant, mrna expression levels differed across distinct regions of the adult  murine cns. to compare the relative expression of total bk channel mrna transcripts between different cns regions of p <dig> mice all data were normalised to the expression of the housekeeping gene, β-actin, in each region. total bk channel mrna expression was variable between different regions with the highest levels observed in frontal cortex and entorhinal cortex . regions with the lowest levels  were cerebellum, medulla and posterior cortex. the spinal cord, midbrain, pons, thalamus, hypothalamus, hippocampus, olfactory bulb and striatum displayed intermediate total bk mrna levels .

differential expression of the strex and zero bk channel splice variant mrna was also observed across these tissues at p <dig>  the relative proportion of strex transcripts  was low in all regions tested, with levels typically < 10% of total bk mrna transcripts. however, even across tissues, the relative proportion of strex transcripts was significantly different  with frontal cortex, thalamus and entorhinal cortex displaying the highest proportion of strex transcripts and the pons and cerebellum displaying the lowest levels . the proportion of total bk channel transcripts expressing the zero variant also varied significantly across tissues. the entorhinal cortex displayed a significantly  greater proportion of zero transcripts compared to any other tissue, with  <dig>  ±  <dig>  % of total bk transcripts encoded by the zero variant. . in the majority of cns regions, the proportion of zero transcripts was greater than 50% of total bk mrna transcripts with the notable exception of cerebellum, in which  <dig>  ±  <dig>  % of transcripts encoded for the zero variant . taken together, these data suggest that the zero variant is the predominant transcript in most adult cns tissues and that the strex variant is expressed at a significantly lower level at postnatal day  <dig>  a notable exception is the cerebellum, in which both zero and strex transcripts represent < 10% of total transcripts at p <dig> suggesting that other site c <dig> splice variants are predominantly expressed in this region.

developmental regulation of bk channel mrna splicing in the cns
in order to investigate developmental changes in bk channel mrna expression in different regions of the murine cns, bk channel mrna expression was quantified at embryonic days  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  and postnatal days  <dig> and  <dig>  for each tissue, the total bk channel mrna expression at each developmental time point was expressed as a percentage of that at p <dig>  for each splice variant the expression at each developmental time point was expressed as a percentage of the total bk channel transcripts in each tissue.

tissues from rhombencephalon, mesencephalon and spinal cord
in spinal cord a small, but significant, increase in total bk channel mrna expression was observed from e <dig> compared to p <dig> . this was accompanied by a dramatic decrease in strex variant expression with a concomitant increase in zero variant mrna expression . similar developmental up regulation of total bk channel mrna expression was also observed in the midbrain, cerebellum, pons and medulla . in these tissues, significant developmental downregulation of strex variant expression was again observed between embryonic and postnatal stages . in midbrain this was paralleled by a significant increase in zero variant expression whereas in pons and medulla no significant change between e <dig> and p <dig> were observed . in contrast to other regions, zero variant expression significantly decreased with postnatal development in the cerebellum .

tissues from the diencephalon and telencephalon
in thalamus and hypothalamus a small, but significant, increase in total bk channel expression was observed from e <dig> to p <dig> . in contrast, total bk channel mrna expression increased almost 10-fold between embryonic and postnatal stages in frontal cortex, posterior cortex, hippocampus, olfactory bulb, striatum and entorhinal cortex . in all regions examined, there was a significant developmental downregulation of strex variant mrna expression . in frontal cortex, posterior cortex, hippocampus, olfactory bulb, striatum and entorhinal cortex this is associated with a significant upregulation of zero variant mrna expression . in thalamus and hypothalamus no significant changes in zero variant mrna expression was observed between e <dig> and p <dig> .

discussion
the contribution of bk channels to the regulation of cns function is critically dependent upon cell type, subcellular localisation, intrinsic bk channel kinetic properties, calcium- and voltage sensitivities, and regulation by diverse cellular signalling pathways. such diversity in the functional properties of bk channels, encoded by a single gene, can be generated by multiple mechanisms including expression and heterotetrameric assembly of distinct splice variants of the pore-forming subunit, association with regulatory beta subunits and signalling complexes and posttranslational regulation. this study suggests that during murine development a contributing factor to the impact of bk channels on cns function would be through control of alternative splicing of the bk channel pore forming subunit.

the robust developmental changes in splice variant mrna expression we observe in multiple cns regions strongly supports the hypothesis that bk channel splicing is coordinated in the developing cns and is of functional relevance. in all cns regions examined, the expression of the strex variant was significantly down regulated in the face of increasing total bk mrna levels. in most tissues, such as spinal cord and olfactory bulb, this was accompanied by an upregulation in zero variant expression suggesting that splicing decisions to exclude the strex insert are coordinated across all regions of the developing murine cns. however, there are important exceptions to this rule such as the cerebellum. in the cerebellum, both strex and zero variant expression is developmentally down regulated resulting in zero and strex variants representing < 10% of total bk channel transcripts at p <dig>  in the cerebellum, developmental upregulation of total bk channel mrna must be accompanied by an increased expression of other site c <dig> splice inserts. a similar situation must also occur in tissues such as pons and medulla in which strex expression declines with no significant change in proportion of zero variants when comparing between e <dig> and p <dig>  analysis of the splicing decisions in cns regions with distinct splicing patterns should provide important insights into the mechanisms controlling splicing at site c <dig> during development.

this broad-scale qrt-pcr analysis, at the level of cns tissue regions, provides a framework in which to generate testable hypothesis of the functional importance of bk channel alternative splicing in specific cell types during murine cns development. clearly, detailed expression and functional analysis in individual cell types within a particular brain region are required to address these issues.

in this regard, during the time-span of the developmental regulation analysed here, considerable changes in both maturational states of neurones  as well as the cellular composition of brain regions  are apparent. even in the adult state, considerable cell-cell variations in bk channel mrna expression levels are apparent. for example, in the adult cerebellum total bk channel mrna and protein levels are high in the purkinje cell layer but with very low expression in granular cells  <cit> . such cell specific expression levels are also highlighted by both functional and biochemical analysis of bk channel expression in a variety of neurones, including the widely varying levels of bk channel protein observed in detailed histochemical analysis of rat and murine brain  <cit> . thus, whether the changes in splicing decision reported here reflect changes in cellular composition or intrinsic properties of maturing cell types remains to be examined. while these developmental changes in bk channel expression levels are likely to be of functional relevance, it is unlikely that bk channels play a dominant role in proliferation, migration or morphological maturation of the developing cns as bk channel knockout mice  <cit>  do not show gross abnormalities in neuronal or brain architecture. this suggests that changes in bk channel expression during development are more important for shaping cellular activity, plasticity, and/or connectivity.

a further caveat to these studies is the extent to which developmental changes in bk channel mrna levels in fact reflect changes in the expression, or functional properties, of bk channel protein. while determination of the functional consequence of bk channel mrna splicing during development remains to be fully explored in vertebrates  <cit> , the developmental upregulation in total bk mrna expression is in accordance with several functional and molecular studies  <cit> . for example, in the rat cerebellum, total bk channel mrna expression increases in the first  <dig> weeks of postnatal development, a process that appears to be activity dependent  <cit> . in chick ciliary neurones, developmental upregulation of bk channel mrna is observed at e <dig>  prior to synaptogenesis, and before a significant macroscopic bk current is observed  <cit> . in chick ciliary neurones, the increase in functional bk channel expression is dependent upon target-derived factors  <cit> . finally, the relative expression profiles of total bk channel mrna levels at late postnatal stages are in broad agreement with the distribution of channel protein in adult mice  <cit> .

what may be the functional consequence of differential splicing of the strex exon during murine cns development? the strex insert represents a gain-of-function module that confers strex variant channels with faster activation and slower deactivation kinetics and channels are activated at more negative voltages than other variants  <cit> . as such, strex channels have been proposed to support high frequency action potential firing, for example in chromaffin cells  <cit> , although this function is likely to be context and cell type dependent. in humans, gain of function mutations in the bk channel pore-forming subunit result in generalised epilepsy  <cit> . furthermore, in mice, genetic ablation of the neuron specific β  <dig> regulatory subunit results in a gain of function of bk channels resulting in hyperexcitability  <cit> . thus, the general down regulation of the gain-of-function strex variant, from embryonic to postnatal development, may provide a protective mechanism to limit hyperexcitability in the postnatal cns. in addition, strex variant channels display distinct posttranslational regulation by a variety of cellular signalling pathways compared to other variants: including differences in regulation by protein phosphorylation, cellular redox potential and hypoxia  <cit> . taken together, these attributes may allow neonates to differentially control bk channel function, compared to adults, dependent upon the prevailing physiological demands. in this regard, the close association of bk channels with either voltage- or ligand- dependent ca2+ entry pathways  <cit>  may play an important role in shaping ca2+ – signalling to the nucleus to programme developmental changes in gene transcription  <cit> . clearly detailed biochemical and functional analysis of bk channel splice variant expression is warranted in selected systems to address such issues.

how might alternative splicing of the bk channel be regulating during development? inclusion of the strex exon is dynamically regulated by cellular activity per se through calcium dependent activation of calmodulin kinase iv  <cit> . indeed, in murine cerebellar granule cells, strex variant expression is controlled by calcium entry through l-type calcium channels and genetic deletion of calmodulin kinase iv in the cerebellum results in an upregulation of strex transcripts compared to wild type controls  <cit> . furthermore, both stress and sex hormones potently regulate alternative splicing of the strex exon in endocrine tissues  <cit>  and such hormones have dramatic effects on neuronal development, activity and plasticity  <cit> . clearly, such multifactorial control of the splicing decision suggests that expression levels of splice variants will be critically dependent upon the cell type under investigation. indeed, although the strex insert is highly conserved in vertebrate evolution  <cit>  strex mrna expression increases in spinal neurones in xenopus during early postnatal development  <cit> . however, as robust downregulation of strex variant expression occurs across all regions of the cns our data suggest that splicing decisions to exclude the strex exon from bk channel transcripts is tightly coordinated in the developing murine cns.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that developmental up regulation of total bk channel mrna levels in the murine cns are associated with a developmentally regulated switch in pre mrna splicing. the downregulation of strex variant expression paralleled with a general increase in zero variant expression suggests that changes in the relative expression levels of these phenotypically distinct channel isoforms might result in changes in the physiological function of bk channels during mammalian brain development.

