BACKGROUND
amino acids are required for protein biosynthesis, but have also additional functions like nitrogen storage and transport. proline  and the non-proteinogenic γ-aminobutyrate are also used as compatible osmolytes that are accumulated by many plant species in response to water deprivation  <cit> . arginine  and arg-rich proteins serve as an important storage form of organic nitrogen in many plants, especially in seeds  <cit> . additionally, arg or ornithine  are the precursors for the synthesis of spermine, spermidine and related polyamines, which are essential for sexual reproduction and additionally play important roles in stress tolerance  <cit> . therefore, biosynthesis and degradation of amino acids is embedded in a complex metabolic and regulatory network that allows the plant to serve all the requirements of growth and environmental adaptation.

the primary pathways for amino acid biosynthesis and degradation in plants were mainly deduced by identifying genes or enzyme activities homologous to prokaryotic or fungal model systems. however, the localisation of metabolic pathways in different compartments within the plant cell is still not satisfyingly clarified  <cit> . additional complications arise from the possibility of substrate channelling in multi-enzyme complexes that could separate individual pathways despite the use of common metabolites.

arg biosynthesis seems to be localised predominantly in plastids, with some ambiguous localisation prediction of enzymes in the cytosol  <cit> . arg decarboxylases , the committing enzymes for polyamine synthesis in arabidopsis have a predicted localisation in the cytosol or chloroplast , whereas arg catabolism takes place in mitochondria via arginase  <cit> . arginase produces urea, which is further degraded by urease in the cytoplasm, and orn, which could be exported from mitochondria to re-enter arg biosynthesis  <cit> . two transporters for basic amino acids that could mediate exchange of arg and orn across the mitochondrial inner membrane have been identified by complementation of a yeast arg <dig> mutant  <cit> .

pro is mainly synthesised in the cytosol from glutamate  via pyrroline-5-carboxylate  by the sequential action of p5c synthetase  and p5c reductase . in arabidopsis, two isoforms of p5cs are present, with p5cs <dig> as a housekeeping isoform and p5cs <dig> being responsible for the accumulation of pro in response to stress  <cit> . in response to osmotic stress, p5cs <dig> becomes re-localised to plastids  <cit> . for degradation, pro is imported into mitochondria where it is converted back to glu by pro-dehydrogenase  and p5c-dehydrogenase   <cit> . there is also evidence for a pathway of pro synthesis from orn, and orn-δ-aminotransferase  has been implicated in this pathway  <cit> . δoat transfers the δ-amino group of orn to α-ketoglutarate or related α-keto acids, thereby forming glutamate-5-semialdehyde  and glu. the equilibrium of this reaction was found far on the gsa/glu side  <cit> . gsa is in spontaneous equilibrium with the cyclic p5c, which is the common intermediate in pro biosynthesis and degradation. formation of gsa/p5c from orn was postulated to constitute an alternative pathway of pro synthesis and accumulation, with arg or orn instead of glu as precursors  <cit> .

the first gene encoding a plant δoat was cloned from a moth bean cdna library by functional complementation of an e. coli pro-auxotroph strain deficient in the conversion of glu to p5c  <cit> . sequence similarity to mammalian and bacterial enzymes strongly suggested that the gene encoded a δoat rather than an αoat. recently, heterologous expression of the moth bean δoat in e. coli revealed that its activity was inhibited by serine, isoleucine and valine, but not pro  <cit> . the arabidopsis δoat gene  was identified by sequence comparison and was found to be upregulated in young seedlings and in response to salt stress  <cit> . however, out of eleven prediction programs for subcellular localisation including mitochondria, all strongly predict a targeting of the δoat protein to mitochondria, with a putative transit peptide cleavage site after phe <dig>  <cit> . targeting δoat to mitochondria strongly suggests that p5c is fed into the pro degradation pathway rather than into pro biosynthesis. additionally, radiotracer experiments with externally supplied orn indicated that pro formed from orn preserves the δ-amino group, whereas the α-amino group is lost  <cit> . the latter results suggested that orn to pro conversion proceeds via an αoat.

on the other hand, transgenic tobacco and rice plants overexpressing the arabidopsis δoat gene had increased pro content and increased stress tolerance, supporting the concept that orn conversion can contribute to pro accumulation  <cit> . use of gabaculine as a potent inhibitor of δoat suggested that in radish cotyledons orn conversion could contribute to salt-induced pro accumulation, whereas in rice leaves this pathway was probably of minor importance or not at all active  <cit> . none of the studies published at present directly investigated the subcellular localisation of δoat or provided strong evidence for a physiological function of δoat in pro synthesis in non-transgenic plants.

in the present study we have analysed the physiological function of δoat in arabidopsis. we provide experimental confirmation of the predicted localisation of δoat in mitochondria using a δoat-gfp fusion protein. with the use of loss-of-function t-dna insertion mutants we demonstrate that δoat is essential for nitrogen recycling from arg, whereas it does not seem to contribute to pro biosynthesis.

RESULTS
ornithine-δ-aminotransferase is localised in mitochondria
as a first step to determine the physiological function of δoat we determined the subcellular localisation of the enzyme. we fused the cdna of δoat in frame to the n-terminus of gfp and expressed the fusion protein in arabidopsis and in nicotiana benthamiana. intact cells and protoplasts from stably transformed arabidopsis plants or from transiently transformed n. benthamiana leaves showed a clear punctate distribution of δoat within the cells . staining of leaf sections with mitotracker was not successful, therefore double labelling was performed on protoplasts. in protoplasts, colocalisation of the gfp-signal with the orange fluorescence of mitotracker clearly identified the δoat-gfp containing compartments as mitochondria, confirming the sequence-based prediction of subcellular localisation.

ornithine-δ-aminotransferase does not contribute to stress-induced proline accumulation
the mitochondrial localisation of δoat indicated that it is not involved in the formation of pro, since a reversed reaction of prodh is energetically unfavourable. due to the chemical instability of gsa/p5c, an export of this intermediate to the cytosol and thus a contribution to pro synthesis appears rather unlikely. to obtain direct evidence for the physiological function of δoat, we identified and characterised loss-of-function t-dna insertion mutants. we found that the t-dna insertion lines salk_ <dig>  and salk_ <dig>  carry inverted tandem repeats of the t-dna in the 1st intron and 4th exon of δoat, respectively . segregation analysis confirmed the absence of further t-dna insertions in oat <dig> and oat <dig> after repeated backcrossing to wildtype col- <dig> . plants homozygous for the t-dna insertions were identified by pcr on genomic dna . in both lines, the t-dna insertion resulted in the complete loss of transcript accumulation as demonstrated by northern blot analysis . the probe used covers  <dig> bp of the conserved domain of pyridoxal-dependent aminotransferases and did not detect any native or truncated transcripts in both lines, thus excluding the translation of any active protein from the δoat gene . in transgenic lines expressing the δoat-gfp fusion construct, the δoat probe detected the native mrna and a band with higher molecular weight corresponding to the δoat-gfp transcript. expression of p5cs <dig>  the gene responsible for stress-induced pro biosynthesis, was unchanged in oat mutants and δoat-gfp transgenic plants . a third line, salk_ <dig> , carried the insertion  <dig> bp upstream of the transcription start site that was determined by  <cit> . δoat transcripts of the native size were detected in oat <dig>  although they were slightly less abundant compared to the wildtype col- <dig> . thus the oat <dig> mutant was not included in further studies.

analysis of genomic sequences revealed no other candidate genes for oats in arabidopsis. still, it was important to analyse oat activity in the oat <dig> and oat <dig> knockout mutants. in whole plant extracts of 2-week-old wildtype seedlings, a weak but significant oat activity was detected . in oat <dig> and oat <dig> extracts, oat activity was not significantly increased over control values and accounted for maximally 1/ <dig> of the wildtype activity. two δoat-gfp expressing lines had  <dig>  and  <dig> -fold higher oat activities than the wildtype. homozygous plants of both oat <dig> and oat <dig> mutant lines showed no obvious phenotypical differences from the wildtype under greenhouse conditions, demonstrating that δoat-activity is not essential for the normal life cycle of arabidopsis .

to investigate a potential function of δoat in stress-induced pro accumulation, we cultivated wildtype, oat <dig> and oat <dig> in sterile culture on media containing increasing amounts of nacl . the mutants displayed similar sensitivity towards nacl as the wildtype and seedling establishment was almost completely blocked in all three genotypes by the addition of more than  <dig> mm nacl. quantification of free pro content in 3-week-old plants revealed no significant differences between wildtype and oat mutants, neither under control conditions nor after salt stress . in all three genotypes the content of free pro was increased approximately 3-fold by the addition of  <dig> mm nacl. similar fw/dw ratios in wildtype and oat mutants under all salt concentrations further supported an equal stress tolerance in both genotypes . these findings indicate that δoat does not contribute significantly to stress-induced pro biosynthesis in vivo during salt stress. additional evidence against a direct entry of orn-derived p5c into pro biosynthesis was derived from public microarray-expression data analysed with the bar e-northern web-tool  <cit> . over a large set of stress experiments, δoat mrna levels are in much closer correlation to p5cdh mrna than to p5cr mrna .

ornithine-δ-aminotransferase is required for utilisation of arginine and ornithine
since the predominant function of δoat was apparently not in pro biosynthesis, we considered alternative metabolic functions for this enzyme. co-localisation with the arg-breakdown pathway in mitochondria suggested a putative function of δoat in recycling of nitrogen stored as arg. to test if δoat functions in arg catabolism, we grew wildtype and oat mutant seedlings in sterile culture with arg, orn or urea as the sole source of nitrogen . in the absence of any external nitrogen, both wildtype and mutants showed root growth and expanded, de-etiolated cotyledons, but further development was not possible. arg supported growth of the wildtype, although the plants grew slower when compared to plants grown on normal ms mineral medium. oat mutants germinated, but failed to de-etiolate, initiate root growth or develop true leaves on  <dig> mm arg as the only nitrogen source. with  <dig> mm orn as the only nitrogen source, growth of the wildtype was even more retarded and oat mutants were arrested in development at the same stage as on arg-containing plates. urea could be used equally well by all three analysed genotypes. these findings demonstrated that oat mutants could not use arg or orn as nitrogen sources for growth. comparison with seedlings grown in the absence of nitrogen indicated that supply of arg or orn inhibited seedling establishment and use of internal nitrogen reserves in oat mutants.

a general inhibitory effect of single amino acids to plant cell growth had been observed earlier and could in the case of arg be abolished by addition of glutamine   <cit> . indeed, addition of  <dig>  mm gln to  <dig> mm arg improved growth and development of both wildtype and oat mutants . however, oat mutants remained chlorotic and grew worse than in the presence of  <dig>  mm gln alone .  <dig> mm gln as the only nitrogen source enabled much faster growth of arabidopsis than  <dig> mm arg or  <dig> mm orn, each supplemented with  <dig>  mm gln. oat mutants grew equally well as the wildtype on  <dig> mm gln. these findings indicated that inhibitory effects of orn and arg were overcome by gln, but oat mutants were not or only poorly able to utilise arg or orn as nitrogen sources.

oat mutants accumulate urea cycle intermediates when supplied with arginine
to determine the fate of externally supplied arg and orn in oat mutants and wildtype, we determined the pools of free amino acids in seedlings cultivated on gln, arg, orn or urea as nitrogen sources. to support formation of sufficient amounts of biomass in oat mutants,  <dig>  mm gln was added to all plates. as expected, free gln accumulated in plants cultivated on  <dig> mm gln, while most other amino acids were present at similar levels as in plants cultivated on  <dig> mm mineral nitrogen . a slightly reduced arg content was the only significant difference to the wildtype in oat mutants on  <dig> mm gln. with urea, arg or orn as the main nitrogen source, free gln levels were progressively lowered and the oat mutants always displayed lower gln content than the wildtype, although differences were only significant on  <dig> mm arg . with orn as the main nitrogen source, oat mutants were depleted of gln almost to the detection limit, despite the presence of  <dig>  mm gln in the medium. interestingly, glu levels were nearly constant under all conditions analysed and in all genotypes. levels of asparagine and aspartate basically mirrored the trend of gln and glu contents on a lower level. on  <dig> mm urea as the main nitrogen source, levels of free amino acids were generally low. significant differences between the wildtype and the oat mutants were only observed for γ-aminobutyrate, arg  and orn . the most striking differences between the wildtype and the oat mutants were observed when arg or orn were supplied externally. under these conditions, oat mutants accumulated orn, citrulline  and arg. cit and orn levels were  <dig> to 163-fold higher in oat mutants than in the wildtype, whereas arg was increased  <dig> to 21-fold. also for leucine, isoleucine, phenylalanine and lysine significant, although smaller, increases were observed. gln, aspartate and pro were the only amino acids for which significantly lower levels were observed in oat mutants cultivated on orn or arg. based on these amino acid profiles, we conclude that δoat constitutes a major and possibly the only exit route of nitrogen from orn or arg. accumulation of cit indicated that orn and arg were metabolised after uptake, most likely by enzymes of the urea cycle.

oat mutants are rescued by expression of an δoat-gfp fusion protein
to demonstrate that the mutant phenotypes of the oat knockout mutants are solely based on the lack of δoat activity, we crossed the oat <dig> mutant with a δoat-gfp expressing transgenic line with a single t-dna insertion and clearly visible gfp expression in the t <dig> and t <dig> generation. pcr based genotyping of the f <dig> generation after crossing was used to identify plants homozygous for the oat3-t-dna that additionally carried the δoat-gfp construct . among the progeny of a homozygous oat <dig> plant heterozygous for the δoat-gfp construct,  <dig> out of  <dig> seedlings were scored arg catabolism positive by expanded, de-etiolated cotyledons and true leaf formation . all  <dig> showed clear gfp expression. among the  <dig> arg sensitive seedlings,  <dig> did not show any gfp fluorescence, whereas  <dig> showed expression, mostly with a patchy pattern of gfp-expressing and non-expressing cells. progeny of a plant homozygous for oat <dig> and the δoat-gfp construct had even fewer gfp expressing cells and were not able to grow with arg as the sole nitrogen source, indicating the activation of gene silencing by the combination of the oat <dig> insertion with δoat-gfp overexpression . rescue of the oat mutant phenotype by the gfp fusion protein provided additional evidence that the degradation of arg for nitrogen recycling requires mitochondrial δoat activity.

discussion
δoat is not required for salt-stress induced proline biosynthesis
like the majority of plants analysed so far, arabidopsis reacts to high salinity stress by osmotic adjustment accompanied by pro accumulation. pro accumulation is the cumulative result of induced biosynthesis, reduced degradation and intercellular re-allocation via specific pro transport proteins  <cit> . the main source of stress induced pro biosynthesis is the cytosolic pathway from glu via gsa/p5c involving the enzymes p5cs and p5cr.

in bacteria and mammals, transamination of orn constitutes an alternative route for gsa/p5c and subsequently pro formation  <cit> . recovery of radioactive pro after feeding of labelled orn to plants has led to the concept that a similar pathway exists in higher plants  <cit> . however, the exact biochemical pathway and contributing enzymes are subject to controversial debate. while the majority of publications assume that δoat produces gsa from orn, which spontaneously forms p5c and is then converted to pro by p5cr, this hypothesis neglected the localisation of both enzymes to different compartments . in favour of this concept, transgenic plants overexpressing δoat had higher pro contents  <cit> . to date, the exact source of pro accumulating in these δoat overexpressors has not been determined. we demonstrated here that two t-dna insertion mutants lacked detectable δoat expression and showed insignificant p5c production from orn and α-ketoglutarate in whole seedling protein extracts. both oat mutants were not affected in pro accumulation under stressed or non-stressed conditions.

additionally, a mitochondrial localisation of δoat had been predicted before and was confirmed in this study by analysis of plants expressing a δoat-gfp fusion protein. p5c produced by δoat inside mitochondria is most probably further converted to glu by mitochondrial p5cdh. due to the chemical instability of gsa/p5c, export from mitochondria seems unlikely but can currently not be fully excluded. p5c stimulated o <dig> uptake of isolated intact mitochondria, but very little p5c was produced from orn or pro  <cit> . orn- or pro-dependent p5c production and p5c-dependent nad reduction were measurable only after swelling of mitochondria in low osmolarity buffer, which was attributed to the disruption of prodh-p5cdh and δoat-p5cdh enzyme complexes. the impact of swelling on the permeability of the mitochondrial membranes for p5c was not analysed. in δoat overexpressing plants, non-complexed δoat could indeed lead to the release of p5c from mitochondria and subsequent conversion to pro by cytosolic p5cr. alternatively, the use of the arabidopsis δoat gene for overexpression in tobacco or rice could have resulted in incomplete import into mitochondria and thus cytosolic δoat-activity.

evidence against a role of δoat in the conversion of orn to pro had already come from tracing experiments using differentially labelled 14c/3h-orn  <cit> . only when the δ-amino group of orn was labelled with 3h, substantial 3h activity could be recovered in the pro fraction. these findings are consistent with the activity of a putative α-aminotransferase that would produce pyrroline-2-carboxylate as an intermediate, or an orn-cyclodeaminase, which would produce pro directly. however, long incubation times and possible isotope discrimination effects do not allow excluding the participation of δoat completely  <cit> . 3h labelled pro could have also been formed from 3h glu that was formed when δoat transferred the labelled amino group to α-ketoglutarate. feeding radioactive arg or orn to control or wilted barley leaves indicated that the orn to pro conversion was not enhanced by water deficit and that the c-skeleton of arg contributed maximally 1% of the accumulating pro  <cit> . these findings are in line with our observation that δoat deficient mutants retain unchanged levels of salt stress-induced pro accumulation . we propose that under normal physiological conditions orn can be converted to pro only via glu, while this conversion is not contributing substantially to stress-induced pro accumulation. in addition, oat mutants provide an excellent tool to investigate if mitochondrial orn  or externally supplied orn can be converted to pro by alternative pathways. absence of significant amounts of colour development in our oat assay with oat mutant extracts indicated that such alternative pathways are not catalysed by soluble proteins or require different substrates and cofactors. alternatively, the expression could be too low in young seedlings.

δoat constitutes an essential exit route for nitrogen from the urea cycle
having dismissed the most popular hypothesis for the physiological function of δoat, we set out to analyse an alternative function in arg degradation. arg is effectively taken up from the medium by arabidopsis roots and distributed to aboveground organs, presumably via transporters of the lht rather than aap subfamilies of broad specificity amino acid permeases  <cit> . the first step of arg breakdown is the cleavage into orn and urea by arginase, which is localised in mitochondria in plants  <cit> . urea can be further degraded by cytosolic urease, and urea supported growth of oat mutants and the wildtype equally well . no information is currently available on the export of urea from mitochondria  <cit> . however, further catabolism of orn, the second product of arginase, seems to depend on δoat activity since neither arg nor orn supported growth of oat mutants. instead, intermediates of the urea cycle accumulated to high amounts, indicating that δoat is required for arg catabolism and nitrogen recycling . other metabolites that can be produced from arg are polyamines, but apparently these are not metabolised further or the capacity of this pathway is too low to supply enough nitrogen to meet the demand of growing oat mutant seedlings.

evaluation of microarray expression data using the bar efp-browser revealed strongest expression of δoat in senescing rosette leaves, floral organs and mature and imbibed seeds  <cit> . within the developing embryo, strong δoat expression was detected in cotyledons. these data further support a function of δoat in storage mobilisation during early seedling development and in nitrogen recovery during senescence.

amino acid interconversions and distribution
orn was less effective than arg in supporting growth of wildtype arabidopsis seedlings, which was reflected in generally lower amino acid contents in plants cultured on orn as the main nitrogen source . this difference to arg supply could arise from lower uptake rates or impaired inter- or intracellular distribution of orn. orn is synthesised in plastids, where it is also further converted to arg, whereas production of orn during arg degradation occurs in mitochondria. thus high rates of intracellular orn transport and the occurrence of high orn concentrations in the cytosol are unlikely to happen under natural conditions. two members of the mitochondrial carrier protein-family, atbac <dig> and atbac <dig>  were shown to mediate transport of arg and orn along with other basic amino acids  <cit> . both transporters were able to complement a yeast strain deficient in the mitochondrial orn/arg transporter arg <dig>  suggesting mitochondrial localisation also in plants. the high levels of cit and arg in oat mutants cultivated on orn suggested import of orn into plastids . a reversed reaction of arginase is thermodynamically unfavourable and could not be observed with purified enzyme preparations even in the presence of both orn and urea in high concentrations  <cit> . orn to cit conversion was previously observed in purified mitochondria and could constitute an alternative pathway to direct orn import into plastids  <cit> . high levels of cit after arg feeding of oat mutants indicate that orn originating from arg breakdown is terminally converted to cit inside mitochondria or is transferred from mitochondria to plastids. substantial production of cit by reversion of the argininosuccinate synthetase reaction from the arg biosynthesis pathway is unlikely due to the low pyrophosphate levels in plastids  <cit> . synthesis of arg from orn requires two atoms of nitrogen per molecule of arg, thus requiring net n-input in case of orn feeding. this is consistent with the extreme gln depletion of oat mutants fed with orn .

irrespective of the nitrogen source provided, oat mutants had an increased content in orn, indicating that catabolism of arg is constitutively operative in wildtype plants. surprising were the decreased levels of arg in oat mutants grown on gln or urea . arg biosynthesis is subject to feedback inhibition by the end product at the level of n-acetyl glutamate kinase, which catalyses the key regulatory step of arg biosynthesis  <cit> . arg mediated inhibition of n-acetyl glutamate kinase can be alleviated by the plastidic pii protein, but the precise role of this interaction in regulating arg biosynthesis is yet unknown  <cit> . the block in mitochondrial arg catabolism in oat mutants potentially leads to an altered c/n ratio in plastids or a localised increase in arg concentrations, which in turn could reduce the total rate of arg biosynthesis. recently a genetically encoded nanosensor for arg was developed, that can be used to report cytosolic, mitochondrial or plastidic arg levels in wildtype and oat mutants under various nutrition regimes  <cit> .

also the significant increase in the contents of leucine, isoleucine, phenylalanine and lysine in orn-fed, and partially also in arg-fed, oat mutants indicated disturbances of amino acid metabolism. all increased amino acids have high c/n ratios, consistent with a deficiency of oat mutants to mobilise nitrogen from orn and arg.

the complete degradation of arg via arginase, δoat and p5cdh yields two molecules of glu per molecule of arg. despite the consequential massive differences in mitochondrial glu production between wildtype and oat mutants grown on arg or orn, glu levels were the same in both genotypes . similar glu homeostasis was observed in many studies on nitrogen nutrition, environmental stress or mutant analyses and was proposed to indicate a special regulatory function of glu levels  <cit> . the insensitivity of glu levels to the deletion of δoat is presumably the prerequisite for the unchanged capacity of oat mutants to accumulate pro under stress conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
decades of biochemical analyses have produced the basis for our understanding of plant primary metabolism and are now complemented by genomic, proteomic and metabolomic approaches. still, the compartmentation of metabolic processes to specific organelles or protein supercomplexes is far from being fully uncovered. determination of the exact role of a specific enzyme in the metabolic and regulatory networks of plant cells still requires careful and thorough gene for gene analysis. we show here that arg and pro catabolism are co-localised in mitochondria and converge in the formation of gsa/p5c, which is further metabolised to glu by p5cdh. the detection of unchanged pro levels in arabidopsis oat mutants provides strong evidence against a shortcut from arg catabolism to pro synthesis that bypasses glu and cytosolic p5cs activity. it remains to be investigated if other plant species with more than one p5cdh or oat gene have differently localised isoforms and thus other metabolic possibilities.

