BACKGROUND
parental care in insects has been the focus of several studies that examined its adaptive functions with regard to both parents and offspring  <cit> . such studies may clarify selection regimes that maintain parental care under current ecological conditions and shape co-adaptive behavioral interactions between parents and offspring. however, the selection acting on current populations may not be the same as that in the origin. the phylogeny-based comparative analysis is a powerful tool for testing or generating the hypotheses about the historical developments of traits. however, relatively few attempts have been made to apply this analysis to the evolution of parental care in insects  <cit> .

evolutionary transitions and the lability of uni- or biparental care have attracted the interest of evolutionary biologists . complex parental care, with integrated morphological  and behavioral components, may have a low likelihood of loss. for example, viviparity  has evolved many times, but it has never been lost in ray-finned fish  <cit> . parental food provisioning which has been elaborated through co-evolution between parents and their offspring confers resistance to loss  <cit> . in contrast, simple attendance and guarding of offspring might be more easily lost in low-risk environments than complex parental care  <cit> . tallamy and schaefer  <cit>  suggested that parental care is a plesiomorphic relic in hemiptera, which has repeatedly been lost due to the high cost of caring.

post-ovipositional parental care has been recorded in at least  <dig> genera representing  <dig> families of four infraorders of heteropteran insects . most of them exhibit maternal care, whereas exclusive paternal care is restricted to four families only with reports of dozens of genera: belostomatidae, coreidae, reduviidae, and pentatomidae  <cit> . approximately 70 % of the species in which maternal care has been documented belongs to the superfamily pentatomoidea. they have developed diversified strategies of maternal investments, such as physical protection against predators with defensive movements in many taxa , brood caring combined with nymphal phoresy in the phloeidae and tessaratomidae , joint guarding in some acanthosomatidae , or a series of complex cares including egg-translocation, trophic egg production, hatching assistance, progressive provisioning and joint breeding in cydnoid families .

the family acanthosomatidae is one of the best known members of pentatomoidea, in which the females of several species display a simple form of parental care, egg-nymph guarding, with effective resource allocation among eggs ; for an extensive review see  <cit> . most of them are oligo-or polyphagous, arboreal herbivores that feeding on the developing fruits of some conifers and many flowering plants . the family currently contains about approximately  <dig> described species in  <dig> genera in three subfamilies, namely acanthosomatinae, blaudusinae and ditomotarsinae . considering that its sister group, lestoniidae, is an endemic australian family, and that the majority  of acanthosomatid genera is distributed in the fragmented landmasses of gondwana, the family is very likely of gondwanan origin. however, the greatest species diversity  is found in the  <dig> genera of the subfamily acanthosomatinae, with a high species richness in east, south, and southeast asia.

many acanthosomatine species exhibit maternal care. for example, members of the genera elasmucha and sastragala attend their eggs and nymphs until the 2nd to 5th instar  <cit> . several studies have identified the strategy’s defensive function, the agents of offspring mortality and have quantified its benefits in terms of offspring survival under field conditions . in contrast, the females of other species of the subfamily do not show post-ovipositional care, and instead, smear the eggs one after another with secretion from pendergrast’s organ using the hind legs before leaving the clutch , see also additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  the pendergrast’s organ  is a pair of disc-like, depressed, setose areas located sublaterally on the female abdominal sternites v–vii, vi–vii or vii, having highly modified cuticle  with numerous underlying and closely arranged secretory cells in the epidermal layer  <cit> . although no direct experimental evidence has been published thus far, the organ’s secretion supposedly functions as a repellent against the predators and parasitoids  <cit> , which can be considered as a form of maternal care if the substances could effectively enhance egg survival.

the monophyly of acanthosomatidae and its sister relationship with the lestoniidae are apparently supported by molecular and morphological data  <cit> . however, no hypothesis for the phylogenetic relationships within the family has been proposed so far, rendering it difficult to understand the origin and evolution of maternal care. in this study, we focused on the relationships of the subfamily acanthosomatinae, the taxon containing the largest number of species. we estimated the molecular phylogeny among the major groups of acanthosomatinae with and without maternal care and incorporated several outgroup representatives of the other two subfamilies using three mitochondrial and two nuclear genes. we evaluated whether the maternal care has a single origin or has evolved independently several times within acanthosomatidae. we further examined whether the maternal care is associated with morphological changes, i.e., the loss of po, since some authors have proposed a trend that species showing maternal care lack this organ  <cit> .

RESULTS
phylogenetic analyses and the clades recovered
the phylogenetic trees resulting from maximum likelihood  and bayesian analyses were nearly identical and were well resolved except for some basal branches . the monophyly of the genera cyphostethus, elasmostethus and elasmucha were strongly supported  in all analyses. the monophyly of sastragala was estimated as most likely but this was not robust . the monophyly of acanthosoma and lindbergicoris was not recovered due to a robust sister relationship between a. expansum and l. similis . the latter two species never formed a monophyletic group with the rest of acanthosoma and lindbergicoris, respectively. the monophyly of lindbergicoris containing l. gramineus and l. hochii was recovered . the placements of a. laevicorne and a clade of the sister species a. rufescens + a. sichuanense are still inconclusive; the relationships either with the other members of acanthosoma or sastragala were weakly supported. a clade consisting of acanthosoma  and sastragala is strongly supported .fig.  <dig> 
a. phylogenetic tree resulting from bayesian method based on five gene regions . b–d, three acanthosomatine females guarding their egg batches or nymph clusters. a, topologies resulting from bayesian and ml methods are identical. numbers associated with each branch indicate ml bootstrap/bayesian posterior probabilities, values below 50 % marked with asterisk; clades in red indicate presence of maternal care. b, female of elasmucha bovilla guarding her first instar nymphs. c, egg-guarding female of acanthosoma firmatum. d, egg-guarding female of sastragala esakii




the sister relationship between cyphostethus and elasmucha was moderately to strongly supported . the internal branches of elasmucha were well resolved and well supported. several clades can be recognized in this species-rich genus. the sister relationship between elasmostethus and the other acanthosomatine genera is supported by the bayesian method  but is weakly supported by ml bootstrapping . the internal relationship of elasmostethus was fully resolved with strong support.

evolution of maternal care and morphological correlation
from the resulting tree, three independent origins of maternal care in the subfamily acanthosomatinae were estimated as most parsimonious: one in the common ancestor of elasmucha, one in the common ancestor of sastragala, and one in the species acanthosoma firmatum . shimodaira-hasegawa and kishino-hasegawa tests  rejected the monophylgetic origin of the maternal care in the subfamily  . at present a. firmatum , frequently referred to in the literature as a. giganteum matsumura  <cit> , is the only species exhibiting maternal care in the genus acanthosoma  <cit> . similarly, sinopla perpunctatus in the subfamily blaudusinae is also the single representative in its genus in which maternal care is known  <cit> .

to understand the correlation between the behavioral and morphological evolution, the character states of po  was mapped on the best bayesian tree . the correlated evolution analyses  <cit>  demonstrated that the absence of the organ is significantly correlated with the presence of maternal care . in addition, the difference in likelihood between the independent and dependent model was shown by pagel’s test as significantly greater . two characters under any effect factor significantly fit the dependent  model better; the independent model was therefore rejected.fig.  <dig> character evolution of maternal care  and pendergrast’s organ  using parsimony based on the topology as shown in fig. 1a. left cladogram showing four steps under parsimony reconstruction : red clades indicate presence of egg-nymph guarding , white indicate absence, clades with a mixture of two colors indicate equivocal, clade in gray indicates unknown of reproductive behavior. right cladogram showing  <dig> steps under parsimony reconstruction : blue clades indicate presence of pendergrast’s organ , green indicates reduced po, white indicates absence of po, pie charts and values show likelihood reconstruction of nodes of interest, states judged best estimate under the threshold  are marked with an asterisk, letters indicate representative forms of po shown in fig.  <dig>  letters with same color background have the same pattern of po



five patterns of po are shown in fig.  <dig>  which correspond to the character evolution shown in fig.  <dig>  in general, species display two pairs of elliptic pos on sternite vi and vii , or fused into one large area , or closely joint . in the other examples, species exhibit a pair of large pos on sternite vii . two exceptions are found in a. firmatum and s. perpunctatus, in which pos remain but they still exhibit maternal care. however, they frequently have a reduced pair on abdominal sternite vii and have lost one pair on abdominal sternite vi .fig.  <dig> various forms of pendergrast’s organ  located on the abdominal venter of females of  <dig> species of acanthosomatidae. green arrow indicates presence of a well-developed po on abdominal sternites vi and vii, white arrow indicates reduced po. scales in  <dig>  mm, a–b: lateral view, c–l: ventral view. a, planois gayi; b, acrophyma cumingii; c, ditomotarsus punctiventris; d, sinopla perpunctatus; e, elasmostethus kerzhneri; f, lindbergicoris gramineus; g, cyphostethus triastriatus; h, acanthosoma expansum; i, l. hastatus; j, acanthosoma haemorroidale angulatum; k–l, acanthosoma firmatum. species generally display two pairs of elliptic pos on sternites vi and vii , which are occasionally fused into a single large area , or approach each other closely . in other species a single pair of large, rounded po is present on sternite vii . individuals of a. firmatum exhibits a gradual reduction of po: either reduced in size on sternite vii  or lost one pair on sternite vi . s. perpunctatus only has a vestige of po on sternite vii . we provided photo of a closely species, l. hastatus instead of l. similis due to unavailability of females of the latter species



the reconstruction of the ancestral state of pendergrast’s organ  performed by likelihood calculation is given in fig.  <dig>  the best estimates of the proportional likelihoods for nodes containing maternal care species are as follows:  the likelihood for the node of acanthosoma firmatum and a. denticaudum + a. crasssicaudum is  <dig>   and  <dig>  ;  the likelihood for the node of sastragala is  <dig>   and  <dig>  ;  the likelihood for the node of elasmucha is  <dig>   and  <dig>  ;  and for the node of sinopla perpunctatus + s. humeralis and lanopis rugosus + phorbanta variablis, the likelihood is  <dig>  ,  <dig>  , and  <dig>  . the likelihood reconstruction of the ancestral state of maternal care and po was also estimated using the trimmed tree  . the proportional likelihoods for the node for maternal care and its corresponding node for the presence of po within the acanthosomatinae are as follows:  node for the presence of maternal care for sastragala is  <dig>  and its absence is  <dig> ; the node for absence of po is  <dig> , for its presence,  <dig> ;  for a. denticaudum and a. firmatum, the node for the presence of maternal care is  <dig> , and its absence is  <dig> ; the node for the presence of po is  <dig> , and for reduction,  <dig> ;  for elasmucha, the node for the presence of maternal care is  <dig> , and for its absence,  <dig> ; the node for the absence of po is  <dig>  and for its presence,  <dig> .fig.  <dig> likelihood reconstruction of ancestral state of egg-guarding behaviour  and pendergrast’s organ  in  <dig> terminal taxa without missing data. values on the nodes of interest were shown, and indicate proportional likelihood. the states judged best estimate under the threshold  are marked with an asterisk



discussion
multiple origins of maternal care in the acanthosomatidae
statistical tests rejected the possibility of a single origin for maternal egg-nymph guarding  behavior in the acanthosomatidae, but indicated that it has independently evolved at least three times in the subfamily acanthosomatinae  and once in blaudusinae . the multiple and independent origins of maternal care in distantly related lineages suggest that this guarding behavior did not appear as a result of phylogenetic conservatism, but it was probably driven by complex selective factors .

because pendergrast’s organ is homologous with the disc-like organ of lestoniidae, the sister group of acanthosomatidae, it therefore belongs to the ground plan of the clade lestoniidae + acanthosomatidae. it is presumably a ground plan character for acanthosomatidae too  <cit> ; consequently, its loss is derived. ancestral state reconstruction suggests that maternal care has mostly likely acquired in the presence of pendergrast’s organ . moreover, no secondary loss was detected once maternal care had arisen. as maternal care seems to be resistant to loss at least in acanthosomatid bugs, and additionally it is apparently a recent acquisition in certain acanthosomatid lineages , our results do not support the hypothesis of tallamy and schaefer  <cit>  that parental care is a plesiomorphic relic character and is labile, i.e., it has repeatedly appeared and been lost in hemiptera.

correlation between maternal care and secretory organ
as mentioned above, the secretory pendergrast’s organ  is a plesiomorphic feature for the acanthosomatidae, therefore egg smearing is an ancestral behavior  in the family. species showing maternal care either lack or have a reduced, non-functional po. this organ allows the female to perform egg-smearing by coating the eggs with substances that probably have a protective function  <cit> . the correlation analyses convincingly indicated that the presence of maternal care is significantly correlated with the loss or reduction of the po. considering the strong correlation between a morphological and a behavioral trait, maternal care can be expected to occur in other genera of the family, such as agamedes, bebaeus, catadipson, ibocoris, mahea, phorbanta, proctophantasta and uhlunga, all of which invariably lack po . the negative correlation between the egg-nymph guarding and po with egg-smearing behavior suggests an evolutionary trade-off between the two traits, resulting from the high physiological costs of producing and maintaining both behaviors under allocation of limited resources. alternatively, it could be explained by a relaxed selection against redundant traits. once alternative strategy has evolved, selective pressure for maintaining the other strategy should be relaxed. reduction of one of the redundant traits should also be selectively advantageous for efficient allocation of resources.

likelihood reconstruction of the ancestral state of pendergrast’s organ for the ancestral node of acanthosoma firmatum , a. denticaudum and a. crassicaudum  showed a significantly high proportional likelihood for the organ’s presence  . the trimmed tree with all available behavioral data also showed a concordant pattern between the absence of maternal care  and the presence of po  at their ancestral node . this finding indicates that the egg-smearing behavior was still present in the common ancestor of a. firmatum and a. denticaudum. consequently, the maternal care in a. firmatum mostly likely has developed relatively recently and was followed by a subsequent reduction of the po. the case of acanthosoma firmatum, where females display maternal care and po has been reduced to various degrees, might support a predicted phenotypic trade-off between different degrees of maternal care and reduction of pendergrast’s organ among and/or within populations.

a similar scenario presumably occurred in the common ancestor of lanopis , phorbanta  and sinopla . the ancestral state reconstruction showed a significantly high proportional likelihood of reduced po . the prediction suggests that the acquisition of maternal care precedes reduction and the loss of po.

how did the maternal care evolve in acanthosomatids?
the evolution of paternal care in hemipteran lineages has been driven by a complex of factors. it probably originated as a response to pressure from predators and parasitoids , to prevent eggs from desiccation  <cit> , to develop a more elaborate manipulation of tradeoffs between air exchange and desiccation in water bugs , or to represent an adaptation to unstable or ephemeral food resources in cydnid families  <cit> . in treehoppers, maternal care is associated with changes from a solitary to gregarious life history in connection with the acquisition of ant mutualism  <cit> .

in several species of elasmucha , field experiments have demonstrated that eggs and hatched nymphs are subject to intense predation; females effectively guard them against arthropod predators  but not against parasitoids of the nymphs  <cit> . these suggest that the high predation pressure is a primary factor for the acquisition of maternal care in these insects.

in addition to the selection pressure derived from the change in environmental conditions, an ancestral reproductive mode, i.e., deserting eggs after smearing, may also be associated with the emergence of maternal care. both egg smearing and guarding behaviors share an intimate contact between the female and her eggs at the oviposition site. the smearing process itself forces the female to invest extra energy and time on each egg until forming an egg-clutch . such a prolonged stay at the oviposition site could be an exapted condition that promotes the development of maternal care.

why is maternal care not lost once it has evolved in acanthosomatines?
as our results show, maternal care has arisen from a condition with the presence of pendergrast’s organ  and a strong negative correlation was found between the two traits. we presumed that both egg-smearing and egg-guarding have their own selective advantages in acanthosomatid bugs, however, once maternal care has been acquired, the pendergrast’s organ and therefore the egg-smearing will be reduced or lost because of a trade-off relationship resulting of high physiological costs of both traits. the loss of egg-nymph guarding in acanthosomatinae may also likely be inhibited due to a resulting loss of po, a presumably vulnerable condition which lacks any protective substances as well as female attendance. this could be why no secondary loss of the guarding behavior is observed. even when selection favors the reduction and loss of maternal guarding as a result of a decrease in predation pressure, re-evolution of the morphologically complex po may not be possible. consequently, even if resources were constantly available, a potential non-caring reproductive strategy  could not offset offspring mortalities and thus could not enjoy greater reproductive success than that from a caring strategy even under conditions of moderate predation.

in contrast, the apomorphic trait of maternal care has been lost at least once in the treehopper subfamily membracinae due to its drastic life history specialization with the acquisition of ant mutualism  <cit> . ant mutualism is apparently an alternative life history, which increases the survival of offspring more effectively than maternal guarding and consequently resulted in the secondary loss of the latter. however, such a strategy has not been observed in acanthosomatid bugs.

CONCLUSIONS
the family acanthosomatidae is one of the best known members of pentatomoidea, in which females of several taxa display egg-nymph guarding behavior. however, the origin and evolution of maternal care remain unclear due to the lack of a phylogenetic hypothesis. in this study, we proposed a molecular phylogeny of acanthosomatinae for the first time. maternal care has independently evolved at least four times within the lineages of this family. statistical analyses rejected the possibility of a single origin within acanthosomatinae and revealed at least three independent origins among the distantly related lineages. our results revealed that maternal care is an apomorphy , which has arisen in the presence of secretory pendergrast’s organ, where their common ancestor still exhibits a plesiomorphic reproductive trait, i.e., deserting the eggs after smearing. a negative evolutionary correlation suggests a trade-off between the acquisition of maternal care and the reduction or loss of the secretory organ. alternatively, this negative correlation is possibly a consequence of relaxed selection against one of two redundant traits. the presence of maternal care is to be highly expected in other genera that also lack or have a reduced, unfunctional organ. previous studies indicate that the evolution of maternal guarding is driven by high predation pressure. although maternal guarding might be easily lost in a low-risk environment, it seems resistant to such lost in acanthosomatids. we found that no secondary loss of maternal care occur once it has evolved. the maintenance of maternal care in acanthosomatids are likely due to a vulnerable pendergrast’s-organ-free condition. our phylogenetic hypothesis provides a basis for future comparative analyses of the evolution of parental care and other reproductive traits. the multiple origins of maternal care estimated here will enable us to further test general hypotheses about the ecological and life-history conditions favoring care as well as about the evolutionary trends with other reproductive traits, such as egg size.

