BACKGROUND
regeneration is mediated by a variety of cell behaviors depending upon the organism. broadly, the role of cell proliferation in regeneration is generally grouped into two categories: epimorphosis, in which regeneration is mediated by cell proliferation, and morphallaxis, in which regeneration can occur in the absence of cell proliferation. the source of proliferative cells and their differentiation capacity varies among different organisms that display epimorphic regeneration. in planarians, which have become the recent focus of intensive research, regeneration is mediated by neoblasts, pluripotent stem cells which undergo proliferation and subsequent differentiation to replace lost tissues  <cit> . in the classical system of urodele amphibian regeneration, cell proliferation is also involved, but proliferative cells originate though dedifferentiation of cells  <cit> . new tissues in the regenerated portion of the limb appear to be derived from the same tissue types in the limb stump, and thus appear to be lineage restricted following an amplification phase  <cit> . the hydrozoan cnidarian hydra, the best studied exemplar of morphallaxis, can undergo regeneration of oral structures, such as the mouth and tentacles, when cell proliferation is blocked  <cit> , although recent work has shown that normal regeneration in hydra is characterized by increased cell proliferation  <cit> . these examples demonstrate the surprisingly large variation in “regenerative strategies” displayed by different metazoan taxa, and beg the question about the evolution of “stable” cell fates and the molecular basis of cell communication and differentiation.

the anthozoan cnidarian nematostella vectensis has recently emerged as a basally divergent metazoan system for studies of developmental patterning  <cit> . like hydra, nematostella is a member of the diploblastic clade cnidaria, which is a sister group to the bilateria. however, the two species are distantly related, with nematostella being a member of the clade anthozoa, while hydra is in the clade hydrozoa. these two clades diverged  <dig> million years ago, and have likely been evolving independently from one another for longer than have the lineages leading to amphibians and planarians. nematostella has generated interest for the fact that, unlike most other cnidarians, it can be readily spawned in the laboratory, allowing for experimental comparisons of patterning during the developmental events of embryogenesis, asexual reproduction, and regeneration  <cit> .

although a number of functional studies have begun to detail the patterning mechanisms underlying embryogenesis in nematostella , and the genome has been sequenced  <cit> , the process of regeneration has received comparatively little attention. the present study investigates patterns of cell proliferation during the regeneration of oral structures in nematostella, and evaluates their role in the formation of regenerated structures.

RESULTS
morphogenesis during oral regeneration
wound closure is initiated rapidly after bisection of polyps, with the edges of the wound site coming together almost immediately after bisection . shortly after bisection, oriented fibers of the myoepithelial cells present at the wound site end abruptly and unevenly due to severing during amputation . during the initial  <dig> to 36 hours following amputation, relatively few overt changes in morphology are observed, except that the retractor muscle fibers recede from the wound site . within  <dig> to 48 hours after bisection, tentacle buds form as outpocketings of ectoderm and endoderm around the edges of the wound site . this generally consisted of four tentacle buds, distributed evenly around the reforming oral end of the polyp. during this period the reforming pharynx also first becomes distinguishable as a solid mass of cells underlying the future oral opening. by 72 hours post amputation the tentacles have continued their outgrowth, longitudinal muscles have begun to form in the tentacle endoderm, and the bundled retractor muscles in the body column endoderm have reestablished connections with the oral disc . by 96 hours post amputation, repatterning of the oral structures is essentially complete . the tentacles, mouth, pharynx, and musculature have all been reestablished, and the polyps are able to feed. the tentacles may continue to grow for a few days after this point.

cell proliferation in intact polyps
cell proliferation was detected by labeling animals with the thymidine analog 5-ethynyl-2′-deoxyuridine , which is incorporated into genomic dna during s-phase  <cit> . polyps labeled with edu for 30 minutes at two days after feeding with artemia nauplii display extensive edu incorporation in cells throughout the body . in the body column, labeled cells show a fairly even distribution from below the oral ring to the tip of the physa . concentrations of labeling are highest in the pharynx, with  <dig> % ±  <dig> % of cells having edu incorporation . high concentrations of labeling are also observed in the tentacle ectoderm . in the tentacles, labeling is greater in the ectoderm  than in the endoderm , while in the body column levels of labeling in both tissue layers are nearly the same . the one region of the body where edu labeling appears to be absent is at the tips of the tentacles .

animals labeled one week after feeding continue to display cell proliferation though the body , although at lower levels than at two days after amputation . high concentrations of proliferating cells are observed in the oral ring where new tentacles are forming, and at the base of existing elongate tentacles . again, proliferating cells are almost completely absent from the distal tips of elongate tentacles . for all tissues the percentage of edu labeled cells was significantly lower at one week after feeding than at two days after feeding .

by three weeks after feeding, the percentage of proliferating cells in polyps has decreased dramatically . edu labeled cells are nearly absent from the body column ectoderm and endoderm, including the mesenteries . more cell proliferation is observed in the tentacle ectoderm and pharynx, but here also the proportion of proliferating cells is decreased from one week after feeding . for all tissues the percentage of edu labeled cells was significantly lower at three weeks after feeding than at one week after feeding 

cell proliferation during oral regeneration
measurements of cell proliferation during regeneration of oral structures were made with animals bisected through the polyp body column three weeks after their final feeding with artemia nauplii, at which point cell proliferation was nearly absent from the region of the cut. there is slow increase in the percentage of proliferating cells in the ectoderm near the wound site during the first  <dig> to 20 hours immediately following amputation, while there is no increase in the level of proliferation in the endoderm during the first 18 hours after amputation .

by 24 hours after amputation there is a marked increase in the percentage of proliferative cells in both the ectoderm and endoderm close to the wound site . the percentage of proliferating cells in both the ectoderm and endoderm continues to increase rapidly between 24 hours and 48 hours post amputation , reaching a maximum at 48 hours after amputation in the ectoderm , and between 48 hours and 72 hours post amputation in the endoderm . between 24 hours and 36 hours post amputation, proliferative cells are distributed fairly evenly in the tissue near the wound site . by 48 hours post amputation the majority of proliferating cells in the ectoderm are located in the tentacle buds, while the majority of proliferating cells in the endoderm are located in the reforming pharynx . this distribution of proliferating cells is maintained through 120 hours post amputation , when regeneration of oral structures is nearly complete and the percentage of proliferating cells in both the endoderm and ectoderm has decreased from its maximum .

cell proliferation is required for nematostella regeneration
to evaluate the role of cell proliferation in regeneration, treatments were performed with two inhibitors of cell proliferation, hydroxyurea and nocodazole. efficacy of these two compounds in blocking proliferation was initially established by pulse-chase experiments with edu labeling and inhibitor treatment . polyps were bisected three weeks after their final feeding, and incubated with edu for 30 minutes at 18 hours after amputation. following incubation, unincorporated edu was washed out with several exchanges of 1/3x filtered seawater and polyps were maintained in 1/3x filtered seawater with or without inhibitor for 6 hours, until 24 hours post amputation, when they were fixed and visualized. control polyps maintained in 1/3x seawater for 6 hours after incubation with edu showed a significant increase in the percentage of labeled nuclei, as compared with polyps fixed immediately after incubation with edu at 18 hours post amputation  . in contrast, polyps maintained in 20 mm hydroxyurea or  <dig>  μm nocodazole showed a significantly lower percentage of labeled nuclei at 24 hours post amputation, as compared with control polyps at 24 hours post amputation . incubation with edu at the end of incubation with hydroxyurea or nocodazole resulted in no detectable incorporation . these data show that both treatments effectively prevent cell proliferation, as measured by proliferation of labeled cells during treatment and by the incorporation of edu during s-phase.

inhibition of cell proliferation with hydroxyurea and nocodazole was initially conducted with continuous treatment from 18 hours after amputation to 96 hours after amputation. 96 hours after amputation, polyps were fixed and tentacle length was measured. in untreated, control polyps, the average tentacle length 96 hours after amputation was 214 μm ± 34 μm . continuous treatment with 20 μm hydroxyurea resulted in no detectable outgrowth of tentacles at 96 hours after amputation . there was no detectable necrosis, suggesting that the effect was due specifically to inhibition of cell proliferation, and not more generally toxicity. likewise, treatment with  <dig>  μm nocodazole completely blocked reformation of the tentacles . in the case of the nocodazole treatment, there was no evidence of widespread necrosis, such as sloughing of the ectoderm, but there was folding of the ectoderm and an overall decrease in polyp size , suggesting that an intact microtubule system is needed to retain normal morphological integrity.

to test the importance of cell proliferation during different periods of the regeneration process, amputated polyps were exposed to pulse treatments of hydroxyurea or nocodazole, washed with 1/3x filtered seawater to remove the inhibitor, and incubated until 96 hours after amputation to determine effects on tentacle growth . polyps were also incubated with edu at 96 hours after amputation to test for the perdurance of effects on cell proliferation after pulse treatments with inhibitors and the re-initiation of cell proliferation. pulse treatments were performed over three periods: from  <dig> to 18 hours after amputation, when levels of cell proliferation are similar to those before amputation; from  <dig> to 30 hours after amputation, when there is a dramatic increase in the levels of proliferating cells; and from  <dig> to 42 hours after amputation, when the tentacle buds begin to form.

treatment with hydroxyurea during all three periods produced similar results, with no statistical difference in tentacle lengths between treatments . in each case the tentacle length at 96 hours after amputation was approximately half that of untreated polyps the same time after amputation . all three treatments also showed similar levels of cell proliferation, primarily in the tentacles, oral disc, and pharynx . in contrast, in nocodazole treatments tentacle regeneration was only observed in treatments from  <dig> to 18 hours after amputation . in both later treatments, from  <dig> to 30 hours after amputation and  <dig> to 42 hours after amputation, no tentacle growth was observed by 96 hours .

in polyps treated with nocodazole from  <dig> to 18 hours after amputation, the number of proliferating cells at 96 hours after amputation was comparable to that in all three pulse treatments with hydroxyurea . in the later treatments, from  <dig> to 30 hours and  <dig> to 42 hours, proliferating cells were observed at 96 hours, but the number was greatly reduced . no regeneration of oral structures was observed in these later nocodazole treated polyps after several weeks in 1/3x seawater .

regeneration can be reinitiated in drug treated animals following secondary amputation
secondary amputations were performed on nocodazole treated polyps, which do not normally undergo regeneration, to test the ability of a new wound healing event to reinitiate cell proliferation and regeneration . 24 hours after the initial bisections, aboral fragments were bisected again. this procedure was performed both on polyps that had been maintained in 1/3x seawater, as well as those that had been incubated in nocodazole from  <dig> to 24 hours after the initial amputation.

polyps incubated with edu at 24 hours after amputation showed levels of cell proliferation comparable with those observed in other experiments, described above . however, when polyps were incubated with edu following nocodazole treatment from  <dig> to 24 hours after amputation, no detectable cell proliferation was observed . 96 hours after amputation, untreated polyps displayed regeneration of the tentacles , while nocodazole treated polyps showed no outgrowth of tentacles .

untreated polyps which were bisected a second time showed high levels of cell proliferation at the wound site 24 hours after the second amputation . polyps bisected a second time following incubation with nocodazole showed comparable levels of cell proliferation 24 hours after the second bisection . both control and nocodazole treated polyps underwent regeneration after the second amputation, with similar tentacle lengths achieved 96 hours after the second amputation .

discussion
nematostella polyps demonstrate the ability to undergo rapid regeneration of oral structures, including the tentacles, mouth, and pharynx after amputation. initial wound closure is very rapid, beginning almost immediately after bisection of the animal. the finding that muscle fibers recede from the wound site shortly after amputation is consistent with observations of regeneration made in myosin heavy chain <dig> transgenic polyps by renfer et al.  <cit> . following initial wound closure, relatively little morphological change is seen until the tentacle buds begin to emerge, two to three days later. following this, the tentacles grow progressively and the mouth and pharynx are reformed.

cell proliferation in intact polyps
cell proliferation occurs throughout the polyp, including in the mouth, oral disc, tentacles and physa. the one part of the polyp which appears to be relatively free of proliferating cell is the tentacle tips, which are densely packed with fully differentiated cnidocytes  <cit> . these results suggest that growth occurs throughout the polyp, rather than at a localized growth zone. this distribution of proliferating cells throughout the polyp is comparable to previous results from another anemone, aiptasia, where tritiated thymidine uptake was observed along the length of the oral-aboral axis, including in the tentacles  <cit> . as in nematostella, cell proliferation in aiptasia was found to be highest in the tentacles and the oral disc. singer  <cit>  reported relatively little labeling with tritiated thymidine in the endoderm of aiptasia as compared with the ectoderm. whether this represents a distinct difference in rates of proliferation in the two tissue layers, or is due to a technical limitation of the experiments, is uncertain. although levels of edu incorporation in nematostella were greater in the ectoderm than in the endoderm of the tentacles, levels of incorporation were nearly equivalent in the body column ectoderm and endoderm . cell proliferation in tentacles has also been observed in the scyphozoan aurelia during metamorphosis of the planula into the primary polyp  <cit> . this is in contrast with studies of hydra, where cell proliferation is localized to the body column, and is notably absent from the tentacles, as well as the pedal disc. likewise, an absence of proliferating cells in the tentacles has also been observed in other hydrozoans, including in the polyps of hydractinia <cit> , tubularia <cit> , and podocoryne <cit> , and in the hydromedusae of clytia <cit>  and podcoryne <cit> .

localized cell proliferation in the body column, and absence from the tentacles, appears to be a common feature within hydrozoans, and may be the ancestral state for the hydrozoa. our finding of cell proliferation within the tentacles and physa of nematostella, along with previous work in aiptasia <cit> , demonstrates that growth in actinarian anthozoans occurs locally throughout the body, rather than through the movement of cells from the body column to the extremities, as is the case in hydrozoans. additional taxonomic sampling will be necessary to determine the ancestral state for polyp growth in the cnidaria in general.

cell proliferation during regeneration of oral structures
we have found that in nematostella polyps there is a slow increase in the percentage of proliferating ectodermal cells during the initial 20 hours following amputation of the oral structures. during the period from  <dig> to 24 hours after amputation there is a rapid increase in the percentage of proliferating cells in the ectoderm close to the wound site. this increase in the percentage of proliferating cells reaches a maximum around 48 hours after amputation, and slowly decreases thereafter, as the tentacles, mouth, and pharynx are reformed. in the endoderm, cell proliferation remains at a low level until 16 hours after amputation, and then undergoes a steady increase until at least 48 hours after amputation, before gradually decreasing during the latter morphogenetic period of regeneration. therefore, the greatest increase in the levels of cell proliferation occur in the period after wound healing and before or during the early stages of oral structure morphogenesis. in aiptasia, levels of proliferation during regeneration were likewise reported to increase dramatically after the initial period of wound healing  <cit> . interestingly, in aiptasia proliferation was reported to be localized primarily to the ectoderm, with only minimal proliferation observed in the endoderm  <cit> . in nematostella, the overall trend in levels of cell proliferation during regeneration is comparable between the ectoderm and endoderm, although a higher maximum level of proliferation is reached in the ectoderm.

cell proliferation is required for regeneration of oral structures
pulse-chase experiments with edu labeling and inhibitor treatment demonstrated that both hydroxyurea and nocodazole were effective in inhibiting cell proliferation, and both compounds were utilized to evaluate the role of cell proliferation during regeneration of the oral structures. extended incubations from  <dig> to 96 hours after amputation with either hydroxyurea or nocodazole resulted in no regeneration of the tentacles, mouth, or pharynx, evidencing the requirement of cell proliferation for regeneration of each of these structures. pulse-chase experiments with inhibitors demonstrated that cell proliferation through the initial 42 hours after amputation appears to contribute to regeneration. with hydroxyurea, comparable reductions in tentacle length at 96 hours after amputation were observed following treatments from  <dig> to 18 hours after amputation, the period of wound healing, from  <dig> to 30 hours after amputation, the period of increased proliferation, and from  <dig> to 42 hours after amputation, the period of initial tentacle bud formation. in each case, the effects of hydroxyurea were reversible, with cell proliferation and regeneration proceeding after removal of the inhibitor. while nocodazole treatment from  <dig> to 18 hours after amputation likewise reduced tentacle length, treatments from  <dig> to 30 hours after amputation or from  <dig> to 42 hours after amputation permanently blocked the progression of regeneration. these results suggest that cell proliferation during the initial wound healing stage contributes to, but is not required for, the progression of regeneration. however, the increased levels of cell proliferation which are observed later are essential for the progression of regeneration. it is uncertain whether the differences in the effects of these two inhibitors may be attributable to their mechanisms of action. hydroxyurea, which blocks dna synthesis, has been shown to be reversible in cell culture following removal of the inhibitor  <cit> . nocodazole, which blocks mitosis by binding tubulin and preventing microtubule polymerization, has been shown to be reversible in vitro and in cell cultures  <cit> . however, our results suggest that it permanently blocks proliferation in nematostella under the conditions used. the relative absence of edu incorporation following nocodazole treatment suggests that cells at the wound site may undergo multiple rounds of proliferation, which are blocked by exposure to the inhibitor. experiments conducted during the study to address this question were equivocal . future investigations will be required to determine the precise fate of proliferating cells over the course of regeneration.

we were able to overcome the inhibition of regeneration by nocodazole though secondary amputation. polyps that were re-amputated following exposure to nocodazole initiated cell proliferation at the new wound site and grew tentacles at rates comparable to polyps in control treatments. these results suggest that initiation of cell proliferation and regeneration may be a localized event linked to wound closure and healing. it appears likely that a distinct population of cells at the secondary wound site were unaffected by the nocodazole treatment and begin to proliferate once stimulated by the secondary amputation. the nature of these cells, whether they are stem cells or dedifferentiated cells that have reentered the cell cycle, remains to be determined. one factor that may be mediating the response to amputation is the canonical wnt/ß-catenin pathway, as treatments with alsterpaullone, which prevents degradation of cytosolic ß-catenin, have been shown to bias nematostella regeneration towards oral fates  <cit> .

the role of cell proliferation in nematostella appears to be distinct from that in the hydrozoan cnidarian hydra. regeneration in hydra has classically been described as morphallactic, based upon numerous studies have demonstrated the ability of hydra to undergo reformation of oral structures in the absence of cell proliferation  <cit> . however, in unperturbed animals increased cell proliferation at the wound site has been shown to characterize regeneration response both shortly after amputation in response to wnt <dig> signaling from apoptotic cells  <cit> , and in association with neurogenesis  <dig> to  <dig> after amputation, prior to the emergence of the tentacle buds  <cit> . although regeneration of oral structures can proceed in hydra in the absence of cell proliferation, a number of abnormalities, including changes in the number of tentacles formed, have been observed in polyps where cell proliferation has been inhibited to produce polyps lacking nerve cells  <cit> . in nematostella we have found an absence of any morphallactic response, with cell proliferation being absolutely required for the regeneration of oral structures, including the tentacles, mouth, and pharynx, in the experiments performed. a role for cell proliferation in regeneration has also been suggested in the scyphozoan aurelia, where hydroxyurea treatment inhibits the reformation of polyps from isolated tentacle fragments  <cit> . these results suggest that cell proliferation may be a common feature of oral regeneration in the cnidaria in general, with hydra having acquired the ability to undergo regeneration through a compensatory morphallactic mode.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study demonstrate that increased cell proliferation occurs during the regeneration of oral structures in nematostella, and is necessary for regeneration to proceed. this epimorphic mode of regeneration differs from the morphallactic regeneration potential in hydra, which can proceed without the contribution of cell proliferation. future studies will be needed to determine the origin and character of the proliferative cells that participate in nematostella regeneration.

