BACKGROUND
dna methylation in mammals occurs predominantly at cpg dinucleotides  <cit> . early studies indicated that in normal cells, most cpgs in repeats, retroviral sequences, and within the coding region of genes are methylated, whereas most cpg island  regions are maintained in an unmethylated state  <cit> . after fertilization there is a period of genome-wide demethylation followed by periods of remethylation in somatic cells after implantation. demethylation and reprogramming is also necessary in the germ cells to reset gamete-specific imprinting  <cit> . there is a long history and generally inverse correlation between gene promoter dna methylation and gene expression  <cit> . early studies proposed that regulated methylation and demethylation has a role regulating gene expression during development  <cit> .

the critical function of dna methylation during development is also apparent from the consequence of targeted knockouts of dna methyltransferase genes. the knockout of dnmt <dig>  which has a strong preference for hemimethylated dna and is thus considered to be a maintenance dna methyltransferase, is lethal during development  <cit> . dnmt3a and dnmt3b are required for de novo methylation during development  <cit> . the persistent expression of both dnmt 3a and dnmt 3b after gastrulation and implantation suggests that de novo methylation occurs during later stages of development.

restriction landmark genomic scanning  detected differences in dna methylation between tissues more than  <dig> years ago  <cit> . these studies, as well as more recent reports using a variety of methods, have markedly altered our concept of differentially methylated regions  in the mammalian genome and the progression of dna methylation changes during development  <cit> . tissue specific differentially methylated regions  include both cpgi and non-cpgi promoter regions as well as intragenic and intergenic regions  <cit> . analysis of t-dmrs using a cpgi array indicated that t-dmrs in cpgi regions are associated with developmental gene loci and many are located in non-promoter regions  <cit> . cpgi amplification in conjunction with microarrays, indicated approximately 4% of dense cpgi promoters are methylated in normal peripheral blood  <cit> . a number of studies have consistently observed that weak or non-cpgi promoters are major targets for tissue specific dna methylation  <cit> .

analysis of dna methylation changes during development in vitro and in vivo are more limited but indicate that dna methylation is a dynamic process involving both methylation and demethylation  <cit> . in vivo analysis of methylation changes within a tissue at different developmental stages is complicated by changes in cell populations  <cit> . in vitro analysis of dna methylation during differentiation of es cells or progenitor cells is complicated by potential aberrant methylation due to growth of cells in tissue culture  <cit> .

our previous results identified a limited number of t-dmrs using rlgs, suggesting that methylation changes during development are dynamic and involve both methylation and demethylation  <cit> . the results reported here investigate this with a more comprehensive set of t-dmrs and developmental stage specific differentially methylated dna regions  identified through methylated dna immunoprecipitation   <cit> .

RESULTS
medip methylation analysis
the medip methylation analysis developed by weber et al  <cit>  was utilized to identify genomic sites of differential dna methylation in selected  <dig> wk adult c57bl/6j mouse tissues  and in tissues at different developmental stages . methylated dna was immunoprecipitated with antibody to 5-methyl-cytidine, the input and immunoprecipitated  dna were differentially labeled and hybridized to a nimblegen promoter plus cpgi array according to a protocol provided by nimblegen. the nimblegen array covers all ucsc-annotated cpgi  as well as promoters for all refseq genes . repetitive regions are excluded from the array. non-cpgi intragenic and intergenic regions are not covered by the array except in some limited regions in which the array is essentially a tiling array .

assessment of the medip data quality and validation of medip methylation peaks
a number of methods were used to validate the quality of the medip methylation data. these include scatter plots of log  <dig> ratios between ip dna and input dna, analysis of pearson coefficients between biological replicate samples, comparison of medip methylation with previously identified rlgs t-dmrs, medip analysis of other known methylation sites, such as imprinted genes, and analysis of both selected and randomly chosen medip methylated regions by sequenom massarray quantitative methylation analysis of bisulfite treated dna. an example of a selected region analyzed by sequenom massarray is shown in figure  <dig>  the results indicate a close similarity between medip and sequenom massarray methylation analysis. additional details of sequenom massarray methylation analysis and other validation methods are presented in the methods section and additional files.

identification of genomic sites of dna methylation in adult tissues 
the ip and input dna from  <dig> wk adult c57bl/6j mouse tissues  were hybridized to a nimblegen promoter plus cpgi array. t-dmrs are genomic regions that are methylated in one or more of the four adult tissues, but unmethylated in at least one tissue. for the identification of t-dmrs, the log <dig> ratios of all probes for each sample were normalized and used to identify methylation peaks as described in the methods. to facilitate the analysis of medip data, an ad hoc bioinformatics tool was developed to process the methylation peak lists for individual samples and identify genomic regions that are 1) commonly methylated in all tissues; 2) methylated in a single tissue; and 3) methylated in some but not all tissues. only those methylation peak regions that were present in both biological replicate samples and were absent from at least one other tissue were designated as t-dmrs. thus, the frequency of t-dmrs may be underestimated. t-dmr locations were designated as 1) cpgi promoter; 2) intragenic cpgi; 3) intergenic cpgi; and 4) non-cpgi promoter .

summaries of the number and distributions of the adult t-dmrs are shown in table  <dig>  overall, there are almost  <dig>  adult t-dmrs that are present in one or more of the examined adult tissues but are absent in one or more tissues, whereas there are only  <dig> methylated regions that are common to all four tissues. there are a relatively high number of t-dmrs unique to testis  and a relatively low number unique to brain . most of the t-dmrs  are located within non-cpgi promoter regions, but  <dig> % are within cpgi regions, among which  <dig> % are within cpgi promoter regions and 17% are in non-promoter cpgi regions . within the different tissues there are some notable differences. for example, approximately 94% of the testis-specific t-dmrs are in non-cpgi promoter regions, whereas each of the three somatic tissues is no more than 60%. t-dmrs that are present in brain, heart, and liver, but not testis, would include somatic methylation sites. the majority of these  are in cpgi regions .

the number and distribution of t-dmrs in es cells
es cells are derived from the inner cell mass of the early blastocyst that gives rise to the embryo. following fertilization, the embryonic cells undergo a period of demethylation and make up/form the inner cell mass. remethylation of somatic tissues is thought to resume following implantation  <cit> . thus, we compared the methylation status of t-dmrs in e <dig> tissues with es cells . overall, there are fewer t-dmrs  from the comparison of es cell and e <dig> tissues than t-dmrs in adult tissues . we found more unique methylation peaks in es cells  than in e <dig> tissues of brain , heart , liver , or testis . this indicates that there are many sites that are methylated in es cells but are unmethylated in e <dig> tissues with most  located in non-cpgi promoter regions.

t-dmrs in regions outside cpgi regions and promoters
the nimblegen promoter + cpgi array contains a tiling array that covers about  <dig>  mb of the mouse genome. this includes the hoxa gene cluster on chromosome  <dig> , the igf2r imprinted region on chromosome  <dig>  and imprinted regions on chromosome  <dig> . in these regions it is possible to identify tissue specific methylation peaks that are not associated with cpgi regions or promoters. for example, in the kvdmr region on chromosome  <dig> , there are non-cpgi and non-promoter methylation peaks in testis and brain that are not present in liver in addition to t-dmrs in cpgi regions. the results shown in additional file 3a indicate that there is similar distribution of t-dmrs in the tiling regions in cpgi and non-cpgi promoter regions as in the rest of the array-covered genome. however, there are additional methylation peaks within the tiling regions  in non-cpgi intragenic regions  and in non-cpgi intergenic regions . these results indicate that almost 30% of the t-dmrs may be missed by restricting analysis to cpgi and promoter regions.

developmental stage-specific differentially methylated regions 
we used medip to determine the number and location of methylated sites at the different developmental stages within each tissue . ds-dmrs are genomic regions that are methylated at one or more developmental stage of a tissue, but unmethylated in at least one stage. it should be noted that ds-dmrs are selected as stage-specific differentially methylated regions within a tissue without regard to presence or absence in another tissue. this analysis provides a basis for determining changes in developmental stage specific methylation that occur within a tissue. these changes may reflect active or passive changes in dna methylation as well as changes in the proportion of specific cell populations. the pearson coefficients between the duplicate biological replicates varied somewhat from sample to sample . therefore the total number of methylation peaks would be somewhat underestimated in samples with low relative to those with high pearson coefficients. we adjusted the total number of methylation peaks as if the pearson coefficients for all stages were the same as the best one in that tissue . although the total number of peaks increases for the samples with lower coefficients, the overall trends are comparable , indicating that our underestimation of methylation peaks does not have a significant impact on the distribution of methylation peaks into different genomic regions.

%1: percentage is based on the row total vs. total dmrs; %2: percentage is based on the total of dmrs in the row; total*: stage specific; unme-ad**: unmethylated in ad but methylated in e <dig> and/or nb; me-ad***: methylated in adult but unmethylated in e <dig> and/or nb; adjusted#: number of dmrs adjusted based on the adjusted coefficiency between the duplicated samples.

there were considerably more methylation sites that were common within a tissue at the different developmental stages than between different adult tissues . brain, heart, and liver each had  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  common methylation sites, respectively, whereas testis had  <dig> . similar to the common sites for the adult tissues, about 50% of developmental stage common sites are in cpgi regions  and about 50% are in non-cpgi promoter regions . somewhat surprising is the relatively high number of sites in liver  that are methylated in e <dig> + nb but unmethylated in adult . together, in somatic tissues , there were almost  <dig>  sites of methylation that exhibit stage specific differences. testis alone had  <dig>  sites of stage specific methylated regions, most of which were methylated in adult and localized to non-cpgi promoters. again, as for the adult tissues, the most frequent location for differential methylation was within non-cpgi promoter regions , followed by cpgi promoter regions , intragenic cpgi regions , and intergenic cpgi regions . in contrast to other tissues, the location of testis stage specific ds-dmrs appear to shift from a high proportion of cpgi location at early developmental stages  to a high proportion of non-cpgi promoter location in adult .

many ds-dmrs are unmethylated in adult
we grouped the ds-dmrs within a tissue according to whether they were unmethylated in adult  but methylated at earlier developmental stages . these would represent sites of demethylation during development. conversely sites that were methylated in adult  but unmethylated at earlier developmental stages would be sites that were methylated during development. surprisingly, there were more sites that became unmethylated  than became methylated  during development . adjustment for differences in the pearson coefficient  does not significantly alter this general conclusion. among the different tissues, there seem to be some significant differences with regard to the ratio of dmrs subjected to methylation and demethylation. in testis, there are an almost equal number of sites that become unmethylated  or methylated  in adult. however, in brain and liver there are a much larger number of sites undergoing demethylation in adult than that of methylation whereas in heart, there are a smaller number of sites undergoing demethylation than methylation. these results indicate dynamic changes in dna methylation during development and that epigenetic changes resulting in unmethylated ds-dmrs are a major feature of differentiation into adult tissues.

overlap between ds-dmrs in different tissues
the ds-dmrs indicate differential stage-specific sites of methylation within a tissue without regard to whether it is tissue specific. to determine how many of the ds-dmrs are tissue specific, we determined the extent of overlapping ds-dmr  between tissues . the results indicate for all four tissues together, the majority  of the  <dig>  ds-dmrs are unique to a single tissue whereas the remaining  <dig>  ds-dmrs are present in two or more but not all tissues, and thus are also tissue-specific. together, it indicates that all of the  <dig>  ds-dmrs are also t-dmrs. if testis is excluded, there are  <dig>  out of  <dig>  ds-dmrs that are unique to a single tissue and  <dig> peaks being present from one or more but not all tissues . in this case, we did find a small number of peaks  that are common to all three tissues, suggesting that the  <dig> somatic tissues share more commonality among each other than with testis. we also examined the overlap for the  <dig>  dmrs that are common to all stages in a tissue . the majority of these dmrs are also tissue-specific . however, compared to ds-dmrs, the percentage of these dmrs being tissue-unique is much lower, approximately 15% for each of the somatic tissues and only  <dig> % for testis. only a small proportion  are common to all developmental stages and all tissues. overall, since all of the  <dig>  ds-dmrs and  <dig>  of the  <dig>  dmrs common to all developmental stages in a tissue are also t-dmrs, we identified a total of  <dig>  t-dmrs.

#: peak present in  <dig> or more but not all tissues; *: contains redundancy due to overlap; the numbers are larger than those in table  <dig> due to certain peak splitting; **: a non-redundant  list of all sites from the four tissues.

tissue-specific differences in dna methylation within the hoxa gene cluster
homeobox genes have important roles in regulating development  <cit> . one of the tiled regions available on the nimblegen array includes the hoxa gene cluster on chromosome  <dig>  additional file  <dig> shows the scaled log <dig> ratios from the nimblegen signalmap view of an approximately  <dig> kb region that includes the hoxa gene cluster. there are  <dig> adult t-dmrs in this region that were present in both biological replicate dna samples of the involved tissue. even though this region is cpgi rich, none of the peaks were within cpgi regions and only one was localized in a promoter region . the other methylation peaks were within introns  or associated with the 3' end  of the gene . four of the peaks  were testis specific, one  was heart specific, one  was present in heart and liver, and one  was in heart and brain. all sequences corresponding to these peaks were highly conserved, suggesting a regulatory function. analysis of methylation differences within the hoxa gene cluster during development  indicates that two additional ds-dmrs not seen as t-dmrs for adult tissues were observed when samples from all three developmental stages were examined . one of these is specific to nb liver  and the other is a large region  methylated in e <dig> and nb of liver and testis and in ad heart, and demethylated in adult liver and testis. overall, our results indicate extensive tissue and developmental stage specific methylation in the hoxa gene cluster that is not associated with promoter or cpgi regions.

dna methylation within the protocadherin gene cluster
protocadherins are a large gene family involved in cell adhesion and signaling, particularly during neural development. there are three large clusters totaling more than  <dig> genes  that span about  <dig> mb on chromosome  <dig> in the mouse. additional file  <dig> shows the medip methylation profile from a portion of the pcdha and pchdhg gene clusters. many of the alternative promoters are associated with cpg islands. most of the alternative promoters are completely unmethylated in the adult testis, but some are differentially methylated in the liver . note that the promoter for pcdhga <dig>  is methylated in the testis but unmethylated in liver, brain, and heart. these results indicate that alternative promoters within the protocadherin gene cluster are targets for dna methylation.

relationship between t-dmrs/ds-dmrs and gene expression
to test whether the t-dmrs and ds-dmrs have any relationship with and the expression of their associated genes, we identified  and analyzed two published expression data sets, which have the best match to the samples we used in this study with regard to animal strain, tissue type and developmental stage.

for t-dmrs, we used gse <dig>  <cit>  designed for the analysis of  <dig> different tissues from adult c57bl/ <dig> mice, and we performed a small-scale manual examination, as well as computational analysis for all t-dmrs. manual examination of individual genes revealed a variety of situations, with no obvious consistent pattern, likely due to reasons discussed later. nevertheless, the data from the analysis of all t-dmrs seems to reveal two general trends: 1) genes containing t-dmrs in non-cpgi promoters tend to have lower expression in the tissue to which the t-dmrs are unique than in other three tissues ; 2) within the same tissue, genes containing t-dmrs in non-cpgi promoters have lower expression than those containing t-dmrs in either in cpgi promoters or in intragenic cpgi and those containing no t-dmrs . the first trend is well shown in brain and liver, but less consistent in heart and brain, while the second trend is consistently observed in all four tissues. t-dmrs in cpgi promoters do not seem to associate with a significantly lower expression except for those from liver, while t-dmrs in intra-genic cpgi do not seem to have a significant impact on gene expression either way in any tissue examined. the trend for ds-dmrs, based on analysis of a liver development expression data set , seems to be less clear except for adult unique ds-dmr, which are mostly t-dmrs as described earlier and show a similar pattern as t-dmrs , suggesting that there might be some differences between t-dmrs and ds-dmrs in the ways they impact gene expression.

discussion
total number of t-dmrs and ds-dmrs
medip methylation analysis in conjunction with nimblegen promoter + cpgi microarrays were used to identify adult tissue specific differentially methylated regions  and developmental stage specific dmrs . we used relatively conservative criteria to identify methylation peaks requiring both independently derived biological replicates to contain the same or overlapping methylation peaks. other investigators have indicated that medip may miss differentially methylated regions in regions of low cpg density  <cit> . thus we may underestimate the total number of t-dmrs and ds-dmrs to some extent. nevertheless, our study identified almost  <dig>  adult t-dmrs and  <dig>  ds-dmrs that represent a total of over  <dig>  t-dmrs in four adult tissues . since tissues are made up of many cell types and it is likely that there are cell type specific epigenetic differences, the methylation peaks we identified probably correspond to the major cell types in the tissue, while many methylation peaks corresponding to minor cell types would be missed. considering that we only sampled  <dig> tissues and  <dig> developmental stages , and that the analysis does not include methylation peaks in regions outside promoter and cpgi regions , it is quite likely that there are many additional t-dmrs and ds-dmrs that were not identified in this study. these results demonstrate that there are numerous dna methylation differences between adult tissues  and within the same tissue at different stages of development , indicating that alterations in dna methylation are a major feature of development.

genomic locations of t-dmrs and ds-dmrs
overall most t-dmrs and ds-dmrs  are located within non-cpgi promoter regions , which is consistent with results of other studies  <cit> . however, we also found that about 30% of t-dmrs  and ds-dmrs  are located in cpgi regions . this corresponds to more than 15% of the  <dig>  cpgi regions on the nimblegen array and is a relatively large number considering the limited number of tissues and developmental stages surveyed and other factors cited above. in fact, among the  <dig>  cpgi regions annotated in ucsc mm <dig> freeze, a total of  <dig>   were partially or entirely methylated in one or more of the  <dig> samples analyzed in this study . thus, tissue- and developmental stage-specific cpgi methylation may be a very common event during development.

analysis of methylation in the few tiling regions available on the nimblegen array made it possible to determine whether there was significant tissue specific methylation outside of promoter and cpg island regions. our results indicate that as much as 30% of the t-dmrs are missed by restricting analysis to promoter and cpgi regions .

the location of methylation peaks differs according to tissue distribution. about 50% of the adult common methylation sites are within cpgi regions whereas only 30% of the t-dmrs are located within cpgi regions . similarly, about 48% of the methylation peaks that are common among all developmental stages within a tissue are located in cpgi regions . the significance of this difference between common methylation and differential methylation is not presently clear. possibly this reflects a difference between transient changes in methylation that are tissue specific and more stable changes in methylation that are common to tissues.

the distribution of the location of t-dmrs and ds-dmrs in testis is dramatically different from somatic tissues. almost 94% of the adult testis t-dmrs are associated with non-cpgi promoter regions . about 68% of the testis ds-dmrs are associated with non-cpgi promoter regions, which represents an average of e <dig>  nb, and ad developmental stages. unlike somatic tissues there appears to be a clear pattern shift in the distribution of testis ds-dmrs during development. in e <dig> testis only about 37% of the ds-dmrs are located in non-cpgi promoters whereas the percentage increases in nb  and ad . this may reflect post-natal onset of meiosis and other developmental changes. this general bias of dmrs towards non-cpgi promoter vs. cpgi promoter is significant since the majority  of  <dig>  promoters  are cpgi promoters .

t-dmrs correspond to sites of methylation that vary between tissues, whereas ds-dmrs correspond to sites of methylation within a single tissue that differ according to developmental stage. we determined the extent of overlap between ds-dmrs from different tissues by combining all ds-dmrs for the same tissue and excluding common methylation sites within a tissue . we reasoned that the degree of overlap of ds-dmrs among tissues would shed light on the level of tissue specificity of dna methylation during development. we found a very low level of overlap among different tissues , indicating that most ds-dmrs are tissue-unique and tissue-specific . even for dmrs that are shared among all three developmental stages in a tissue , almost 50% are tissue unique and almost all are tissue specific . in addition, a large fraction of the tissue specific ds-dmrs were unique to a single tissue . however, we would expect this percentage to decrease as more tissues are added to the analysis. these results suggest that almost all dna methylation in non-repetitive regions is tissue specific. we have previously shown, using rlgs, that methylation of some genomic regions containing repetitive sequences is also tissue-specific  <cit> .

recent studies  <cit>  identified  <dig>  t-dmrs in four human adult tissues  using a method termed "comprehensive high-throughput arrays for relative methylation" or charm. although the methods, species and tissues used for this analysis were different from those presented here, the total number of t-dmrs is surprisingly similar , emphasizing extensive tissue specific dna differences in dna methylation. however, the charm analysis of human tissues found that 76% of the t-dmrs were located within  <dig> kb of cpgi regions that were denoted cpgi shores. the array design used in our study limits analysis to promoter, cpgi regions, and very limited tiled genomic regions and would appear to exclude most cpgi shores. however, we reason that many cpgi shores may be within the promoter regions in our studies. for both the promoter and tiling regions, we observed a slightly higher density of ds-dmrs in cpgi shores than in cpgi regions . since at the genome scale, the cpgi shore region is much larger  than the cpgi region, we can expect to have a larger number of ds-dmrs in the cpgi shores than in the cpgi, supporting the conclusion of irizarry et al  <cit>  in principle that there are more t-dmrs in cpgi shores.

gene ontology of t-dmrs and ds-dmrs
gene ontology  analysis was performed to identify any common theme among the identified t-dmrs. in this analysis, we divided all dmrs associated with genes into three groups , since as noted by others  <cit> , methylation in different gene locations may impact the gene expression regulation differently. we found more or less similar enrichment categories for different tissues, especially among somatic tissues. for both t-dmrs and ds-dmrs, the most consistent go enrichment pattern is seen among those in non-cpgi promoters  with enrichment for "membrane proteins, g-proteins, olfactory proteins" among unme-ad  and "extracellular space/region" for both t-dmrs and ds-dmrs . apparently, these enrichment patterns reflect a pattern that is observed for all genes with non-cpgi promoters . additional go enrichment was observed for somatic ds-dmrs in intragenic cpgi regions on "regulation of biological and cellular processes, ion-binding and transport". this data supports the notion that intra-genic cpgi methylation tends to promote the expression of the involved gene  <cit> , and may participate in gene regulation during differentiation and development.

"demethylation" of previously methylated sites  is a common feature of tissue differentiation
quite surprisingly, our studies indicate that many ds-dmrs that are methylated at early stages of development  are unmethylated in adult tissues . this is particularly evident in brain and liver where there are almost  <dig> times as many ds-dmrs that become "unmethylated" in adult as become "methylated" in adult. this is somewhat contrary to expectations that differentiation into adult tissues would reflect promoter methylation and silencing of genes not associated with the final gene expression pattern. in contrast, it suggests that the final gene expression pattern depends on extensive demethylation events during differentiation. although methylation of gene promoter regions is associated with gene repression, gene body methylation is associated with gene expression  <cit> . in addition, recent reports indicate that there are extensive allelic differences in gene expression in human that result from allelic differences in methylation, due to imprinting or dna sequence variation  <cit> . thus, demethylation of previously methylated sites could reflect either increased or decreased gene expression, depending on site location. our observations that demethylation is a common feature of tissue differentiation are consistent with the recent report that liver development in human is characterized predominantly by demethylation  <cit> .

methylation of es cells
es cells are pluripotent and are derived from the blastomeres of the early embryo that are thought to be extensively demethylated due to active and passive demethylation that follows fertilization. therefore, we decided to compare the methylation peaks from es cells with those found in e <dig> embryonic tissues  to determine the extent of methylation differences during early stages of tissue differentiation . we found that the number of e <dig> t-dmrs  is less than half of that found in adult , which is consistent with e <dig> tissues being generally less methylated than adult. es cells also had a low level of methylation with  <dig> t-dmrs. however, somewhat surprisingly, es cells had more methylation peaks  than any of the e <dig> tissues. this would suggest that many genomic sites that are methylated in es cells become demethylated during early development. we previously found that many  of the adult t-dmrs identified by rlgs were methylated in es cells, suggesting these were demethylated during tissue differentiation  <cit> . it is also possible that some or many of the sites that are methylated in es cells are due to growth in tissue culture. it has previously been shown that tumor cells grown in tissue culture accumulate excessive aberrant methylation that is unrelated to tumorigenesis  <cit> . also, growth of mouse neural progenitor cells in culture after extended passages results in aberrant methylation  <cit>  and investigators found extensive differences in the genomic methylation patterns of independently isolated human es cell lines  <cit> . at the present time, it is unclear whether sites of methylation in es cells is aberrant due to extended growth in culture or whether demethylation during early differentiation in es cells is an important process as in later stages of tissue differentiation noted above.

methylation analysis of stem cells revealed extensive cytosine methylation in a non-cpg context  <cit>  that was mainly located within gene bodies  <cit> . the non-cpg methylation appears to be mostly confined to stem cells and disappears upon differentiation. our analysis of mouse es cells indicated a very low level of intragenic cpgi methylation. this suggests that most of the non-cpg gene body methylation was in non-cpgi intragenic regions that were not on the nimblegen array or that our analysis did not resolve non-cpg methylation.

non-promoter and non-cpgi methylation in the hoxa gene cluster
a  <dig> kb region on chromosome  <dig> that includes the hoxa gene cluster is essentially a tiling array on the nimblegen promoter plus cpgi array. this region includes  <dig> refseq genes and  <dig> ucsc-annotated cpgi regions . somewhat surprisingly all  <dig> methylation peaks were in non-cpgi regions and only one was in a promoter region . in addition, developmental analysis of hoxa gene methylation indicated stage-specific methylation differences . these differentially methylated regions include 3' exons and intron regions. since these regions are highly conserved and hox genes are known to have important roles in development  <cit> , these results suggest that methylation in non-promoter, non-cpgi regions may have novel, currently undefined roles in regulating development. a recent report also indicates differential development-associated methylation within hox gene clusters in human  <cit> .

dna methylation and alternative promoter use
interrogation of the medip/nimblegen array data suggests that dna methylation may be associated with alternative promoter use. analysis of methylation within the protocadherin gene clusters on chromosome  <dig> indicates extensive methylation within cpgi promoter and non-cpgi promoter regions, particularly within somatic tissues . some differential tissue specific methylation in this region is also noted. pcdha mrnas are synthesized by the activation of one of the alternative promoters on only one of the two chromosomes resulting in monoallelic expression  <cit> . although the mechanistic basis for this selection is unknown, it is hypothesized that it provides a foundation for neuron adhesive diversity that is required for complex synaptic interactions  <cit> . recent genome-wide methylation analysis using charm  <cit>  also indicates an association between tissue specific dna methylation and alternative transcripts. that study indicated that most tissue specific differentially methylated regions were located in cpgi shores and that 68% of the shores were within  <dig> bp of alternative promoter sites.

the impact of t-dmrs and ds-dmrs on gene expression
to understand the biological function of t-dmrs and ds-dmrs, one obvious approach is to examine their impact on gene expression. efforts to address this question at a genome scale is complicated by several factors that can obscure correlations.

first, one gene may be subjected to dna methylation in multiple regions with the t-dmr or ds-dmr in question being just one of those. therefore, the level of gene expression may depend on methylation status in other regions of the gene. second, existence of multiple splicing isoforms, particularly those associated with alternative promoters, as well as the use of multiple expression probes for the same gene makes this one-gene vs. one dmr association analysis very challenging. last but not least, dna methylation is not the only factor affecting the gene expression. in other words, the lack of dna methylation in one of the promoter region does not necessarily confer gene activation, as the expression can be limited by other factors, for instance the lack of the required transcriptional factor. these complications may be responsible for the highly diverse situations we observed between the occurrence of t-dmrs/ds-dmrs and the expression level of their associated genes on a gene-by-gene basis. despite these complications, our preliminary analysis does seem to reveal a few novel insights. first, it appears that t-dmrs are associated with lower gene expression in non-cpgi promoter regions. second, there may be some differences between t-dmrs and ds-dmrs from earlier developmental stages in the manner they impact gene expression. certainly, extensive data analysis using more data sets representing more tissues, as well as experimental validation is needed to confirm these observations.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our results indicate that there are extensive differences in dna methylation between adult tissues and within tissues during development. these results indicate that differential dna methylation is a dynamic process involving both methylation and demethylation events. the prominence of demethylation in adult tissues of genomic regions that are methylated at earlier stages of development was particularly striking. even though proliferative changes in cell populations may underlie many apparent methylation differences during development, the results still indicate that extensive differences in methylation status are associated with development. although the majority of the methylation differences were associated with non-cpgi promoter regions, there were also many methylation differences associated with non-promoter regions that may have novel roles in regulating development.

