BACKGROUND
typically, the shelf life of peach fruit  is short due to its fragility, fast loss of pulp firmness and decay susceptibility. thus, postharvest conservation is based on methods that decrease pathogen inocula, and reduce fruit metabolism  <cit> . cold storage  has been the main method used to increase peach shelf life. however, a wide range of factors, such as cultivar, ripening stage at harvest, temperature and time of storage, contribute to the occurrence of physiological disorders, commonly known as chilling injury, including woolliness or loss of juice, pit darkening and reddening, flesh breakdown and others  <cit> .

in peaches, woolliness occurrence is frequent after long-term cs, even when the fruits are kept at temperatures as low as 0 °c . chilling injuries are complex phenotypes, likely to be controlled by a wide range of genetic, developmental, anatomical and physiological factors  <cit> . exogenous application of ga to peach and nectarine fruits on the tree at the initial stages of pit hardening has been demonstrated to effectively reduce woolliness incidence  <cit> . preharvest hormone application has been demonstrated to reduce chilling injuries a reduced number of cultivars, such as chimarrita and chiripá  <cit> . the responses induced by the hormone that lead to the reduced occurrence of the woolly phenotype remain largely unknown. exogenous ga application in citrus has been demonstrated to induce pleiotropic and previously unreported effects  <cit> .

pectin metabolism is currently considered one important effector of woolliness in peach  <cit> , although the molecular mechanisms involved in its onset remain elusive. reduced accumulation of transcripts from genes related to normal ripening processes, such as those involved in ethylene biosynthesis and signaling, cellular respiration, volatile compounds biosynthesis, endocellular transport, protein folding, lipid turnover, cell wall disassembling and redox system, has been correlated to chilling disorders . the abnormal ripening processes under cold storage are thought to trigger wooliness at the transcriptional level. targeted proteomic approaches have also demonstrated similar behavior of protein and enzyme activity levels  <cit> .

in the current work, we have taken advantage of the ga-responsive genomic context, consisting of the cultivar chimarrita, to investigate the large-scale transcriptional profile of peaches, subjected to hormone application at the initial stages of pit hardening, at harvest and after chilling injury inducing storage conditions. in addition, time course analyses of the woolly phenotype development and candidate gene expression were performed on ga-treated and control fruits submitted to cs, before the onset of the disturbance. taken together, our results demonstrate that a complex interplay between transcriptional programs controlled by ga and low temperatures underlies cellular and developmental mechanisms associated to woolliness in peaches.

RESULTS
application of ga at pit hardening stage reduces woolliness
the incidence of woolliness remained undetected for control and ga treated fruits up to 15 days under cs . after this period, the frequency of woolly fruits steeply increased in untreated control peaches . preharvest application of exogenous ga significantly prevented the incidence of woolliness after cs . after 30 days under cs and two days at rt, approximately 100 % of the control fruits exhibited the physiological disorder . in contrast, the incidence of woolliness in fruits harvested from trees sprayed with ga at the onset of pit hardening was more than six fold smaller  .fig.  <dig> woolliness symptom occurrence in preharvest ga untreated  and ga treated peaches . fruits were stored for 30 days under cold storage  and ripened at room temperature  for 2 days. the ga treatment was carried out in the pre harvest before pit hardening of peaches



genome wide transcriptional profiling of peach under postharvest conditions
genome wide expression analyses, employing  <dig>  protein-coding transcripts from the peach transcriptome were performed for control and ga treated fruit at harvest and after cs. factorial analysis of the expression data revealed extensive transcriptional changes in response to cs and ga, with  <dig>  %  of the genes being differentially expressed . from overlap analysis, approximately 34 % of the genes exhibiting differential expression in response to the tested factors  were commonly down  and  up regulated , although induction and/or repression levels were significantly different between ga and cs. gene sets exhibiting exclusive regulation by cs or ga were also detected . a subset of transcripts exhibit opposite responses to ga and cs treatments, being  <dig>  %  induced by ga and repressed by cs  and  <dig>  %  repressed by ga and induced by cs .fig.  <dig> differentially regulated genes in peaches submitted to ga and cs factors. ga: gibberellic acid; cs: cold storage. the treatments used for determination of ga effect were c  and cs - level ga  <dig> – against ga and gacs – level ga  <dig> mgl− <dig>  the treatments used for determination of cs effect were c and ga – level cs  <dig> – against cs and gacs – level cs 0 °c. differentially expressed genes were identified by limma analysis and classified as up or down regulated by log <dig> fold change



differentially regulated genes classified to gene ontology  classes of cellular, metabolic and developmental processes were significantly overrepresented in comparison to reference peach transcriptome . in contrast, go classes corresponding to cell death and immune system responses were underrepresented in all investigated conditions . metabolic classification of the genes exhibiting significant responses to ga and cs according to the mapman scheme revealed transcriptional shifts associated to primary and specialized metabolism , with a predominantly repressive effect of cs on global gene expression. cs and ga treatment significantly affected the expression of the coding sequences for a wide range of cell wall metabolism associated proteins, such as cellulose syntases, pectinesterases, polygalacturonases, pectate lyases, xyloglucan endotransglycosyilases and expansins . similarly, genes associated to carbohydrate, lipid, specialized metabolism, amino acids, nucleotides, fermentation, tetrapyrrole and photorespiration  were distinctly regulated in response to low temperatures and ga treatment.table  <dig> parametric analysis of gene set enrichment of go terms in response to ga and cs


a
fdr false discovery rate was estimated by benjamini–hochberg–yekutieli procedure at agrigo 

fig.  <dig> singular enrichment analysis of go biological process categories for differentially expressed genes. go classifications of the responsive genes were compared to those from the peach genome and bar length represents z-score for the go in each treatment. the treatments correspond to control , ga , cs  and gacs 

fig.  <dig> general metabolism classification of differentially expressed genes in response to ga and cs. the treatments used for determination of ga effect were c  and cs - level ga  <dig> – against ga and gacs – level ga  <dig> mgl− <dig>  the treatments used for determination of cs effect were c and ga – level cs  <dig> – against cs and gacs – level cs 0 °c. log <dig> fold changes are represented as color scale for ga x no ga  and cold x no cold  contrasts. positive values  correspond up regulated genes and negative values , to down regulated genes



a large number of genes associated to photosynthesis light reactions were differentially regulated in peach fruit in response to cs and ga application . the application of ga and storage of fruit under cs promoted the differential expression of sequences coding for light harvesting complexes, photosystem ii reaction centers, photosystem ii core complexes, photosystem i subunits and photosystem ii subunits .

gene set enrichment analyses  of woolliness associated candidate probes
to gain insight in the processes associated to the onset of woolliness, we have investigated the transcriptional behavior of genes known to be involved in cell wall metabolism and hormonal regulation by gene set enrichment analyses . eight distinct expression patterns were identified by clustering analyses of the transcriptional behavior of cell wall metabolism genes in peach in response to cs and ga. exogenous ga application repressed the expression of a subset of genes in the first two clusters. a third subset of cell wall associated genes, which includes expansin and pectinesterase coding sequences, exhibited repressed transcription equally mediated by cs and ga . the transcriptional profile of a large number of genes involved in cell wall processes in clusters iv, v and vi, remained virtually unchanged in response to both investigated factors . in contrast, cs relieved the transcriptional repression of a subset of genes associated to cell wall metabolism in peach , including those related to carbohydrate metabolism and endomembrane transport .fig.  <dig> enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes associated to cell wall metabolism in peach. experimental conditions correspond to c ; cs ; ga  and gacs . roman numbers represent expression clusters, by hierarchical clustering using pearson correlation



genes associated to hormonal responses exhibit a more complex response pattern to ga exogenous application and cs in peaches . a subset of transcripts corresponding to gibberellin biosynthesis oxidases and ethylene responsive transcription factors   was induced by cs, although subjected to an antagonistic effect of ga application . a similar profile, although less marked, was observed for genes coding for auxin signaling partners and biosynthesis enzymes . the combined action of cold storage and gibberellic acid treatment led to the repression of a small set of genes associated to hormone responses in cluster iv, with the majority of them belonging to the auxin, ethylene and gibberellin metabolism. in contrast, the transcription of other groups of hormone-related genes was repressed by cs with an inductive effect of ga  . significant differential regulation was also observed for peach homologs of ga receptor gid <dig>  one sequence coding for a della repressor and alcatraz/spatula transcription factor in response to cs and ga . a small number of hormone associated genes were shown to respond individually to a single factor, with the vast majority of the sequences exhibiting transcriptional changes in response to both factors . corregulated modules consisting of ga, auxin and ethylene metabolism were evidenced by relevance network analysis, including a module of genes coding for auxin biosynthesis and signaling, ga catabolism and an ethylene responsive protein, auxin mediated signaling and ethylene responses and biosynthesis . the opposite transcriptional behavior of the genes coding for ga and ethylene biosynthesis key enzymes in response to ga and cs was also shown . in contrast, the transcription of sequences coding for auxin, ga and ethylene signaling partners exhibited a similar response to the investigated factors .fig.  <dig> 
a enrichment analysis of differentially expressed genes associated to hormone metabolism in peach. experimental conditions correspond to c ; cs ; ga  and gacs . roman numbers represent expression clusters, by hierarchical clustering using pearson correlation. b, c relevance networks constructed from the expression pattern of genes associated to hormone metabolism. associations with negative ȓ <dig> are represented in red and those with positive ȓ <dig>  in blue. probes with no associations at  <dig>  were removed. d expression of ga signaling components in endocarp layer separation in response to ga and cs



reverse transcription quantitative pcr gene expression analyses
microarray data validation and time course expression analyses of candidate genes associated to woolliness under cs were performed by rt-qpcr. the expression patterns observed by microarray analyses were consistently confirmed by rt-qpcr for genes associated to cell wall metabolism, redox system and photosynthesis . the expression pattern of approximately 70 % of the investigated genes was similar between the microarray and rt-qpcr.

time course analyses of cell wall metabolism genes during cs have demonstrated that the transcriptional profile of three genes associated to cell wall metabolism and one gene associated to photosynthesis were discrepant between control and ga treated fruit . interestingly, the most striking transcriptional differences between hormone treated and control fruit were found at the first half of the low temperature period for an expansin  coding sequence. in contrast, for pectin methyl esterase  and polygalacturonase , the differences were greater at later stages of cs . the transcription of a gene coding for a photosystem ii core complex protein  was repressed in ga treated fruit submitted to cs .fig.  <dig> expression kinetics of cell wall metabolism and photosynthesis genes during cs and ga-treated peaches. values correspond to the mean ± sd 



discussion
effect of ga application on peach fruit
the role of ga in fruit ripening and development remains largely unknown, although the effect of endogenous or exogenous ga on fruit growth has been shown for several species  <cit> . previously, we have demonstrated that exogenous application of ga at the initial stages of pit hardening effectively reduces the incidence of chilling injuries in responsive cultivars  <cit> . applications at later stages did not significantly affect the frequency of the disorder in stored fruit  <cit> . thus, the processes leading to reduced frequencies of woolliness in response to ga application are confined to pre lignification of the endocarp. in dry, dehiscent fruit of model plant arabidopsis thaliana, ga has been demonstrated to negatively regulate, via della repressors, the bhlh transcription factor alcatraz , involved in the determination of the cell fate for the non-lignified valve margin tissues promoting fruit dehiscence  <cit> . alc function is partially redundant to that of another bhlh transcription factor, spatula   <cit> . the transcriptional regulator indehiscent  activates the transcription of a ga-activating enzyme ; thus, resulting in accumulation of the hormone in the separation valve layers leading to the dissociation of the della repressor from alc, allowing cell fate specification  <cit> . recently, the essential role of gibberellin-mediated signaling components in fruit development has been demonstrated for plum   <cit> .

peach is a fleshy fruit with hardened endocarp, termed drupe. in peach genome clear homologs of alc and ind are absent and the most similar genes identified exhibit a non specific endocarp transcription pattern  <cit> . in contrast, the expression of peach spt homolog is consistent with a role in cell fate determination in endocarp margins  <cit> . thus, in peach, spt is likely to be an important factor controlling the determination of endocarp margins. transcription of homologs of ga receptor gid <dig> and signaling components, including della repressors and spt transcription factor, was significantly altered by exogenous ga application and cs . interestingly, while all three components were repressed in response to cs and induced by ga application, the combination of both factors led to the induction of gid <dig> and spt transcription . the responsive della coding sequence was down regulated by the combination of exogenous ga application and cold temperatures . in other plant species the application of bioactive forms of gibberellin have been shown to stimulate the degradation of the repressive della proteins and result in the loss of stress tolerance  <cit> . several corregulated modules consisting of genes associated to auxin, ga and ethylene metabolism were demonstrated by relevance network analyses of functionally annotated sequences . interestingly, exogenous ga application restored the expression levels of the key enzyme 1-aminocyclopropane 1-carboxylate synthase  <dig>  of ethylene biosynthesis . these observations suggest a role for cs in blocking ethylene biosynthesis and preventing woolliness in peach. moreover, the transcriptional reprogramming of auxin biosynthesis and signaling genes in response to exogenous ga may indicate its involvement in the complex wooly phenotype of cold stored peaches. the extensive transcriptional changes observed in response to ga application  and the overrepresentation of genes associated to cellular and developmental processes  and hormone metabolism  in the genome wide transcriptional analyses indicate that reduced incidence of chilling induced damages is likely to result from extensive developmental reprogramming mediated by hormones in response to ga application.

effect of cs on peach fruit
low temperatures have been demonstrated to affect the activity of enzymes associated to pectin metabolism in fruit  <cit> , although the magnitude and direction of the reported effects are largely discrepant . in contrast to its biochemical effect, genome wide transcriptional analyses have demonstrated a preferential repressive function of low temperatures on gene expression in peach . low temperatures were also able to promote the transcription of a small number of genes associated to cell wall metabolism, and those related to carbohydrate metabolism and endomembrane transport . interestingly, the repressive effect of cold on gene expression was completely or partially alleviated by the exogenous application of ga for sequences associated to hormone metabolism and signal transduction, such as gibberellin biosynthesis oxidases and ethylene responsive transcription factors  . low temperatures had a significant repressive effect on the transcription of ga signaling components, although exogenous hormone application released the repression of gid <dig> and spt homologs .

in plants, the conserved c-repeat binding factor  pathway has been associated to low temperature tolerance in a wide range of evolutionary distinct species  <cit> . the cbf signaling network is positively regulated by the circadian clock components cca <dig> and lhy  <cit>  and functions downstream of the inducer of cbf expression  <dig>  protein  <cit> . the hormone salicylic acid  has also been shown to participate in low temperature responses in plants  <cit> . in peach, several genes exhibiting similarity to known partners of the cbf and sa pathway were transcriptionally affected by low temperatures .

our genome wide transcription profiling has demonstrated the antagonistic role of ga on low temperature transcriptional repression in fruit . these findings may be associated to the distinct functional roles of gibberellins throughout plant development, since the hormone is associated to stress tolerance during germination and seedling establishment  <cit>  and is involved in stress sensitivity in determined vegetative tissues  <cit> .

the role of cell wall metabolism and hormone interplay in woolliness
woolliness is a complex phenotype observed in fruit after cs, consisting in a severe loss of juice and dry texture of the fruit flesh  <cit> . peaches  and nectarines  are highly subjected to the physiological disorder  <cit> , although some cultivars exhibit reduced woolliness incidence by exogenous ga application previous to pit hardening  <cit> . the reduction of polygalacturonase  activity, and subsequent reduction in water-soluble pectins and increase in sodium-carbonate-soluble pectins, by low temperatures is considered the biochemical basis for woolliness in peaches  <cit> . employing genome wide and time course expression analyses we have demonstrated that extensive transcriptional regulation occurs in stored peaches and may contribute to the biochemical changes that appear to underlie woolliness. consistent with the reduced enzymatic activity, cs was demonstrated to preferentially repress gene expression in peach . approximately, half of the peach transcriptome exhibited significant differential expression patterns in response to ga and cs, suggesting that extensive genetic reprogramming is the basis for the known biochemical changes during ripening.

the reduction in woolliness incidence by preharvest ga application to immature fruit, at early endocarp hardening stage is consistent with changes in the hormone mediated developmental transitions controlling ripening. in peach, low temperatures repressed the transcription of a ga receptor homolog gid <dig>  a della receptor coding sequence and an alc/spt transcriptional regulator gene. in contrast, exogenous application of the hormone up regulated these genes. in ga treated fruits, chilling for 15 days restored the expression levels of gid <dig> and alc/spt, whereas the combination of ga and cs further decreased the transcription of the della coding sequence. in arabidopsis, there is no evidence of temperature regulation of the transcription of the partially redundant alc and spt  <cit> . however, other members of the bhlh family of alc and spt, the phytochrome-interacting factors , have been demonstrated to be involved in a wide range of temperature controlled processes in arabidopsis .

biochemical changes and modifications in enzyme activity are considered the most important mechanism responsible for chilling induced damage in peaches  <cit> . our genome wide expression analyses suggest that transcriptional regulation is likely to contribute to the biochemical changes associated to postharvest processes in peach. moreover, the over representation of genes associated to developmental ontology classes and the large number of hormone metabolism differentially regulated in response to cs and ga in peaches indicate that the physiological disorder and its reduced incidence in response to the hormone treatment are subjected to developmental regulation, as shown for other species . in addition, genes related to photosystem i and ii are differentially expressed in woolly fruit. these findings may contribute to explain the changes in chlorophyll a fluorescence during cold storage  <cit> . transcript accumulation of psby is modified before chilling injury . thus, the expression profile of the gene can be used as a wooliness incidence marker.

CONCLUSIONS
in the current work, we have investigated the factors underlying the prevention of chilling injuries in peaches by the application of ga at the initial stages of pit hardening, coupling physiological analyses of a responsive cultivar to global transcriptional profiling. we have confirmed the involvement of cell wall, hormone and stress metabolism in controlling the fruits responses to low temperatures during storage and have demonstrated that ga application at the early stages of endocarp hardening alone or coupled with cold storage trigger complex transcriptional reprogramming in peaches. our data demonstrated the transcriptional control of ga receptor and signaling partner alc/spt in response to the hormone application and cold storage, suggesting ga controlled developmental processes, such as determination of endocarp borders, may be involved in the determination of chilling injury susceptibility in peach.

