BACKGROUND
euphorbia fischeriana is a perennial herbaceous flowering plant, located in northeast of china. the dried plant roots of e. fischeriana and other euphorbia species are called "lang-du", which means extremely toxic in chinese. the roots have often been used in traditional chinese medicine to treat a wide range of ailments, such as edema, ascites, and cancer  <cit> . previous studies of the plant have revealed it mainly contains diterpenoids, triterpenoids and steroids  <cit> . one particular tigliane diterpene and phorbol ester found in the roots of e. fischeriana is 12-deoxyphorbol-13-acetate, commonly known as prostratin.

prostratin was first discovered during ethno botanical studies carried out on the island of savai'i, samoa, where native healers used the bark of homalanthus nutans, a small rain-forest tree from the euphorbiaceae family, called "mamala" to treat hepatitis infection  <cit> . prostratin has been shown in previous studies to be a protein kinase c activator  <cit>  and effective in the treatment of hiv infected patients, by acting as a latent hiv <dig> activator, enabling anti-viral drugs to eliminate a large proportion of viral reservoirs in the body  <cit> . latent hiv is one of the biggest obstacles hiv researchers face in regards to the treatment of patients  <cit> . prostratin has also been found to be an anti-tumour promoter, unlike other diterpene compounds that are known to promote tumorigenesis  <cit> .

very little is known about the biosynthetic pathway of prostratin, although a lot is known about its biochemical structure. the main pathways which are likely to play a role in the synthesis of prostratin and which were chosen for this study were the terpenoid backbone biosynthesis  pathway  and the diterpenoid biosynthesis  pathway . the tbb pathway is an important pathway for the synthesis of terpenoid or isoprene  compounds that are the building blocks for many important complex compounds synthesised further down the pathway  in other important biosynthetic pathways. the tbb pathway consists of two separate parallel biosynthetic pathways, one corresponding to the 2-c-methyl-d-erythritol 4-phosphate  pathway that takes place in the plastids, and another comprising the mevalonic acid  pathway that occurs in the cytosol. both pathways lead to the synthesis of terpenoid building blocks: isopentenyl diphosphate  and dimethylallyl diphosphate . these terpenoid compounds are then used to generate compounds geranyl diphosphate , farsenyl diphosphate  and geranylgeranyl diphosphate , which are all precursor compounds to pathways further down stream, such as the db pathway. the db pathway is an important pathway, which begins with ggpp and leads to the synthesis of many important diterpenoids  compounds. the synthesis of one particular diterpenoid compound that is investigated in this study is casbene, which has a very similar skeleton structure to prostratin. it is highly likely that casbene is a precursor to prostratin  <cit> .

similar properties to prostratin have been reported for 12-deoxyphorbol 13-phenylacetate , which has been derived from euphorbia resinifera and very close relative of e. fischeriana  <cit> . dpp has very similar structure to prostratin, with the addition of an ester group at c <dig>  concluding that many more phorbol esters may have anti-hiv properties and would be worth investigating in future studies  <cit> .

cross talk and/or interaction between distinct metabolic pathways are important to determine the potential metabolite profile of a cell under specific conditions. distinct pathways may share common intermediate compounds for their downstream processing. an associated pathway to the db pathway is the kaurenol and the zeatin biosynthesis  pathway . kaurenol is derived from ggpp and serves as a precursor for the synthesis of various gibberellin compounds that act as plant hormones modulating growth and development  <cit> . the intermediate dmapp compound of the tbb pathway is utilized to initiate the zb pathway that leads to the synthesis of zeatin, a member of the cytokinin family, a class of plant hormones involved in various processes of plant growth and development .

in this study we present the results of next generation sequencing, de novo assembly and annotation of the e. fischeriana root transcriptome. based on literature review and kegg pathway information we identified candidate genes involved in the synthesis of upstream precursors to prostratin and estimated the expression levels of these enzymes.

RESULTS
sequencing and de novo transcriptome assembly
next generation sequencing technologies have significantly facilitated a wide range of genomics applications including high throughput sequencing of non-model plant transcriptomes. to obtain e. fischeriana transcriptome expression profiles in roots, and identify candidate genes upstream of prostratin synthesis, where traces of prostratin has been previously reported  <cit> , illumina technology was used to sequence an e. fischeriana library of transcripts expressed in roots generating more than  <dig>  million pair-end short reads encoding  <dig>  billion bases . we initially evaluated the base quality of the sequenced reads  and trimmed poor quality bases as well as removed poor quality reads . after trimming we retained  <dig>  million high quality pair-end reads and an additional  <dig>  single-end reads. the average length of short reads after trimming decreased from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp. to aid in the process of de novo assembly and scaffolding we also sequenced  <dig>  high quality ests encoding an additional  <dig>  million bases .

to determine the best parameters for transcriptome de novo assembly using oases  <cit>  multiple k-mers were compared . our analysis determined that de novo assembly using a k-mer of  <dig> provided the best compromise between high and low abundant transcripts . we also determined that a minimum k-mer coverage threshold of two is suitable for de novo assembly as this removes the majority of sequencing errors . thus, a k-mer of  <dig> and a k-mer coverage cut-off of two were used to assemble the e. fischeriana root transcriptome using oases  <cit>  by combining both high quality illumina short reads and ests in a hybrid assembly approach.

another feature of oases is that attempts to cluster assembled transcripts into 'gene clusters' containing two or more putative alternative splicing  isoforms. our preliminary manual inspection of randomly selected gene clusters revealed that the majority of the predicted as isoforms corresponded to spurious calls including rna degradation products, sequence gaps denoted by ns that were introduced in the scaffolding step and clustering of unrelated sense-antisense transcripts among others . these assembly artefacts occur in part due to the extreme variability in coverage depth between genes, isoforms and along each isoform increasing the complexity of the de brujin graph structure. to remove spurious isoforms from downstream analyses we selected a single transcript from each gene cluster based on various filtering criteria: i) the transcript has the highest oases confidence score  that represents the transcripts with the largest number of exons, ii) encodes the longest orf, iii) corresponds to the longest nucleotide transcript, and iv) in cases where two or more transcripts have the same length then the one with highest sequence coverage was selected. this generated a reference e. fischeriana root transcriptome of  <dig>  transcripts .

transcriptome annotation
to determine protein-coding transcripts we screened the e. fischeriana root transcriptome against the non-redundant  ncbi peptide database using blastx with a cut-off e-value of 1e- <dig>  this resulted in  <dig>  transcripts  annotated as similar to known proteins or matching known conserved hypothetical proteins . we also found  <dig>  transcripts harbouring an orf > =  <dig> amino acids that represent putative e. fischeriana-specific hypothetical protein-coding genes. the remaining  <dig>   unannotated transcripts encoded putative short orfs and may correspond to non-coding rnas . to test this notion we subjected these transcripts to trnascan-se  <cit>  and rnammer  <cit>  scan. this resulted in the finding of  <dig> trna genes including two pseudogenes encoded in seven transcripts  and the identification of duplicated copies of the 8s, 18s and 28s rrnas . unannotated transcripts not matching trnas and rrnas may correspond to putative novel ncrnas or sequencing artefacts, overall we found  <dig>  unannotated transcripts .

atotal number of trnas including four trnas identified in a transcriptome assembly using a shorter k-mer size of  <dig> and a minimum transcript length of  <dig> bp.

btranscripts efi_ <dig> and efi_ <dig> encodes three and two trna genes, respectively.

the species distribution showed that the majority of top matches were to ricinus communis , populus trichocarpa  and vitis vinifera  . the top matches to r. communis were further evaluated and identified that  <dig>  transcripts were highly similar  to the e. fischeriana transcriptome. the blastx species distribution showed a bias towards r. communis owing to the over representation of this species within the database compared to other species such as euphorbia esula, a closer relative of e. fischeriana.

we then evaluated the relative expression levels of e. fischeriana transcripts as described in methods and categorized these into three expression ranges 1- <dig>  125- <dig> and more than  <dig> mean coverage expression level. the majority of the transcripts fall into the first category , while only  <dig>  and  <dig>  were assigned to the 125- <dig> and  <dig> plus categories, respectively.

functional and pathway annotations
to assign functional information to transcripts gene ontology codes were annotated using annot8r  <cit> . this yielded  <dig>  annotated transcripts  covering a broad range of go categories . the most abundant biological process go codes represented by the largest percent of transcripts were 'metabolic process'  and 'response to stimulus' , indicating that a large range of metabolic activities occur in e. fischeriana root. interestingly, the largest category within metabolic processes corresponds to phosphorylation that encompasses  <dig> transcripts  with the majority of these involved in protein phosphorylation. in roots reversible protein phosphorylation has been implicated in modulating delivery and response to auxin signals  <cit>  that is essential for plant growth and development.

among the  <dig>  transcripts assigned to the response to stimulus category,  <dig> and  <dig> were assigned to 'defence response' and 'response to cadmium ion', respectively. interestingly,  <dig> of the transcripts assigned to defence response were associated with defence against bacteria, which correlates with the known anti-microbial properties of root extracts from euphorbia species, such as euphorbia fusiformis  <cit> .

under molecular function go the two most abundant categories were 'binding' and 'catalytic activity' accounting for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the transcripts, respectively . the  <dig>  transcripts assigned to the binding category were classified into various categories including protein binding , nucleotide binding , atp binding , metal ion binding , dna binding  and rna binding . the large fraction of transcripts associated with protein, nucleotide and/or metabolite binding suggest the presence of an intricate interactome network in e. fischeriana roots.

next we evaluated the expression levels for each go code by averaging the coverage of all transcripts matching to each go code . we found that the go molecular function codes 'structural molecular activity' and 'antioxidant activity' showed the highest overall expression levels with an average mean coverage of  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . interestingly the majority of the go biological process and cellular component codes presented an overall expression level close to  <dig> .

the e. fischeriana root transcriptome was further annotated by mapping the transcripts onto pathways in kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes . a total of  <dig>  transcripts  were assigned to  <dig> kegg pathways, of these  <dig>  transcripts were also assigned enzyme commission  numbers. the percentage of assigned transcripts and their overall mean coverage expression level for each of the top  <dig> kegg pathways are shown in figure 4a. the top kegg metabolic pathways included carbohydrate metabolism, energy and lipid metabolism, amino acid metabolism and the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites. in the secondary metabolism,  <dig> transcripts were classified into  <dig> subcategories, and most of them were mapped to terpenoid backbone and diterpenoid biosynthesis, carotenoid biosynthesis, flavone and flavonol biosynthesis, zeatin and glucosinolate biosynthesis . these results indicated the active metabolic processes in e. fischeriana root, but also imply that a variety of metabolites are synthesized in the root. interestingly as anticipated the terpenoid and diterpenoid biosynthesis pathways encompasses the largest number of transcripts related to secondary metabolites, which may relate with the capacity of e. fischeriana root to produce prostratin and related diterpenoid compounds.

we next determined the overall expression levels for each kegg pathway as described above for go codes. the pathways with the highest expression levels were 'translation' and 'signaling molecules and interaction' with mean coverage values of  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . the majority of all other pathways displayed similar expression levels with an overall mean coverage close to  <dig> 

comparison of e. fischeriana transcriptome with related species
to evaluate the conservation of the e. fischeriana genes in related species we compared transcripts for each locus against ncbi expressed sequence tags  of hevea brasiliensis, e. esula and r. communis. ests were used, as these are the most comprehensive available resource for comparative analyses. non-redundant sequence datasets for e. fischeriana , e. esula , h. brasiliensis , and r. communis  were generated and clustered to identify orthologous gene clusters as described in methods. a total of  <dig>  gene clusters were identified among e. fischeriana, e. esula, h. brasiliensis and r. communis. figure  <dig> shows the overlapping orthologous genes between all evaluated species. as expected we found that e. fischeriana shares the largest number of orthologous genes with e. esula  as compared to r. communis  and h. brasiliensis , but in terms of proportion of shared orthologous sequences as compared to the total number of available genes for each species, h. brasiliensis shared the largest fraction of their genes  as compared to the equality similar fractions of  <dig> % and  <dig> % for e. esula and r. communis, respectively. we also found  <dig>  genes that are shared by all species representing a potential core orthologous gene set for euphorbiaceae species. to characterize further this core gene set, we evaluated their assigned gene ontology  codes. in terms of go biological processes we found 43% and 24% transcripts annotated under 'metabolic processes' and 'response to stimulus', respectively. other important categories were 'nucleobase, nucleoside, nucleotide and nucleic acid metabolic process' , 'cellular process' , 'multicellular organismal development'  and 'transport' . we also identified  <dig>  paralog genes within e. fischeriana transcriptome. our results provide a preliminary overview of core genes shared between euphorbiaceae species based on currently available resources. we anticipate that this dataset will be expanded and refined further as more significant transcriptome sequencing efforts are conducted in other euphorbiaceae species.

candidate genes upstream of prostratin biosynthesis pathway
prostratin is a phorbol ester from the tigliane diterpene series. recently casbene a product of the db pathway  has been shown to be structurally similar to prostratin  <cit> . the db pathway requires geranylgeranyl diphosphate  as a precursor for casbene synthesis. to characterise possible candidate genes upstream of prostratin synthesis we screened the e. fischeriana transcriptome for enzymes in the tbb  and db pathways. we found  <dig> and  <dig> transcripts encoding the candidate genes in the tbb and db pathways, respectively .

transcripts matching to genes encoding enzymes involved in the tbb, db and zb pathways were found through blastx nr searches using an e-value threshold of 1e- <dig> . we found two transcripts, encoding for geranylgeranyl diphosphate synthase  and 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme a reductase  contained transcripts on the opposite strands encoding different genes, not classified as tbb genes. these transcripts were further evaluated to determine if these corresponded to naturally occurring antisense transcripts , but these were not nats . furthermore, this highlighted another artefact produced using the oases tool when unrelated transcripts may be clustered into the same cluster.

the db pathway is of particular interest, as one of the downstream products is the phorbol ester prostratin. all diterpenes begin synthesis from ggpp, a 20-carbon isoprenoid diphosphate, derived primarily from the mep pathway . ggpp is also the precursor to many other compounds in plants, such as chlorophylls, prenylated proteins and gibberellins  <cit> . on entry to the db pathway, ggpp is converted to a variety of diterpenes by diterpene synthases. only a hand full of diterpene synthases have been identified thus far, including casbene and neocembrene synthases from r. communis and other well known euphorbiaceae species  <cit> .

casbene is considered the most likely precursor to prostratin  <cit> , although other diterpenes with similar structures could possibly go through a further series of structural changes with the same end product, so other possible paths within the db pathway were considered such as the initial structural changes of ggpp, to ent-copalyl diphosphate and then ent-kaurene. a number of transcripts coding for these enzymes involved in this path were found with blastx nr searches and their expression levels were evaluated based on the mean read coverage of these transcripts as described previously.

the expression levels of enzymes in the tbb and db pathways were compared to those of enzymes in the zb pathway. we found that the tbb pathway showed an overall higher expression level as compared to other downstream pathways. interestingly 1-hydroxy-2-methyl-2--butenyl 4-diphosphate synthase  and isopentenyl diphosphate/dimethylallyl diphosphate synthase  from the mep pathway presented the highest expression levels . comparison of the mep and mva pathways within the tbb pathway revealed that genes in the mva pathway had lower overall expression levels, although enzymes such as 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl coenzyme a reductase  and mevalonate diphosphate decarboxylase  had higher relative expression levels. these findings suggest that overall within the tbb pathway, there is a preference for the synthesis of larger amounts of dimethylallyl diphosphate  and isopentenyl diphosphate  that is required to drive various downstream pathways including diterpene synthesis .

to validate the observed rna-seq expression trends we selected  <dig> transcripts encoding  <dig> enzyme types and designed primers for real time rt-pcr . as shown in additional file  <dig>  we determined a very strong correlation of expression for ggpps, dxs, aact, hmgr, mdd, ids and hds. the only exception was casbene  that showed a relatively high expression level in real time rt-pcr in contrast to the very low expression detected in our rna-seq experiment . these findings indicate that although a good correlation was observed for the majority of the enzymes tested and global trends can be interpreted, it is required to conduct independent validations to accurately measure the expression level of enzymes of interest.

there were no transcripts with sequence similarity to geranyl diphosphate synthase  identified in this study . this may be due to the low expression level of gpps and the inefficient assembly of poorly expressed genes. gpps enzyme is critical for the synthesis of geranyl diphosphate , which is essential for synthesis of farnesyl diphosphate  via farnesyl diphosphate synthase . fpps was detected in the transcriptome and its expression was found to be relatively low . additionally, mevalonate kinase  transcripts were not found in the transcriptome even though downstream enzyme transcripts were present . this may be due to similar reasons for the absence of gpps. as both gpps and mk enzymes are present in the related h. brasiliensis species and stored in public databases under the accession numbers ab <dig> and ab <dig>  respectively. these findings emphasis the need to increase the amount of sequencing data and/or the evaluation of lower k-mer values to de novo assemble low expressed genes. overall we identified  <dig> enzymes involved in terpenoid and diterpenoid biosynthesis, including two casbene synthases that are a valuable resource for further biochemical and functional studies leading to increase the production of prostratin.

CONCLUSIONS
the de novo assembly of the e. fischeriana root transcriptome identified  <dig>  transcripts, of these  <dig>  encoded genes with sequence similarity in other species and  <dig>  represent paralogous genes. this study identified  <dig> transcripts encoding enzymes involved in various pathways upstream of the casbene biosynthesis pathway, which is a proposed precursor for prostratin. furthermore we revealed the high expression of hds and ids enzymes in the tbb pathway. critically we found a significant higher expression level of the ent-kaurene oxidase  and trna dimethylallyltransferase  enzymes driving the synthesis of kaurenol and cis-zeatin-o-glucoside + udp, which compete for available ggpp and dmapp, respectively. dmapp is essential for the synthesis of ggpp further downstream, while ggpp is directly essential for the synthesis of casbene. the resources generated in this study will likely facilitate further functional studies aiming to increase the production of prostratin, dpp and other phorbol esters of interest for the advancement of hiv research and/or treatment of patients.

