BACKGROUND
dispersal, the movement of organisms between spatial units of habitat, is an essential life-history trait shaping the characteristic texture of populations, communities and ecosystems in space and time. despite the numerous books and papers on the subject , dispersal remains one of the least understood factors in evolutionary biology, especially the behavioural mechanisms that underlie this complex phenomenon  <cit> .

dispersal has been defined as a three-stage process:  emigration ,  travelling through a more or less hostile landscape matrix, and  immigration   <cit> . when the degree of habitat fragmentation increases, the distances to be covered through the landscape increase as well, which may result in dispersal-related deferred costs  or even mortality . hence, we may predict that behavioural responses have evolved to limit costs and risks of dispersal. indeed, empirical studies show that organisms are more reluctant to cross the border of the habitat  in fragmented landscapes . this was particularly clear in our study species, the bog fritillary butterfly , a habitat specialist species restricted to unfertilized alluvial wet meadows and peat bogs  <cit> . this behavioural response affects the first stage of dispersal, i.e. emigration.

changes in behaviour during travel in the matrix, the second stage of dispersal, can be another adaptive answer to reduce the cost of dispersal. we recently suggested that dispersal can be realized in two ways: as a by-product of routine movements associated with resource exploitation  with high levels of returning, or as special, fast and directed movements designed for net displacement  <cit> . we also predict that the latter, directed flight behaviour should occur more frequently in fragmented landscapes as it allows maximizing the probability to end up in another unit of habitat by limiting travelling time across the landscape matrix . a simulation model  <cit>  predicts that evolution towards straighter movement paths is to be expected both when  dispersing individuals travel through a more hostile landscape and  inter-habitat distances increase. several empirical studies show variation in dispersal behaviour relative to landscape structure . most of those studies investigated dispersal in the landscape without reference to movement behaviour within the habitat  and there are only few quantitative analyses.

in this paper, we test for differences between movement behaviour within habitat and outside habitat  in two habitat networks of southern belgium , one largely fragmented , the other more aggregated . assuming that specialist butterflies perceive their environment as fragmented , we hypothesize that dispersal movements in the matrix are relatively straight whereas search movements when foraging within habitat are rather tortuous. habitat fragmentation in the study area occurred since >  <dig> years or butterfly generations  <cit> . such a time frame allows evolutionary changes to habitat fragmentation in flying insects  <cit> .

experimental evidence indicates that butterflies respond to visual and/or olfactory cues to locate landscape elements and to detect suitable habitat  <cit> . we first quantified the distance component of the perceptual range  to test the assumption that the study landscapes were perceived as fragmented by p. eunomia butterflies. next, we recorded movement paths of butterflies in the matrix and compared movement parameters to those previously recorded within habitat  <cit> , to test our prediction that movements are straighter in the matrix. finally, we assessed whether movement behaviour in the matrix may be adequately described by a correlated random walk. this would allow the use of simulation models of movement to predict dispersal at the metapopulation level.

RESULTS
perceptual range
we measured perceptual range by assessing the maximum distance at which butterflies could orientate towards the habitat when released in the matrix . p. eunomia adults  showed a highly significant response to return into the habitat patch when released at  <dig> m of the patch. this response completely vanished at wider distance: at  <dig> and  <dig> m of the patch they flew at random in all directions . perceptual range of p. eunomia was therefore estimated to be below  <dig> m.

movement behaviour
adults were tracked individually to record movement paths. every stop or turn was marked by a numbered flag, and coordinates mapped by triangulation. movements were approximated as sequences of straight lines moves and turning angles . in the habitat , we recorded  <dig> female paths  in frag and  <dig> female paths  in aggreg. in the matrix , we recorded  <dig> male paths  in frag,  <dig> male paths  and  <dig> female paths  in aggreg. differences in numbers mainly reflect different weather conditions affecting sampling opportunities via their effect on butterfly abundance  and responsible for tracking interruptions.

movement parameters in habitat and matrix
whatever the habitat type and the landscape, movement parameters fit the same distribution: a lognormal distribution for move length , with frequent short and rare long moves between successive stops/turns, and a symmetrical around zero von mises distribution for turning angle : butterflies did not show a preference for left or right turns and made more often small than large turns.

note: test numbers refer to table  <dig>  where more details on tests and references are available. legend of table content is given in corresponding test title. while it is possible to obtain full test of the two factors and their interaction at once for μ using 2-factor anova, there is no such test for σ <dig>  therefore, in this case, we decided to compare groups in two steps: first the landscape comparing frag vs agregg for each habitat type separately, then the environment type  comparing habitat patch vs matrix on landscape-pooled data.

note: test numbers refer to table  <dig>  where more details on tests and references are available. legend of table content is given in corresponding test title.

moves were on average twice as long in the matrix as in the habitat . they were similar for frag and aggreg within habitat, but slightly longer and more variable in frag matrix than in aggreg matrix. more importantly, there was an obvious difference of path linearity between matrix and habitat:  the concentration parameter k was much higher in the matrix while nearly absolutely identical in the two networks ;  the fractal dimension was lower in the matrix while here again nearly identical in frag and aggreg ; and  for a given number of moves, the net displacement was larger in the matrix .

note: significance is determined by no overlap of 95% confidence interval 

goodness-of-fit to correlated random walk
there were no differences in the frequency of departures from correlated random walk  between frag and aggreg, nor between habitat and matrix . overall, the majority of the paths  were well described by crw, only 3%  are underpredicted by crw , 26%  overpredicted by crw . crw is an adequate description of movement paths both within and outside habitat; differences in linearity are achieved by distributions of move length and turning angle differing between habitat and matrix.

discussion
our results support four main conclusions.  the perceptual range of p. eunomia is relatively low. hence, it confirms the assumption that butterflies perceived both habitat networks as fragmented.  the behavioural nature of movements differs significantly between habitat and matrix: butterflies were found to fly straighter  in the matrix .  movements differed between frag and aggreg landscapes in the matrix, but not within habitat.  movement behaviour can be adequately modelled by a correlated random walk , both within habitat and in the matrix.

perceptual range is low
our experiments indicated a relatively low perceptual range in p. eunomia, between  <dig> and  <dig> m only. as a consequence, both the frag and aggreg landscapes arise as fragmented habitat networks for these butterflies, i.e. individuals are not able to perceive other suitable habitat patches when they leave their current patch. this perceptual range is in agreement with the few other studies existing on butterflies: 10– <dig> m in icaricia icarioides fenderi  <cit> , a few meters in pieris napae  <cit> ,  <dig> m in phoebis sennae and eurema nicippe  <cit> . of course, our experiment does not allow discriminating between the two alternatives that butterflies were unable or unmotivated to orientate towards the habitat patch. indeed, we observed some butterflies flying towards a habitat patch from a distance longer than  <dig> m, but this may be done by chance only. the finding that orientation towards habitat patch is done from a distance far lower than the distance individuals are able to disperse successfully -p. eunomia is able to disperse between relatively distant patches - has also been observed in euphydryas editha bayensis  <cit> , and pararge aegeria  <cit> . if habitat detection is visually cued, this is in line with the 20– <dig> m distance of large object detection predicted from optical properties of butterfly eyes  <cit> . alternatively, olfactory clues may be used to orientate towards habitat. both senses can also be involved  <cit> . navigation clues used during dispersal require further mechanistic research, as well as parallel studies on perceptual range of species with different habitat requirements.

dispersal flights in the matrix are straighter movements than search flights within habitat
both networks being perceived as fragmented by butterflies, selection pressure due to costs of dispersal are likely to occur. we showed previously that mortality during dispersal was higher in frag than in agreg  <cit> . therefore, we predicted the use of specific dispersal behaviours limiting these costs. accordingly, within-habitat movements differed from those in the matrix. several lines of evidence showed that paths were relatively straight in the matrix while largely tortuous within habitat. the same conclusion was drawn for both frag and aggreg landscapes, and these two landscapes present similar path linearity for a given environmental condition . this observation is in line with the view of  <cit>  that special dispersal movements may differ behaviourally from routine, explorative movements associated with resource  searching. our results are also in line with predictions of simulation models  <cit> , where relatively straight crws have been shown to be among the best search strategies to find habitat patches over long distances in fragmented landscapes, especially when perceptual range is small compared to the average between-patch distance. it is worth noting that in landscapes where habitat patches are highly aggregated, the reverse is expected: more tortuous movements are expected to increase dispersal success  <cit> .

moves in matrix are longer in the more fragmented landscape
differences in movement behaviour between frag and aggreg landscapes were clearly small compared to those between matrix and habitat. we previously showed that movements did not differ between landscapes within habitat, except for behaviour at habitat patch boundaries  <cit> . the present results complete the picture for movements in the matrix: linearity was similar in the two landscapes but moves were longer in frag. this latter result might be related to fragmentation level  and the nature of the matrix . we have previously shown that mortality during dispersal was higher than mortality within habitats  <cit> , which should favour individuals with a higher dispersal success, notably through longer and straighter moves as discussed above. on the other hand, there is a growing body of evidence that variation in landscape heterogeneity affects movement behaviour in animals, including butterflies . nevertheless, we acknowledge that, given the present experimental design with one replicate per fragmentation level , this difference between frag and aggreg matrices  could also be due to another particular difference between landscapes.

movement behaviour of p. eunomia can be adequately modelled as a correlated random walk
movement behaviour could be adequately modelled in 70% of the cases by a correlated random walk  with lognormal move length and von mises  turning angles; these distributions are environment-specific  , which allows modelling both tortuous movements in the habitat and straight movements in the matrix under the same crw framework. the most frequent departures from crw were caused by disruptions in the path due to the presence of some barriers to dispersal , which reflect individuals towards their point of origin  <cit> . these departures do not alter the adequacy of crw to model movement in barrier-free zones.

CONCLUSIONS
dispersing individuals suffer costs from mortality, or fitness depletion due to a loss of time and energy on the way between habitats. those costs are expected to shape adaptive answers on dispersal behaviours in highly fragmented landscapes where distance between suitable habitats increases. we showed previously that dispersal propensity, i.e. the probability that an individual decided to cross habitat boundaries to engage the dispersal process, decreased according to the fragmentation level of the landscape. this was proved to be associated with an increase in the mortality risk associated to dispersal. here we show that dispersal in two fragmented landscapes was achieved by special directed movements significantly straighter and longer than those movements that are associated with resource searching within habitat. we showed previously that even if the overall dispersal mortality was higher in fragmented than in continuous landscapes, for a given patch connectivity mortality was lower in more fragmented landscapes  <cit> . this is likely associated to the use of straighter flight in the matrix, a good strategy to improve dispersal success.

