BACKGROUND
the workings of combinatorial genetic regulatory networks control how an organism grows and develops as well as responds to biotic and abiotic stresses. distinct regulatory networks emerged during evolution likely have contributed to the diversification of biological phenotypes. investigations over the last decade from many different organisms have uncovered the novel regulatory roles of numerous small, noncoding rnas. these include micrornas  and short interfering rnas  that exert epigenetic regulation of gene expression at the transcriptional, posttranscriptional, and translational levels . these discoveries have led to rna-based new paradigms of genetic regulatory networks that control various biological processes including the emergence of biological diversity .

in plants, mirnas can trigger the generation of secondary, phased sirnas  from protein-coding or intergenic loci   <cit> . some phased sirnas can trans-regulate the expression of target genes, and are called trans-acting sirnas   <cit> . early studies with arabidopsis thaliana provided genetic evidence supporting that some tasirnas regulate gene expression critical to plant development  <cit> , and it has been shown that a deeply conserved tas <dig> pathway is pivotal in developmental processes from moss to higher plants . more recent studies showed the generation of phasirnas from mrnas that encode many nucleotide binding site  and leucine-rich repeat  disease resistance proteins in legumes  <cit>  and solanaceae  <cit> . some disease resistance gene-derived phasirnas have been shown to down-regulate the expression of genes in the same family  <cit> . besides nbs-lrr disease resistance proteins, many other types of protein-coding genes have been identified as phas loci in plants, such as myb transcription factors  <cit> , pentatricopeptide repeat  genes  <cit> , transporter inhibitor response /auxin f-box genes   <cit> , and calcium atpase transporters  <cit> .

these findings suggest potentially broad roles of phasirnas in plant evolution and function, but many fundamental questions remain outstanding:  how widespread are phas loci in the plant kingdom?  how many types of protein-coding genes can function as phas loci in the plant kingdom?  how conserved or unique are these phas loci in different plants?  what categories of genes do phasirnas regulate? and  what is the broad spectrum of biological processes that may be associated with or regulated by phasirna biogenesis? to address these questions, we performed a systematic search of phas loci in  <dig> plant species covering major phylogenetic groups including alga, moss, gymnosperm, basal angiosperm, monocot, and dicot as shown in fig.  <dig>  our study uncovered a wide range of novel phas loci from protein-coding genes. intriguingly, many phasirnas appear to be derived from introns or intron-exon junctions. while some phas loci occur broadly in plants, many are found in a limited number of species. production of phasirnas from protein-coding genes is associated with developmental processes, plant–virus interaction, and abiotic stresses, demonstrating the highly dynamic nature of phasirna biogenesis regulation. our data provide the most comprehensive kingdom-wide landscape to date of phasirna distribution and potential regulatory function in plants, which will serve as an important foundation for developing mechanistic studies on the evolution, biogenesis, and function of these novel sirnas underlying many aspects of plant biology.fig.  <dig> plant species investigated in this study. these species belong to major groups with well-established phylogeny. three-letter abbreviations of these species, shown in brackets, were used in the present study



RESULTS
a broad search for phas loci in different plant species
we collected deep small rna  sequences of  <dig> plant species spanning from green algae to angiosperm groups from public resources . these srnas were generated from organs or tissues at different developmental stages or under various growth conditions. the majority of the libraries contained 1– <dig> million high-quality cleaned srna sequences  . to identify phasirna-generating loci, we aligned the srna sequences to the corresponding genome and cdna reference sequences . based on the alignments, we identified phas loci from the  <dig> species using the method described in xia et al.  <cit>  . the phasirna-generating loci mapped to the same protein-coding gene were further combined to represent a unique locus.

in total, we found  <dig>  phas loci in all the  <dig> species, including  <dig>  that generated 21-nucleotides  and  <dig> that generated 24-nt phasirnas . the 24-nt phasirna-generating loci were found exclusively in the grass family , and all of them were mapped to intergenic regions . the number of 21-nt phasirna-generating loci in each plant group or species varied greatly . dicot species tended to have large numbers of phas loci, with many species having more than  <dig>  in addition, approximately  <dig> %  of the phas loci mapped to annotated genic regions in all tested dicot species. the number of phas loci in monocot plants ranged from  <dig> to more than  <dig>  in contrast to those in dicots, significantly fewer phas loci were mapped to genic regions in monocots. in a basal angiosperm species, amborella trichopoda, there were  <dig> phasirna-generating loci, comparable to that in many dicot plants. in moss, physcomitrella patens, there were four phas loci. in algae, chlamydomonas reinhardtii had a comparable number of phas loci as in many higher plants whereas volvox carteri generated phasirnas from only six loci. the complete list of 21-nt phasirna-generating loci is provided in additional file  <dig>  all the phas loci identified in the present study are stored in an interactive online database we developed  <cit> . the database provides a set of query interfaces and tools to analyze, visualize, and mine the phasirna data presented in this study.table  <dig> summary of phas loci identified from various plant species




arabidopsis lyrata

arabidopsis thaliana















amborella trichopoda

cycas rumphii

ginkgo biloba

physcomitrella patens

volvox carteri

chlamydomonas reinhardtii





conserved and unique phas loci from non-coding dna sequences
the non-coding tas loci  were first identified in arabidopsis thaliana. mir <dig> is responsible for triggering tas <dig> and tas <dig>  which seems to be unique in a. thaliana  <cit> . in contrast, tas <dig> and its cognate trigger mir <dig> were found from moss to most of the land plants examined  <cit> . our searches in  <dig> plant species confirmed that tas <dig> was unique to a. thaliana, tas <dig> could only be found in a. thaliana and a. lyrata, and tas <dig> was present in many land plant species.

the taxonomic distribution of tas <dig> and its cognate trigger mir <dig> was enigmatic. previous studies postulated that the mir828–tas <dig> regulatory circuit might exist only in arabidopsis thaliana and a few closely related species, but the possibility of a wider distribution was proposed based on the presence of mir <dig> and/or tas <dig> homologs in several other plant genomes  <cit> . our searches identified bona fide tas <dig> loci based on the production of phasirnas in several dicot species, including poplar , sweet orange , grape , tomato , tobacco , potato , and monkey flower  . the mir828–tas <dig> regulatory circuit was suggested to play a role in trichome development in a. thaliana  <cit>  and apple  <cit> , fiber growth in cotton  <cit> , flavonoid biogenesis in a. thaliana  <cit> , and perhaps fruit development in tomato  <cit> . in line with previous reports  <cit> , we did not detect the presence of mir <dig> or tas4-derived phasirnas in any of the tested monocot species. interestingly, although the mir <dig> gene could be found in the genomes of all test species, its reads were only found in poplar and grape srna libraries  , in contrast to the detection of highly abundant mir <dig> in cotton  <cit> . it is possible that the mir <dig> level was too low to be detected in srna libraries from many plant species investigated in this study.

intriguingly, we found a mir <dig> homolog in the basal angiosperm amborella trichopoda  based on the homology of mature mirna sequences. this mirna was predicted to trigger phasirna production from an intergenic region. it is noteworthy that phasirna production triggered by atr-mir <dig> in amborella trichopoda did not yield the conserved d <dig> sequence  that was found in arabidopsis thaliana and many other species  <cit> . our current data are insufficient to draw a conclusion about the phylogenetic relationship between the mir828–phas regulatory circuit in amborella trichopoda and that in dicots, but raise the interesting possibility that the amborella trichopoda circuit was a prototype that has stabilized and been refined in dicots but been lost in monocots during evolution.

our searches uncovered many phas loci from noncoding sequences from various species  and we did not analyze them in further detail. our subsequent analyses were devoted to phas loci derived from protein-coding genes.

an expansive and diverse repertoire of phas loci originated from protein-coding genes
our analyses identified approximately  <dig>  protein-coding genes, belonging to  <dig> categories  based on their functional annotations, that serve as phas loci in at least one species, significantly expanding the list of  <dig> currently identified gene categories that can produce phasirnas . these phas loci cover a wide range of genes, which include those encoding disease resistance and wound-response proteins, hormone response factors, transcription factors, rna silencing components, proteins involved in signal transduction, transporters, protein translation machinery components, photosystem components, histone and dna methylation proteins, the cytoskeleton and associated factors, intracellular trafficking machinery, kinases, and other enzymes involved in diverse metabolic pathways. . transcription factors and kinases were also found to function as phas loci in soybean  <cit> .

when the total number of phas loci from leaves of land plants was compared, some interesting patterns emerged . the eudicots and basal angiosperm amborella trichopoda had relatively higher numbers of phas loci than monocots. among eudicots, sweet orange had the largest number of phas categories from the annotated gene loci in leaves. grapevine and poplar also had a large number of phas loci from annotated gene loci in leaves. closely related species may have different protein-coding phas loci enriched. for example, ppr-containing protein genes were the dominant phas loci in arabidopsis thaliana leaves, whereas tir-nbs-lrr class disease resistance genes were the most enriched in arabidopsis lyrata leaves.

disease resistance genes, including nbs-lrr genes, constitute the most conserved group of phas loci, confirming and expanding previous reports  <cit> . our extensive search found phasirnas produced from nbs-lrr genes in gymnosperms, the basal angiosperm amborella trichopoda and monocots, although much less than in dicots . thus, disease resistance genes evolved as phas loci in early seed plants but were strongly selected for in dicot plants. expression of r genes constitutes a high cost for plants  <cit> . infection of several viruses and a bacterium which encode silencing suppressors led to down-regulated expression of mirnas and sirnas that trigger phasirnas from r genes  <cit> , leading to the hypothesis that repressed expression of r genes by phasirnas under non-infection conditions functions to minimize the costs for plants  <cit>  and that viral or bacterial suppressor-induced expression of r genes enables or enhances plant defense responses during infection  <cit> . the wide taxonomic distribution of disease resistance genes as phas loci in our analysis lends further support to this hypothesis.

while some phas loci, such as disease resistance genes and myb domain-containing genes, were widespread among the plants we examined, most loci were found in only a few species or just one single species. for example, a squamosal promoter-binding protein gene served as a phas locus only in grapevine though this gene family is a conserved target of mir <dig> in many plants. the stochastic occurrence of many phas loci in the plant kingdom suggests their young evolutionary origins and the existence of yet-to-be identified biogenesis factors. this, together with the diversity of protein-coding genes acting as phas loci, suggests phasirnas as the fastest-evolving riboregulators to regulate the expression of continuously expanding numbers and types of protein-coding genes. as such, this regulation may be an important contributor to the diversification of certain plant phenotypes.

broad taxonomic distribution of rna silencing machinery components as phas loci
phasirnas can be generated from rna silencing machinery components, including dicer-like s and suppressor of gene silencing  <dig>  in medicago truncatula  <cit> , peach  <cit> , and soybean  <cit> , as well as argonaute <dig>  in peach  <cit> , and soybean  <cit> . we found sgs <dig> to be a phas locus in leaf and cone samples of the two gymnosperm species examined  and in leaf and fruit samples of grape. interestingly, arabidopsis thaliana sgs <dig> did not produce any sirnas. we also observed dcl-derived 21-nt phasirnas from papaya, sweet orange, tomato, and tobacco, ago-derived 21-nt phasirnas from a. thaliana, a. lyrata, monkey flower, tomato and sorghum, and rna-dependent rna polymerase -derived 21-nt phasirnas from foxtail millet and amborella trichopoda. these new observations, together with earlier reports  <cit> , support the notion that phasirnas generated from rna silencing machinery genes may function in a feedback mechanism to regulate the expression of these genes  <cit> , and that this mechanism may be widespread in plants.

novel biogenesis of phasirnas from introns or exon-intron junctions
the noncoding tas <dig> locus in arabidopsis thaliana produces sirnas from an alternative transcript that retained an intron  <cit> . in the present study, we found a large number of protein-coding genes that generate phasirnas from annotated introns alone  or intron–exon junctions  in many plant species. for example, we found that phasirna production from the sgs <dig> locus in grape progressed from an exon into an adjacent intron . in addition, a serine/threonine protein kinase gene produced phasirnas only from its second intron . in total, we identified  <dig> phas loci producing phasirnas only from annotated introns and  <dig> loci producing phasirnas from intron–exon junctions. to validate intron annotations, we used gbrowser in the phytozome  <cit> , solgenomics  <cit> , and amborella genome  <cit>  databases to examine expressed sequence tag and/or rna-sequencing  data for these phas loci. the data validated annotations for approximately one third  of the intron-only and one fourth  of the intron–exon junction phas loci . intriguingly, the majority of phas loci that generated phasirnas from introns or intron–exon junctions were disease resistance genes .

an outstanding question is whether phasirnas from the intron-only phas loci are generated from free-standing introns or from alternatively spliced or aberrant transcripts. we addressed this question by analyzing the published tomato dataset that contains rna-seq and srna data from the same samples  <cit> . we found three annotated intron regions that generated phasirnas but had no rna-seq coverage, indicating that they are bona fide introns. an example is shown in fig. 2a. we also found  <dig> annotated intron regions, which generated phasirnas with good rna-seq coverage, indicating that they are retained in the alternatively spliced transcripts . these data provide experimental evidence that free-standing introns or introns retained in the alternatively spliced transcripts can indeed be the direct sources of phasirnas.fig.  <dig> phasirnas generated from introns in tomato. examples of a phas locus  that generates phasirnas from a bona fide intron  and a phas locus  that generates phasirnas from an alternatively retained intron . rna-seq and srna reads were derived from the same organ  and mapped to the tomato genome. for srna mapping, red depicts reads aligned in forward orientation and blue in reverse orientation. est expressed sequence tag



it remains unclear whether the phasirnas from free-standing introns are generated via the conventional phasirna biogenesis pathway where a mirna trigger functions in the cytoplasm or via a novel pathway operating in the nucleus. regardless of the specific pathway, our findings revealed an unexpected link among mrna splicing, mrna stability, and phasirna regulation. this might represent a new mechanism of removing aberrant  rna transcripts that escape the nucleus to accumulate in the cytoplasm. alternatively, phasirna biogenesis from introns and/or intron–exon junctions of certain loci may function to regulate pre-mrna stability or other aspects of gene expression.

unique developmental regulation of phas expression in different plants
comprehensive analysis of phasirnas in soybean identified a number of tissue-specific phas loci  <cit> . most plant species we analyzed had srna libraries prepared from different organs and/or from various developmental stages, thereby allowing examination of the developmental significance of phasirna generation among different taxonomic groups. it is worth noting that srna libraries we used for comparative analysis for a given plant were all derived from the same genotype and generated by the same laboratory, and have been used to explore the widespread conservation and divergence of micrornas in plants  <cit> . our analyses showed that many protein-coding genes that acted as phas loci in one organ did not produce any sirnas or produced only abundant non-phased sirnas in another organ of the same species . for example, genes encoding nac domain-containing transcription factors were an obvious cluster in producing phasirnas in fruits but much less in leaves and flowers of sweet orange , implying their unique roles in regulating sweet orange fruit development.

all tested monocot plants possessed very few loci for generating 21-nt phasirnas in non-reproductive organs such as leaf, shoot, and root. for species in the grass family, there was a drastic induction of the phas loci in certain reproductive organs, such as the flower of foxtail millet, ear and tassel of maize , and panicle of sorghum. furthermore, most of these phas loci were in the intergenic regions as shown in fig.  <dig> and additional file  <dig> fig.  <dig> number of phas loci identified in different organs of representative species in the grass family



notably, wild rice had five phas loci producing phasirnas only in the seeds, but no sirnas in the shoots or roots. among these five loci, a phosphoinositide phosphatase family gene and a nuclear factor y gene produced 20-fold more phasirnas than those generated by a deeply conserved noncoding phas . thus, the regulatory roles of these two loci may help us understand the function of protein-coding transcript-derived phasirnas in cereal development.

these observations, together with the findings from arikit et al.  <cit> , indicate that phas-based gene regulations are unique in different organs in a wide range of plants. interestingly, organ-specific phas loci did not exhibit any general conservation among different plant species. whether this may contribute to the development of distinct phenotypes in different plants remains an outstanding question.

it should be noted that the datasets we have analyzed for land plants were mostly derived from whole plant organs. a recent study reported phasirnas in maize anther and pollen at different developmental stages, providing deeper insights into phasirna biogenesis at the tissue-specific level  <cit> . thus, future studies to analyze tissue- or even cell-specific expression patterns of phasirnas in different plants should shed new light on the functions of phasirnas in plant development processes.

viral infection induces or suppresses a diverse array of phas loci
some mirnas act as master regulators to initiate the generation of phasirnas from mrnas that encode nbs-lrr disease resistance proteins in legumes  <cit>  and solanaceous plants  <cit> . viral and bacterial infection represses the expression of mirna triggers and consequently also phasirnas from some resistance gene loci  <cit> . to gain further insight into the potential role of phasirnas in plant–microbe interactions, we analyzed the global expression patterns of phasirnas in several virus–plant systems. specifically, we examined phasirna profiles in healthy and papaya ringspot virus -infected leaves of papaya   <cit> , healthy and turnip mosaic virus-infected leaves of arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , as well as healthy and rice stripe virus - and rice dwarf virus -infected shoots of rice   <cit>  .

in the papaya system,  <dig> and  <dig> phas loci were found in healthy and infected leaf libraries, respectively; among them,  <dig> were shared while many exhibited different expression patterns . six disease resistance phas loci showed reduced production of 21-nt sirnas upon prsv infection . five of them became non-phas loci in the infected leaves . furthermore, three out of four phas loci derived from auxin-signaling genes in the healthy leaves also became non-phas loci in the infected leaves: arf <dig> had the highest degree of total sirna reduction in infected leaves and two auxin-signaling f-box genes  produced four times less sirnas in infected leaves .fig.  <dig> sirna production from various phas loci upon viral infection. a pie diagram showing the phas loci with more than five-fold changes in total 21-nt sirna production in papaya leaves infected by papaya ringspot virus as compared to that in healthy leaves. the number of phas locus or loci for each gene category showing induced or suppressed expression is indicated. b–d specific examples of phas loci derived from disease-resistant genes , auxin-related genes , and ethylene-responsive transcription factor genes , which showed differential expression of sirnas in healthy and infected leaves



similarly in the rice and arabidopsis systems, a large number of phas loci showed substantial changes in phasirna generation upon infection by different viruses . it is noteworthy that an auxin response factor  gene in rice showed more than 8- and  <dig> -fold changes in phasirna generation upon rsv and rdv infections, respectively.

while the repressed expression of some phas loci in the infected leaves was consistent with earlier reports in solanaceae and fabaceae , our analyses identified many novel phas loci induced by prsv infection. these could be clustered into several groups based on their gene functions: cytoskeleton-related genes, chloroplast-related genes, cell wall-related genes, transporter genes, and hormone-signaling genes . as an example, a saur-like arf increased sirna production by more than eight-fold and became a phas locus in infected leaves . furthermore, two ethylene-responsive transcription factor genes were highly induced as phas loci in response to viral infection . induced expression of these phas loci may function as part of the coordinated plant defense responses, by reducing metabolic activities to dampen viral replication. many studies have reported up- or down-regulated expression of host genes during viral infection, with many types of genes appearing to be commonly affected in different host–virus systems . the underlying molecular mechanisms are largely unknown. we suggest that viral infection-induced or suppressed expression of selective phasirnas may act as a novel mechanism to regulate the expression of selective host genes.

nutrient stresses modulate phasirna biogenesis in algae
previous reports showed the presence of phasirnas in unicellular alga c. reinhardtii, mainly mapped to intergenic regions  <cit> . in the present study, we identified more than  <dig> phas loci in this alga, of which approximately  <dig> were mapped to protein-coding genes. among the protein-coding phas loci, nine were uniquely induced by sulfate starvation, five were uniquely induced by phosphate starvation, and one was induced by both treatments. on the other hand, six protein-coding phas loci were suppressed by both treatments, and four were uniquely suppressed by sulfate treatment . it is noteworthy that there was no unique phas locus suppressed by phosphate starvation.

the biological implications of these changes in phas activities remain to be understood, but the suppressed expression of transposon-polyprotein loci is of notable interest. in c. reinhardtii, a dcl <dig> homolog has been shown to repress retrotransposon activity  <cit> . however, the underlying molecular mechanism is unknown. in the case of rem <dig> ty3-gypsy retrotransposon silencing, retrotransposon-derived sirnas were postulated to be derived from double-stranded rnas formed via a transposon polyprotein gene and its adjacent inverse transcripts  <cit> . however, we did not find evidence for the existence of such adjacent inverse transcripts that would contribute to the production of any sirnas. thus, phasirna-mediated retrotransposon silencing by phasirnas derived from the coding transcripts within the retrotransposon itself may be a novel mechanism underlying the retrotransposon silencing phenomenon in c. reinhardtii.

the multicellular alga v. carteri had much fewer phas loci. we found only one protein-coding phas locus in this alga growing under normal conditions. in contrast, five and one new protein-coding phas loci emerged under sulfate and phosphate starvation conditions, respectively.

our analysis suggested that algae can respond to different abiotic stresses by differential gene expression modulated by phasirna biogenesis. in soybean, drought stress induced the expression of phasirnas from a protein-coding gene, allene oxide synthase  <cit> . future studies will determine whether dynamic changes in phasirna biogenesis may occur broadly in land plants in response to nutrient and other abiotic stresses.

srna triggers for phasirna biogenesis
we predicted srna triggers for phas loci mainly based on sequence complementarity . we noticed that a large number of predicted triggers have a putative guided cleavage site falling out of the n ×  <dig> bp phase windows  to the positions of phasirnas. we discarded these out-of-phase triggers if they were not confirmed previously by other studies or not supported by the sparta  <cit>  analysis described below. in total we could predict triggers for approximately  <dig> % of the phas loci we identified in this study . among these, we could find  <dig> mirna triggers, among which  <dig> were known mirnas  and  <dig> putative mirnas  . there are six species with available sequencing data from degradome libraries from similar sample sources/organs . we used these data to test our trigger prediction with sparta  <cit> . the results are summarized in additional file  <dig>  for  <dig> triggers , the predicted cleavage sites were validated by degradome libraries. we could not validate any in p. patens, which may be attributed to the different sources for degradome and srna libraries. further experimental studies are necessary to validate the remaining triggers.

srna triggers may work via the two-hit model , in which two sites of the transcript are recognized by the same srna  <cit>  or two different srnas  <cit> , or via the one-hit model , in which a single 22-nt srna directs the cleavage of the target  <cit> . the numbers for the predicted 21-nt and 22-nt srna triggers at 5′- and 3′-ends are summarized in additional file  <dig>  there were many cases in which we only found one 21-nt trigger at either 5′- or 3′-end, which may have been due to the limit of the algorithm in identifying imperfect alignments of srnas and targets.

disease resistance genes are targeted by the mir482/mir <dig> superfamily in generating phasirnas  <cit> . other mirna triggers, such as mir <dig>  mir <dig>  mir <dig>  and mir <dig>  have also been reported  <cit> . we found these mirnas as triggers in various species. in addition, we predicted that mir <dig> in grape was also involved in regulating phasirna production from disease resistance genes. whether this suggests parallel evolution of species-specific regulators or suggests mir <dig> as a relative or member of the mir482/mir <dig> superfamily awaits further analysis. for nac domain transcription factors, the predicted trigger was mir <dig> in sweet orange but mir <dig> in poplar. the evolutionary relationship between the mir <dig> gene and mir <dig> gene also remains unknown.

these observations show that an orthologous protein-coding gene in different plant species may be targeted by different mirnas to produce phasirnas. however, because various mirna triggers for phasirna biogenesis may have their own distinct expression patterns, an orthologous protein-coding gene may serve as a phas locus in distinct spatial-temporal manners in various species. for example, nac domain transcription factor genes were enriched phas loci in the fruit sample in sweet orange and in the xylem sample from wood trunk in poplar. these observations reveal the highly complex evolutionary and functional regulatory networks of mirnas and phasirnas.

predicted target genes of phasirnas
we also predicted the downstream targets for phasirnas present with more than  <dig> rpm in a given library . it was evident that nearly all phasirnas had near-perfect matches to the genes in the same family as their originating loci. interestingly, a recent report by boccara et al.  <cit>  showed that phasirnas derived from disease resistance genes negatively regulate a broad spectrum of disease resistance genes in arabidopsis thaliana.

our analyses identified some phasirnas that may target genes outside the gene families of their originating loci. in most species, such potentially trans-regulatory phasirnas accounted for only a small percentage of the total phasirnas, generally less than  <dig> % with exceptions when a stringent cut-off score  was used for target prediction. thus, in contrast to the dominant trans-regulatory mode of mirnas  <cit> , our analysis suggests that phasirnas predominantly regulate protein-coding genes from which they are derived and genes in the same families of phasirna-generating genes. as discussed earlier, many phas loci may be of recent evolutionary origin given their stochastic occurrence in plants, superficially similar to the origin of young mirnas. however, unlike the majority of young mirnas that do not have predicted target genes and are therefore likely function-neutral  <cit> , phasirnas are all likely functional because they may target at least the genes from which they are originated.

evolution of the phasirna biogenesis machinery
the stochastic presence of many phas loci in the species we analyzed raised questions concerning the conservation of their biogenesis machinery. studies on the model plant arabidopsis thaliana demonstrated that the generation of 21-nt phasirnas involves the coordinated actions of protein factors dcl <dig>  ago <dig>  rdr <dig>  and sgs <dig>  in addition to the core players for mirna biogenesis and function such as dcl <dig> and ago <dig>  <cit> . assuming this is an essential set of proteins for phasirna biogenesis in any plant, we determined their presence in different plants by searching the available genome sequences of  <dig> species, covering algae, mosses, monocots, and dicots. gymnosperm plants were not included for lack of full genome sequences.

our extensive search revealed that all proteins currently known to be specifically required for phasirna biogenesis were present in all of the tested land plants, from moss to higher plants. none of the algae species, single cellular or multicellular, had the complete set of sgs <dig>  rdrs, dcls, and agos. among algae, only c. reinhardtii and v. carteri had dicer-like protein factors as shown in fig.  <dig>  our search results match previous reports in several plant species including algae species  <cit> , rice  <cit> , maize  <cit> , and tomato  <cit> .fig.  <dig> summary of key protein factors involved in phasirna biogenesis in the plant kingdom. the color shades depict the species that were investigated for phasirna production in this study. the numbers listed indicate the copy numbers of the corresponding phasirna biogenesis genes



thus, our results suggest that the currently known phasirna biogenesis pathway has evolved only in land plants. these observations raise questions for future investigations:  what factors contribute to the stochastic evolution and activity of phas loci in different plant species, different developmental stages, and under different biotic and abiotic stress conditions; and  what machinery is responsible for the biogenesis of phasirnas in algae?

CONCLUSIONS
our extensive search across  <dig> different plant species uncovered a large and surprisingly diverse repertoire of protein-coding genes as novel phas loci. biogenesis of phasirnas from many loci is uniquely associated with speciation, development, viral infection, or nutrient stresses. numerous phas loci produced phasirnas from intron or exon–intron junction regions, revealing an unexpected link between phasirna biogenesis and rna splicing. our analysis suggests that phasirnas predominantly regulate protein-coding genes from which they are derived and genes in the same families of phasirna-generating genes, in contrast to the dominant trans-regulatory mode of mirnas. interestingly, while dicot phas loci appear to play an overwhelming role in disease resistance, monocot phas loci are mostly associated with reproductive growth.

the phas loci derived from protein-coding genes may be considered an evolutionary novelty in that these phas loci possess an added regulatory function specific to some plant species rather than a replacement of the original function of protein-coding genes for these loci. the stochastic occurrence of phas loci in the plant kingdom suggests their young evolutionary origins. the evolutionary flux that leads to high variations for a given locus among species or taxonomic groups suggests that phasirna networks may contribute to plant phenotype diversity by regulating distinct developmental processes or responses to biotic or abiotic stimuli.

in summary, our new findings, together with an interactive database developed, significantly expand previous findings and will help build a critical foundation to advance further studies on how phasirnas may have emerged to participate in the complex regulatory networks to shape the evolution of plant phenotype diversity.

