BACKGROUND
in the flow of genetic information, translational control is the level at which reprogramming of cell activities accesses the phenotype, ultimately shaping protein synthesis and therefore, together with the control of protein degradation, quantitative variation of the proteome. originally studied in early stages of development in oocytes and embryos  <cit> , translational control has been increasingly recognized as a very general feature of eukaryotic cells, extensively present also in mature tissues. this process is orchestrated by incoming cell stimuli which elicit largely unknown transduction pathways, affecting primarily translation initiation, i.e. the loading of ribosomes on messenger ribonucleoprotein particles  to form polysomes, and secondarily translation elongation  <cit> . the ways in which these stimuli influence polysome formation involve “general” translation factors as eif4e, eif4g, eif4a and pabp, allowing mrna circularization and ribosome scanning, and more specialized factors acting on sequences found primarily in the 5’ or 3’ untranslated regions  of mrnas. these latter factors belong to the two classes of rna binding proteins  and noncoding rnas , among which micrornas  are an intensively studied subclass. in the human genome the predicted genes coding for proteins involved in translational control are around a thousand and the number of mirnas, proven to be able to modulate translation  <cit> , is estimated between one and two thousands  <cit> . furthermore, by recent transcriptome high-sensitivity sequencing scannings, the human ncrna collection has risen to comprise around five thousands ncrnas  <cit> , to which the  <dig>   <cit>  processed pseudogenes have to be added because they also can interfere with gene expression  <cit> . if even a small fraction of these ncrnas was involved in modulating translation, the amount of macromolecules potentially able to operate at the interface between mrna and proteins would be extremely high. moreover, recent findings reveal the presence in eukaryotic cells of cytoplasmic rna-containing granules  composed of aggregates of mrnps where mrna decay, editing and storage can take place  <cit> . these granules can generate a bidirectional flow of mrnas with polysomes  <cit> .

given this complex layer of activities in the cytoplasm, we set the goal to estimate the relationship between fluctuations of mrna levels in the cell and fluctuations of the fraction of mrnas available for translation after a stimulus, which to our knowledge has never been addressed with a population-based approach. the degree of change in translation-engaged mrnas can be estimated by extracting mrnas organized in polysomes by a classical separation technique, velocity sedimentation by sucrose gradients, and profiling them in parallel with total mrna  <cit> .

by measuring the total mrnas of cells  and the polysomally-loaded mrnas  after a growth stimulus, we obtained a picture of overall mismatching between the two changes for the majority of genes, to which we refer as “uncoupling” in the mrna behavior. this was confirmed studying a number of other available profiles coming from very diverse experiments and kinetics. the marked, general uncoupling between transcriptome and translatome gene expression changes allowed us to propose a biological model by which the machineries responsible for mrna availability in the cytoplasm and for mrna engagement in translation lack overall dependency, therefore questioning the notion of continuity in the control of the flow of gene expression.

RESULTS
profound uncoupling between transcriptome and translatome gene expression variations upon egf stimulation of hela cells
to address the impact of translational regulation in reshaping transcriptome profiles we chose a classical paradigm of cellular reprogramming of gene expression, epidermal growth factor  treatment of starved cells. this stimulus elicits a well-known chain of intracellular transduction events, resulting in a complex phenotypic spectrum of changes with prevalent induction of cell growth and proliferation  <cit> . as outlined in figure 1a, we treated hela cells under serum starvation with egf for  <dig> minutes . the activation of the egf signalling cascade is proved by an increased phosphorylation of akt and elk <dig>  known egfr downstream effectors  <cit> , and by an increase of myc, an early egf transcriptional target  <cit>  . consistently with an overall engagement of the translational machinery by egf, the absorbance profiles obtained after sucrose gradient centrifugation of lysates from egf-treated compared to control cells show a clear increase of rna associated to the polysomal fractions and a concomitant reduction of rna present in the subpolysomal portion of the gradient . we then profiled by gene expression arrays both the transcriptome and the translatome, before and after  <dig> minutes of egf treatment. microarray results were validated with quantitative real time pcr on a selected subset of twelve genes, showing a good concordance between the two independent sets of measurements : pearson correlation was  <dig>  for transcriptome data and  <dig>  for translatome data. differentially expressed genes  upon egf treatment were detected from microarray data with the rankprod algorithm  <cit>  separately at the transcriptome and translatome level. this allowed us to obtain a simple classification of degs into “coupled” or “uncoupled”, based on the concordance of their variation between the transcriptome and the translatome . we consider the degs coupled if they show a significant change in both the transcriptome and the translatome and if the change is homodirectional . they are instead scored as uncoupled if  they change significantly in both the transcriptome and the translatome but in an antidirectional way ,  they change significantly only in the transcriptome  and  they change significantly only in the translatome . following these criteria, the proportion of coupled degs observed in our experiment is only  <dig> % , against the overwhelming  <dig> % proportion of uncoupled degs . furthermore, among the uncoupled degs, purely translatome degs are nine times more frequent than purely transcriptome degs  and transcriptome degs result to be exclusively upregulated. plotting translatome versus transcriptome fold changes makes clear that the variations in mrna abundance are poorly correlated with the variations in mrna polysomal engagement . therefore, treatment of hela cells with a well-known growth factor results to target mostly translation, with a negligible concordance between the two levels of regulation. we next sought to determine if the observed differences between the two profiles were also reflected in variations of predicted cellular processes and activities. degs were annotated by sequence, protein domain, phylogenetic and functional descriptors: pir resource  <cit> , interpro database  <cit> , cog database  <cit> , kegg  <cit>  and biocarta pathway databases, gene ontology  <cit> . the high degree of uncoupling was confirmed by enrichment analysis of the transcriptome and translatome degs, resulting in sharply distinct patterns of significant terms, with only  <dig> common terms ,  <dig> transcriptome-specific terms and  <dig> translatome-specific terms .

the high degree of uncoupling between transcriptome and translatome variation profiles is a general feature of the control of gene expression in mammalian cells
to test whether our observation of strong discordance between the variations of total mrnas and polysome-associated mrnas could be of some generality in mammals, we systematically reanalyzed already published experiments in which both the transcriptome and the translatome  were profiled in mammalian cells and tissues. we selected the experiments according to stringent quality standards  to ensure technical comparability between different studies. among an initial database of  <dig> mammalian studies, we finally identified  <dig> experiments involving observation of different treatments and processes in human, mouse and rat cells and tissues, giving a total of  <dig> paired transcriptome/translatome datasets. the profiles belonged to three types of experiments: short-term treatments with extracellular stimuli , differentiation processes in cells and tissues  and induced genetic alterations of the translational machinery . the experiments are briefly described in table  <dig> and extensively annotated in additional file  <dig>  all the microarrays used in the experiments belong to the affymetrix platform: this decreases the risk of introducing in the following analyses cross-platform biases due to different manufacturing technologies . raw microarray data were subjected to the same normalization and degs selection procedure previously described for the egf experiment . to measure the significance of differential expression, we chose the rankprod algorithm because, transforming the actual expression values into ranks, it offers a way to overcome the heterogeneity among multiple datasets and therefore to extract and integrate information from them  <cit> . in order to keep a methodological homogeneity, we also chose to apply for all the datasets the same significance threshold. to quantify the transcriptome/translatome uncoupling for each paired dataset, we calculated the percentage of uncoupled degs, which outnumbered coupled degs in two thirds of the analyzed datasets  the percentage of uncoupled degs ranging from  <dig> % to  <dig> % with an average of  <dig> %. conversely, the percentage of coupled degs ranges from a minimum of  <dig> % to a maximum of  <dig> %, with an average of  <dig> %. importantly, these relative proportions between uncoupled and coupled degs are stable even when using different significance thresholds to identify degs, or alternative deg detection methods . as alternatives we used t-test and sam  <cit> , by which we can show an even more extensive uncoupling than by rankprod. therefore, this broad analysis confirmed that the marked uncoupling between transcriptome and translatome profiles is a feature far from being confined to short-time treatment of hela cells with egf, assuming instead the dimension of a general principle describing change of gene expression in mammals.

 short name specifying exposure to or subtraction from  a broadly defined perturbation agent, perturbation agent name, experimental time.

 dataset reference on geo or arrayexpress.

 all the chips belong to the affymetrix platform.

ontological enrichment and pathway analysis of transcriptome and translatome variations predict very different phenotypes
we were then interested in estimating the impact of gene expression uncoupling on the cell activities ascribed to the transcriptome and the translatome degs, when studying the whole collection of experiments. all the lists of degs from the dataset pairs were independently subjected to ontological enrichment analysis as for our egf experiment . we tested whether the gene expression uncoupling between transcriptome and translatome can originate a semantic specificity between the two relative sets of enriched ontological terms. two measures of semantic specificity were adopted. the first measure is based on the simple enumeration of cell activities that, as an effect of uncoupling, resulted enriched uniquely in the transcriptome or in the translatome degs . transcriptome specificity is higher  than translatome specificity in the large majority of dataset pairs, except for three of them related to short-term cell treatments. the second measure of semantic specificity accounts also for semantic similarity relationships between not identical ontological terms , and was applied to all the dataset pairs . semantic specificities were low, with an average value of  <dig>  and with  <dig> dataset pairs falling below the midrange value of  <dig> . to further estimate the extent of the distance between the transcriptome and the translatome of each experiment, we compared the semantic specificity measures with a reference distribution, calculated as the set of semantic specificities between the transcriptome of each dataset pair and the transcriptome of all the other datasets. since the datasets collected were largely heterogeneous, they were assumed to show a low semantic relationship between their transcriptome degs. surprisingly, the semantic specificity observed between the transcriptome and the translatome in all the dataset pairs except one was found within or below the distribution, and in  <dig> of them below the distribution median . taken together, the results show unexpectedly weak semantic similarity between the transcriptome and the translatome ontological enrichments of all the considered experiments.

finally, we wanted to derive from the global ontological analysis those cell activities more specifically characterizing transcriptome degs compared to translatome degs and vice versa. to provide a general view, individual over-represented go terms from all dataset pairs were mapped to goslim  <cit> , a simplified version of go. a clear outcome was that half of the translatome-specific terms  were exclusively translation-related . this result provides additional support to the notion of independent transcriptome and translatome controls of gene expression variations.

for each dataset, lists of transcriptome and translatome degs were subjected to further annotation with the ingenuity pathway analysis  library of canonical pathways . the significance of the association between the degs and the canonical pathways was measured with the fisher’s exact test, and a  <dig>  cut-off on the benjamini-hochberg corrected p-value was used to identify significantly enriched pathways. comparing the number of pathways that resulted enriched uniquely in the transcriptome or in the translatome degs, we had another proof that the gene expression uncoupling between transcriptome and translatome is extended to a functional specificity between the two relative sets of enriched pathways . across all the dataset pairs,  <dig> pathways  were significantly enriched only in transcriptome degs,  <dig> pathways  only in translatome degs and  <dig> pathways  in both transcriptome and translatome degs. in  <dig> out of the  <dig> datasets with at least one enriched pathway, the number of specific pathways exceeds the number of common pathways.

the ingenuity knowledge base was employed to build networks from the lists of transcriptome and translatome degs for each dataset. networks were generated using experimentally validated direct interactions among degs . cellular functions associated to networks, based on the functional annotation of their genes, were ranked according to their translatome specificity . rna post-transcriptional modification, again an mrna related theme, resulted as a cellular function mainly associated to translatome networks.

transcriptome and translatome variations are globally not dependent
having shown the high level of uncoupling between transcriptome and translatome variations by either a gene-oriented and a function-oriented perspective, we speculate that these variations could be controlled by largely independent regulatory mechanisms. if confirmed, this hypothesis would falsify the conventional model of gene expression change where transcriptome fluctuations induced by regulated mrna synthesis or degradation are implicitly considered determinants of translatome changes, through “mass effects” of increased or decreased mrna quantities on polysomal occupancy  <cit> . indeed, the results of three different statistical tests carried out on the available deg profiles support a counterintuitive model of transcriptome and translatome relative autonomy . the conventional dependency model reasonably generates the following expectations:  the total number of translatome degs should be dependent on the total number of transcriptome degs,  significant variations of expression of a gene in the transcriptome should be reflected in the translatome, and therefore transcriptome degs should overlap translatome degs in a statistically significant manner. neither expectation was confirmed by our analysis. in fact, the likelihood ratio test clearly rejected the first expectation, by supporting the notion that the numbers of transcriptome and translatome degs are independent in  <dig> out of the  <dig> comparisons . furthermore, when we tested the second expectation, we found the observed overlap between transcriptome and translatome degs to be comparable with the overlap deriving from random sampling of gene variations of expression, never passing a  <dig>  p-value threshold for significance by standard non-parametric bootstrap . to further assess this strong indication of independence, we finally estimated the mutual information between transcriptome and translatome variations, modeled as binary variables. across all comparisons mutual information values ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , with an average value of  <dig> . when we took into account the minimal and maximal mutual information values allowed by the frequencies of degs in each dataset pair , the observed mutual information values were not found to deviate from the overall midrange values . the lack of substantial mutual dependence between transcriptome and translatome degs was confirmed by the fact that the observed mutual information values never significantly exceed the corresponding values in random bootstrapping samples .

past studies employing yeast and reticulocyte lysates  <cit>  have claimed that mrnas have to numerically compete to gain access to ribosomes and to form polysomes. according to this view, polysomes should generally buffer transcriptome variations, except for those transcripts associated to trans-acting factors specifically increasing their probability of access to polysomes. to verify this hypothesis in our mammalian datasets, we counted the number of translationally enhanced  and translationally buffered  mrnas across all the  <dig> dataset pairs. since the proportions are roughly 50% and 50%  without a significant majority of genes buffered at the polysomal level, we suggest that in mammalian cells the competition of mrna for ribosomes is not a general driving force regulating translation, unless the action of trans factors promoting polysome formation has the same magnitude of the polysomal competition effect.

in conclusion, we suggest that by analyzing the available data with different approaches, the mrna production/degradation and the mrna access to translation appear to be globally regulated not in an interdependent way.

discussion
the conceptualization which framed molecular genetics studies for four decades is the so-called central dogma  <cit> , representing the forward flow of gene expression from dna to mrna to proteins through transcription and translation. this directional flow can easily be viewed as an assembly line in which the translation step is automatically determined by the availability of mrnas produced by the transcription step. following this scheme, changes in the quantities of an mrna species due to changes in its transcription and/or degradation rate after a stimulus determine changes in its translation rate.

prompted by the recent appreciation of translational control being more widespread than originally thought  <cit> , and by the discovery of universal cytoplasmic foci of mrna accumulation  <cit> , in this work we wanted to address the quantitative population changes induced by a cell stimulus between the cytoplasmic mrnas and those mrnas supposed to be actively engaged in translation because part of polysomes. inspired by the results of an experiment of egf treatment on hela cells, we extended the analysis to a number of available published data on mammalian systems, all obtaining the translatome measures after sucrose gradient separation of polysomes. therefore the outcome proposed, deriving from  <dig> treatments and  <dig> developmental assays performed on  <dig> different types of mammalian cells, can be likely regarded as general for mammals.

we found that the degree of uncoupling between the transcriptome and the translatome was higher than the degree of coupling, both in terms of single transcripts undergoing changes in levels and in terms of the ontological enrichment of the corresponding proteins. a striking result of the ontological analysis is that the transcriptome variation profiles of two different, unrelated experiments are as diverse as each of them compared with the corresponding translatome variations of the same experiment . from this result we derive a message of partiality of transcriptome data in representing cell phenotypes, no matter how much quantitatively accurate. we also observed that a general tendency to establish autoregulatory or crossregulatory loops should be a specific feature of mrnas and proteins involved in translation. in fact, among the mrnas that change their abundance purely at the translatome level, we observe a strong enrichment in encoded translation-related proteins. this finding extends previous observations of self-regulating translation activities, such as the well-known example of the top genes, that are involved in the translation basal machinery and at the same time are regulated at the translational level after cell growth stimuli  <cit> . this observation provides a first clue for understanding the independence of translatome changes by the transcriptome: following cell stimuli which act on their expression, many genes coding for components of the translational machinery do not undergo any change in their mrna levels, but only variations in the rate of polysomal loading of these mrnas. moreover, we know that several mammalian rbps bind their own mrna and the mrnas encoding other rbps, regulating their stability and translation  <cit> . in agreement, reconstruction in the yeast of rbp expression networks suggests that at least one third of the studied proteins post-transcriptionally auto regulate themselves, acting as network hubs  <cit> . in metazoan a possible strong evolutionary pressure for the wiring of these rbp-mediated post-transcriptional looping circuits could derive from the need to regulate protein synthesis of maternal mrnas in oocytes and in early embryo development, a well-studied process in c. elegans and drosophila <cit> . a stimulating framework to explain the complexity and the relative independence of post-transcriptional networks from transcriptional events is proposed by keene with the concept of post-transcriptional regulons, clusters of discrete mrnas co-regulated by the same set of rbps in order to orchestrate complex cellular functions  <cit> .

indirect observations sustaining the view of divergence between the transcriptome and the translatome come instead from en-masse analyses comparing absolute mrna and protein abundance. while in many prokaryotic and eukaryotic systems mrna levels can describe no more than 50% of protein levels  <cit> , in a recent work  <cit>  on human tumor cells the matching is lower  and translation-related features  contribute with 30% to the predictability of protein concentration. similar conclusions, with a predominant role in control given to translation, were drawn from a quantitative model based on mrna and protein abundances, synthesis rates and half-lives in mouse fibroblasts and human breast cancer cells  <cit> . protein abundances are also more conserved than total mrna abundances among different taxa, suggesting that transcriptome networks are less affected by evolutionary pressure than proteome networks  <cit> .

direct transcriptome to translatome comparison studies after severe stresses in yeast provide a picture of a marked translational shutdown from which highly concordant homodirectional changes emerge for some genes  <cit> . exposing yeast to mild stresses, instead, produces a response characterized by a high level of uncoupling  <cit> . these last mild perturbations and their dynamic effects can be better assimilated to the stimuli analyzed here in mammalian cells. a statistical treatment of the populations of mrnas undergoing variations in our collection of comparable dataset pairs provides the falsification of a model of straight dependency between translatome changes from transcriptome changes. as a possible alternative, a parsimonious model in line with these data could postulate a general orthogonality between the mechanisms controlling transcript levels and translation in mammalian cells. in other words, changes in abundance of a given mrna do not determine per se any effect on changes in its polysomal engagement. while mrna abundance is controlled in a sequence-dependent way by its rate of transcription and degradation, polysomal engagement of mrna is determined by translation factors interacting with sequence and structural motifs present in the mrna itself  <cit> . these controls do not depend on mrna abundance if not following titration of the trans-acting factors involved, as recently shown for mirnas  <cit> . the view proposed by this model could speculatively match that of the proposed stochastic, “burst-like” nature of transcription  <cit> , characterized by variable kinetics and refractory periods  <cit> , producing therefore a noisy transcriptome which could be later shaped into a more stable proteome by translational control.

following this parsimonious model the observed degree of coupling between fluctuations of the mrna levels in the cells and fluctuations in productive ribosome engagement should be an effect of specific mechanisms of molecular pairing between mrna steady state determinants  and regulation of translation of the same mrna. the prediction emerging from this study is that a variety of coupling mechanisms, some of which already described  <cit> , should be active in mammalian cells to orchestrate cell and tissue primary programs.

CONCLUSIONS
our study estimated the genome-wide correlation between changes in mrna abundance and mrna polysomal loading in an unprecedentedly large collection of mammalian cells and tissues subjected to heterogeneous stimuli. from our results we conclude that the control of gene expression at the polysomal level is pervasive with no exceptions, and genes whose expression changes homodirectionally at the transcriptome and the translatome level represent a minority of those perturbed by the stimuli. from a statistic point of view the variations in the degree of mrna polysomal loading are, on the whole, independent from variations in mrna abundance. this independency is further extended to the cell activities inferred from the ontological analysis of transcriptome and translatome differentially expressed genes, with a clear tendency of translation-related genes to be controlled purely at the translational level without modifications in the levels of their transcripts.

