BACKGROUND
the optic nerve  is an isolated cns tract, supplied by a separate vasculature, that connects the eye to the rest of the central nervous system . the on consists of the myelinated axons of retinal ganglion cells , their supporting glia, oligodendrocytes and vascular elements, all enclosed by a fibrous sheath. the on is one of the few areas that a pure cns white matter tract is readily available for analysis, providing a window into in-vivo cns axonal function. in humans, the  <dig> cm long on is clinically subject to a number of diseases, notably the glaucomas, optic neuritis and anterior ischemic optic neuropathy  <cit> . relatively little is known about gene expression patterns in human on and their implications for on-specific disease, or about species-specific differences in gene expression that may contribute to the dichotomies in pharmacological responsiveness known to occur between humans and rodent models of cns disease  <cit> . in addition, the on provides a near-ideal tool for identifying axonally transported mrnas; a newly described neuronal function  <cit> .

expressed sequence tag  analysis of cdna libraries can provide an informative overview of major transcripts in specific tissues. the neibank project has created and analyzed several cdna libraries from specific eye tissues  <cit> . while many cdna libraries are normalized  or amplified , most neibank libraries are unnormalized and unamplified so that random sequencing for est analysis reflects more closely the natural abundance of common gene transcripts in each tissue. this information can shed light on the molecular bases for the structural and functional differences among tissues, and for important differences in tissue responsiveness to pharmacological agents and sensitivity to various pathological processes.

est data described as originating from human optic nerve is available in the unigene database . however inspection of the data suggested that these libraries may be mis-identified and may not actually represent optic nerve, or may be grossly contaminated with other tissues. here the construction and analysis of a new unnormalized human on library is described. the new library shows strong similarities in gene expression to other neural tissues while previously available unigene data contains markers for anterior segment and retina. the new analysis has revealed the expression of several genes with implications for on function and with potential value as markers for specific cell types in the on. the new on library thus provides both a reasonable indicator of the pattern of gene expression in human on. results of this analysis also provide some insights into the variability of responsiveness to neuroprotective treatments exhibited by rodents and primates on.

RESULTS
cdna library and sequencing
for the human on cdna library , there were  <dig>  ×  <dig> primary transcripts, with an average insert size of  <dig>  kbp.  <dig> % of clones contained no insert and 6% contained mitochondrial genome sequence. a total of  <dig> quality 5' reads from the library yielded  <dig> clones after removal of contaminants and very short sequences and masking of repetitive sequences. analysis of these clones using grist  <cit>  resulted in identification of  <dig> groups of clones, each potentially representing individual on expressed genes.  <dig> of these groups contained two or more clones. these results enable us to generate a 'first pass' analysis of about the relative expression of the more common genes, and allow us to compare characteristics of different cns white matter libraries.

about 75% of the groups of clones corresponded to identified genes with corresponding refseq or unigene entries in genbank. the remainder consists of singleton clones, many of which represent longer 3' utrs of known genes, sequences not include in refseq, sequences with high phred quality scores that nevertheless have insufficiently good sequence to give a reliable match, and clones from intron and intergenic regions. the latter class may or may not have biological significance, although it is now clear that much more of the genome is transcribed than was previously thought  <cit> . the position of such clones can be examined using tools in neibank and eyebrowse  <cit> . table  <dig> shows the most abundant expressed genes the human on library , those represented by  <dig> or more clones in the est analysis.

first column: gene name. column two indicates the gene id number from genbank. genome position on each chromosome is shown in the third column and the number of ests for each gene is shown in the fourth column.

comparisons with related datasets
prior to this new est analysis, two publically available datasets for cdna libraries also described as human on were available through unigene , lib. <dig> . supplemental table s <dig>  shows the most abundant groups of cdnas from the unnormalized data. it is immediately apparent that markers for anterior segment, such as keratin  <dig> and opticin, and markers for retina, such as rhodopsin and α-transducin, are abundantly represented in this dataset. other anterior segment and retina markers, such as aldh3a <dig>  aquaporin  <dig>  cadherin  <dig> and retinol binding protein  <dig>  are also present at lower levels. this suggests that the tissue origin of these libraries is probably not isolated optic nerve and the libraries are at least contaminated with retina and anterior segment. indeed, this observation was a major reason for the creation of the present on library for neibank. data from the combined unigene libraries have been processed at neibank as a resource of eye expressed clones, but because of the uncertainty about tissue origin this data is listed as "for the record" rather than as on.

in contrast to the unigene library data, est analysis of the new neibank on library  shows abundant markers characteristic for white matter neural tissue while retina and anterior segment markers  are absent from nbj. four genes expressed by oligodendrocytes ) that would be expected to be highly expressed in any library generated from on are present in nbj, but are absent or low abundance in the unigene data. indeed, of the  <dig> genes represented by  <dig> or more ests in the new on library,  <dig>  are absent from the unnormalized unigene library.

on is a cns-white matter tract that also contains large numbers of astrocytes and microglia . for tissue comparison, we evaluated est data for white matter neural tissues, including corpus callosum , a library generated from white matter-affected multiple sclerosis lesions  and an un-normalized dorsal root ganglion . additionally, we included est library data from astrocytes , and macrophages , extracted from unigene. while the multiple sclerosis library gene abundance is normalized, the other datasets are un-normalized. since representation of low abundance genes in est data is stochastic, the comparisons were limited to "abundant' genes, simply defined as those represented by  <dig> or more clones in a library. figure  <dig> shows the comparison of the abundant clones in the on data with those in the neural and with the astrocyte/macrophage libraries . about 60% of the genes abundant in on are also abundant in the other white matter libraries while about 40% are also abundant in astrocytes or macrophages.  <dig> of the abundant genes in on are abundant in neither of the other groups. many of these have undefined or general functions. those listed in table  <dig> have potentially interesting connections to functional roles in on. two of the genes code for dystonin and dynein, proteins which are known to interact  <cit> . another interesting gene in this category is efemp1/fibulin <dig>  an ecm protein of unknown function that is mutated in the amd-like disease malattia leventinese/doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy . other genes in this list have known roles in oligodendrocytes, cytoskeleton or cellular motors. some map to areas associated with inherited glaucoma or retinal disease .

the first column shows the unigene number, the second column the gene descriptor. third column indicates the number of specific ests in the first  <dig> sequenced clones. the fourth column  give specific information of interest about these genes * a possible 6th clone in 3'utr is also present. ^ a 5th clone was dropped because it is chimeric.

on expressed with genes with functional implications
axon-associated
rgc axons are major components of on. one of the more abundantly expressed axonal genes in on is dystonin or bpag <dig>  represented by five ests. dystonin is a plakin family member regulated by ifnγ and is associated with retrograde axonal transport in sensory neurons  <cit> . as mentioned above, this gene is not abundantly expressed in a sample of other white matter-related libraries. another axonally expressed gene that is associated with axon outgrowth and axon-dendrite specification, dihydropyrimidinase-like  <dig> , also known as collapsin response mediator protein  <dig>  <cit>  is represented by  <dig> ests, while sema3b, a gene associated with axon guidance has  <dig> ests in the collection. other genes with roles in axonal growth and function, such as dynein subunits and robo <dig>  are also represented at lower levels.

putative axonally-transported mrnas
axon transport of mrnas has been shown in a number of animal models. a number of proteins associated with cytoskeleton, injury-response, and neurodegeneration are specially transported to and translated in axons. we compared reported axonally-transported mrnas with the human equivalent ests identified in the new human on cdna library . table  <dig> shows the concordance in human on with known axonally transported mrnas. the human homologs of 18/ <dig> genes  demonstrated to be axonally transported in rat dorsal root ganglion were identified in the on library. ests for vimentin and beta-actin were among the highest abundance in the un-normalized library, with  <dig> other ests present in multiple copies. while a number of ests identified in this group are also generally expressed in many cell types , these data suggest that mrna axonal transport is likely to be a common aspect of human cns axonal function as well.

column 1: gene name. column 2: gene id. column 3: relative abundance of each identified est, from the first  <dig> sequenced ests.

signaling pathways
ests for several genes associated with intracellular signaling are also represented abundantly in nbj. these include mitogen-activate protein kinase-kinase kinase  <dig>  neurotrophic tyrosine kinase receptor type  <dig>  and calmodulin  <dig>  other signaling components such as fgfr <dig>  stat <dig>  kinectin  <dig> and mapk <dig> are also represented by multiple ests.

oligodendrocyte markers
one of the most abundant on expressed genes in the nbj analysis is qki . there are  <dig> ests for qki, but it is absent from both the unnormalized and normalized unigene datasets). qki is an oligodendrocyte-specific gene expressed in both cytoplasm and nucleus. qki isoforms are dramatically reduced or absent in twitcher mice, and are required for normal myelination  <cit> . we tested qki as a nuclear marker for on-oligodendrocyte identification. a rabbit polyclonal anti-qki antibody was reacted against rat, monkey and human on, and compared with immunoreactivity with adenoma polyposis coli , which has been identified as selectively reacting with oligodendrocyte and astrocyte nuclei  <cit> , as well as against rat and human retina.

in all species the anti-qki antibody generated a strong nuclear signal in the columnar nuclei that typically are associated with oligodendrocytes . similar patterns were seen for anti-qki antibody  and apc- <dig> antibody , another marker for oligodendrocytes  <cit>  while anti-gfap  stained both oligodendrocytes and astrocytes. thus, in conjunction with gfap, qki can be used to selectively identify oligodendrocytes.

ion-channels
these are identified by go terms: atp-gated cation channel activity; calcium-activated potassium channel activity; extracellular-glutamate-gated ion channel activity; ion channel activity; potassium channel activity; voltage-gated chloride channel activity; voltage-gated ion channel activity; voltage-gated ion-selective channel activity; voltage-gated potassium channel activity; voltage-gated potassium channel complex.

results shown in figure  <dig> reveal that rat on has a 5- <dig> fold higher abundance of tested l-type calcium ion channel transcripts than does old-world primate on . a qualitatively similar difference was also apparent at the protein level . these results suggest that the difference in response to l-type calcium ion channel blockers in rodent and primate may be related to species-specific differences in gene expression in on.

immune/inflammatory markers
a significant component of on consists of immune-related cells, particularly microglia. three of the most abundant ests in nbj: cd <dig> , osteopontin, and prostaglandin d <dig> synthetase are associated with microglial-macrophage/inflammatory functions. other abundant ests with functional connection to inflammatory processes are also present. serpina <dig> , represented by  <dig> ests, is an acute phase protein whose expression increases in acute and chronic inflammation and which may be involved in stroke and other neurological disease <cit> . annexin a <dig>  represented by  <dig> ests is thought to have neuroprotective or anti-neuroinflammatory functions in brain  <cit> . an important caveat is that peri-mortem inflammatory conditions may influence the number of inflammation-associated ests in a human donor library.

eye disease genes expressed in on
over  <dig> genes in which mutations or sequence variants directly affect vision are known . many of these have clinical effects on on. table  <dig> shows the known eye disease genes for which ests are present in the nbj dataset. several of these are known to be associated with on disease. one abundantly expressed gene in nbj is efemp1/fibulin <dig>  which is the locus for malattia leventinese/doyne honeycomb retinal dystrophy , an inherited disease with similarities to age-related macular degeneration  <cit> . this raises the question of whether there might be direct on involvement in ml/dhrd. interestingly, efemp1/fibulin <dig> also happens to be the most abundant on est from the candidate gene region for a glaucoma, glc1h .

the gene name is shown in the first column. the second column indicates the relative abundance . the disease associated with mutations in each gene are shown in the the third column. the omim  entry number is shown in the fourth column.

connexin  <dig> , represented by  <dig> ests in on, is the locus of oculodentodigital dysplasia , a disease whose clinical synopsis includes glaucoma. gja <dig> is the major gap junction protein of astrocytes and there are data to suggest it may have a neuroprotective role in ischemia <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the new est analysis gives the first large scale overview of gene expression in the human on. previously available datasets described in unigene as having on origin seem to be misidentified or may include transcripts from other parts of the eye. for the neibank database, these unigene or "dbest" data have been combined  and are available in a 'for the record' section but are probably not a good representation of on . in contrast, the new human on cdna library described here contains a convincing profile of axonal, oligodendrocyte and microglial markers and lacks significant contamination from other part of eye. since on is essentially a cns white matter tract, this library is valuable for analysis of both genes generally expressed in white matter, compared with neuron soma, as well as for comparison between different cns white matter regions. many of the most abundantly expressed genes are associated with key on functions, such as axonal growth, guidance, myelination and astrocyte function and are predicted to be expressed at high levels in a pure white matter cns tissue.

a large number of mrnas for genes known to be axonally transported in non-human cns are also identifiable in the human on library. these range from vimentin  to individual ests such as periredoxin  <dig> and calreticulin. while a number of these mrnas may also be expressed in intrinsic glial cells of the on, it is also likely that many of them are axonally transported in human on. definitive proof of this activity is a relevant subject for a future study.

the relatively elevated levels of genes for inflammatory markers and clusterin may represent perimortem artifactual conditions of donors. although many ion channel related genes are expressed in the on, l-type calcium ion channels were observed at low levels. while detection of low abundance clones by est is stochastic and absence of clones does not mean absence of expression, our rt-pcr and western results suggest that indeed the expression of this class of ion channel protein is lower in primates than in rodents. this finding may explain the difference in responsiveness to l-type calcium channel blockers in different species. this result suggests that further species comparisons of gene expression in on may be valuable in development of on therapeutic models.

several genes that are the loci for inherited eye disease are expressed in on and some of them, notably efemp <dig> and gja <dig>  are quite abundant. previously, differential gene expression of a mitochondrially expressed gene  in a regional retinal pattern was correlated with lebers hereditary optic neuropathy; where mutations in this gene correlate closely with a tissue region-specific dysfunction. similarly, the current work suggests that differential gene expression may contribute to relative on disease resistance or susceptibility, in both acquired and inherited diseases.

