BACKGROUND
understanding the temporal framework in which species have originated is fundamental to historical biogeography and evolutionary studies. however, obtaining a reliable phylogeny for a model system is not always straightforward. rapid radiations are notoriously difficult in this respect, and the older the radiation, the more pronounced the problem will be  <cit> . the crested newt triturus cristatus superspecies , distributed in europe and adjacent asia , is an example of a relatively old, rapid radiation, for which it has proved problematic to obtain a resolved phylogenetic tree.

the crested newt superspecies encompasses four morphological groups, hereafter referred to as 'morphotypes'. ordered from a stocky build with sturdy limbs, to slender with small limbs, via two intermediate stages, these are: 1) the t. karelinii group, 2) t. carnifex - t. macedonicus, 3) t. cristatus and 4) t. dobrogicus. the morphotypes are characterized by discrete differences in the number of rib-bearing pre-sacral vertebrae   <cit> . the typical nrbv count is  <dig> for the t. karelinii group,  <dig> for t. carnifex - t. macedonicus,  <dig> for t. cristatus and  <dig> or  <dig> for t. dobrogicus. the marbled newts, t. marmoratus and t. pygmaeus, which make up the crested newts' sister group, have the heaviest body build in the genus and possess a typical nrbv count of  <dig>  over ninety per cent of these newts can be correctly identified based on nrbv counts alone; interspecific hybridization along parapatric contact zones  is suggested to account for most of the remaining intraspecific variation  <cit> . crested newt morphology has been interpreted as reflecting phylogeny  <cit> . a maximally parsimonious interpretation of nrbv  suggests a branching order as shown in figure 2a.

with the advent of molecular techniques, independent data became available and multiple molecular markers have now been employed to attempt to resolve the crested newt phylogeny. based on restriction fragment length polymorphism of the mitochondrial genome , a polytomy was found   <cit> . similarly, analysis of a suite of forty enzyme loci and  <dig> bp of mitochondrial sequence data resulted in a polytomous relationship for the four morphotypes   <cit> . a polytomy could simply reflect a lack of phylogenetic resolution in the data. however, as the different datasets both pointed towards a polytomy, it was suggested that the four crested newt morphotypes truly split practically simultaneously  <cit> .

a later effort using sequence data of five nuclear dna  and two mitochondrial dna markers  revealed a more varied picture  <cit> . an analysis using the sequence data concatenated found a fully bifurcating and significantly supported phylogeny . there are, however, theoretical objections to data concatenation, as this method does not consider the unique topological history that each individual gene possesses  <cit> . therefore, phylogenetic inference was also carried out using a hierarchical bayesian analysis, which does explicitly take the effects of gene tree heterogeneity into account. this analysis indeed produced different results. based on the five nuclear dna markers, a fourfold polytomy was found again . this fourfold polytomy could be expanded to a trichotomy by incorporating the mitochondrial dna data, but the single sister relationship found was incongruent with the data concatenation approach .

previous molecular studies have firmly established that the crested newt radiation occurred in a brief time interval. however, they yielded conflicting phylogenetic hypotheses and have been unable to settle the relationship among the morphotypes. furthermore, all phylogenetic hypotheses found so far are in conflict with the tree suggested by morphology. in this study we further explore the crested newt phylogeny, this time employing complete mitogenomic sequences. as the mitochondrial genome contains tenfold the bp studied up to now , it is a promising source of phylogenetic resolution . we here analyse nine newly-sequenced mitogenomes, representing all triturus species, and manage to obtain a fully-resolved crested newt phylogeny. we discuss this new phylogeny with respect to previous attempts to obtain the triturus tree and speculate on causes for cladogenesis.

RESULTS
we present a mitogenomic triturus phylogeny  based on a division of the mitogenomic sequence data into  <dig> data partitions, as this partitioning strategy is preferred over the simpler ones tested . bayesian inference identifies a basal dichotomy in the crested newt superspecies between the t. karelinii group and the other morphotypes . the next bifurcation divides the latter assortment in t. carnifex - t. macedonicus  versus t. cristatus and t. dobrogicus . posterior probabilities are ≥  <dig>  . although maximum likelihood inference yields the same branching order and similar branch lengths , the bootstrap support values for two of the three nodes associated with radiation of crested newt morphotypes  are low . the mitogenomic phylogeny is characterized by long terminal branches, which are connected by short internal branches. the three nodes connecting the crested newt morphotypes represent a narrow time window  and have small confidence intervals, independent of dating method used . three character state transitions are required to explain the nrbv differentiation across the four crested newt morphotypes, two of which are situated on short internal branches .

a pairwise comparison of the four tested partitioning strategies , which are ordered from highest to lowest marginal likelihood from left to right and vice versa from top to bottom. the marginal likelihoods, in order from highest to lowest, are:  <dig> = - <dig> ,  <dig> = - <dig> ,  <dig> = - <dig>  and  <dig> = - <dig> .

the coded nodes correspond to figure  <dig>  the nodes of interest, separating the crested newt morphotypes, are coded i-iii . nodes marked with a # are used for temporal calibration.

discussion
the mitogenomic triturus tree
the full mitogenomic dataset has provided the phylogenetic resolution that the crested newt case required. previous approaches using only part of the mitochondrial genome found a polytomy for the four morphotypes, but based on the full mitochondrial dna sequences we managed to resolve this polytomy. under bayesian inference, we find a fully bifurcating phylogeny, with significant support for the three nodes connecting the four crested newt morphotypes . in comparison, maximum likelihood bootstrapping finds equivocal results for two of the three nodes . disparity in support values between both methods is known to occur at short internodes, where bayesian inference appears to better exploit the relatively small number of informative characters  <cit> . our confidence in the bayesian phylogeny is increased by its correspondence to the branching order suggested by a maximally parsimonious interpretation of nrbv evolution .

the mitochondrial genome, given its non-recombining nature, behaves as a single gene and, due to stochasticity in the coalescent process, the branching order it suggests is not necessarily congruent with the true species tree  <cit> . the motivation behind studying independent gene trees  is that these should ultimately converge upon the overarching species tree  <cit> . however, a recent hierarchical bayesian analysis based on five nuclear markers did not yield a resolved crested newt phylogeny  <cit> . this lack of resolution could be explained by the rapidness of the radiation of the crested newt morphotypes, as repeated cladogenesis within the temporal domain of the lineage sorting process increases the chance of a mismatch between gene trees and species tree  <cit> . such a risk of gene tree - species tree discordance is smaller for the mitochondrial genome, because lineage sorting is realized faster compared to the nuclear genome .

we do not claim that our current attempt resolves the crested newt species tree once and for all; studying a much larger battery of nuclear dna markers than previously used is required to further home in on the crested newt species tree  <cit> . however, considering the data currently available, we suggest that the bayesian mitogenomic phylogeny as yet provides the most reliable estimation of the crested newt species tree. we here employ the new phylogeny to explore the potential causes underlying the splits between the crested newt morphotypes.

the potential of paleogeography to explain crested newt speciation
based on temporal estimates associated with the crested newt splits , potential vicariant events can be identified by consulting paleogeographic reconstructions. we here concentrate on the three splits which gave rise to the four crested newt morphotypes ; for vicariant events underlying the three splits within morphotypes , see  <cit> . an earlier attempt to reconstruct the historical biogeography of crested newts assumed a 'hard' polytomous relationship for the four morphotypes  <cit> . in effect, a temporal estimate was only provided for the crown of the crested newts and proposed vicariant events were derived from this date.

the present study has resolved the relationships among the morphotypes . in line with the increased phylogenetic resolution, more recent dates are appointed to the newly resolved nodes and their morphotype lineages. the crested newt crown, i.e. the split between the t. karelinii group and the remaining crested newts , is dated at ca.  <dig>  ma. the origin of the aegean sea at 12- <dig> ma  <cit> , which separated the balkan peninsula from anatolia, is a likely underlying vicariant event . no obvious vicariant events can be associated with the two splits that gave rise to the three remaining morphotypes  <cit> : the separation of t. carnifex - t. macedonicus versus t. cristatus and t. dobrogicus  at approximately  <dig>  ma and the split between t. cristatus and t. dobrogicus  around  <dig>  ma .

no comprehensive paleogeographical reconstructions are as yet available for the balkan peninsula in the period between  <dig> and  <dig>  ma  <cit> . it is feasible that vicariant events relevant to the crested newt case have yet to be discovered. as a way forward, we suggest that more taxa with balkan distributions should be surveyed in a historical biogeographical context  <cit> . by uncovering congruent spatio-temporal signatures, such studies should assist in paleogeographical reconstruction of the balkan peninsula. this strategy might not be so straightforward; genetic structuring in the two other groups of newts that occur on the balkan peninsula , though relatively old, originated considerably more recent than that in the crested newts  <cit> .

could ecological divergence have played a role in crested newt speciation?
the role of ecological divergence in historical biogeography is often regarded as passive; external factors such as geology and climate are considered to be responsible for the actual dividing of ancestral stocks and potential ecological divergence occurs at a later point  <cit> . however, ecology can play an active role in the speciation process: disruptive selection along an ecological gradient can result in restrictions to gene flow, in the absence of geographical isolation  <cit> . could such a parapatric mode of speciation apply to the crested newt case?

the crested newt morphotypes do show ecological differentiation in the time they annually spend in the water. the duration of the annual aquatic period is three months in the t. karelinii group, four in t. carnifex, five in t. cristatus and six in t. dobrogicus  <cit> . crested newts thus show a correlation between phenotype and phenology: sturdy bodies and a low nrbv count are associated with a more terrestrial way of life and slender bodies and a high nrbv count with a more aquatic life style  <cit> . this notion of a terrestrial versus aquatic trade-off associated with body shape is further supported by the even more robust marbled newt t. marmoratus, whose two-month aquatic phase is the shortest of the triturus newts  <cit> .

the body shape differentiation in crested newts occurred over a brief timespan : at least two of the three nrbv additions during crested newt evolution are associated with short internal branches. under the assumption that today's phenology-phenotype correlation has been valid through time, the ecological divergence of the crested newt morphotypes must have similarly taken place over a short period. considering the fundamental role water bodies play in amphibian reproduction  <cit> , it is reasonable to suggest that differences in the availability of standing water would present different adaptive peaks. the time frame of the crested newt radiation corresponds to a period of increased seasonality in eurasia during the late miocene , associated with the uplift of the tibetan plateau, which led to a more heterogeneous landscape in terms of humidity  <cit> .

with a clear speciation scenario involving vicariance lacking, we, as an alternative hypothesis, suggest that the crested newts' body shape differentiation reflects a rapid adaptive radiation to different water regimes. it should be noted that these two hypotheses are not necessarily mutually exclusive.

reflections on nrbv and its adaptive value in triturus
salamanders have become a model group to understand patterns of morphological evolution  <cit> . variation of salamander body shape has been accomplished by modifying the vertebral column, by either altering the length of the individual vertebrae or by changing the total number of vertebrae  <cit> . interestingly, the intrageneric range in nrbv count shown by triturus is unprecedented in salamandridae , suggesting body shape plasticity played a prominent role during crested newt evolution. work on the genetic pathways underlying the evolutionary development of the different triturus morphotypes will provide more insight into this phenomenon .

what could be the adaptive value of the crested newt nrbv radiation? the dualism of an amphibian lifestyle poses conflicting demands on body shape. the rapid adaptive radiation scenario we propose for the crested newts, suggests that the balance struck for this trade-off differs among the morphotypes, due to the different ecological background each of them experiences. what do we currently understand about the differential performance of the morphotypes in the aquatic and the terrestrial environment? although  <cit>  found that triturus stockiness is positively correlated with running speed, this is not so for slenderness and swimming speed. what could be the reason for this partially unexpected result? maybe 'speed' is not the most suitable way to characterize terrestrial or aquatic specialization? perhaps body elongation benefits more aquatic triturus newts some other way, e.g. by increasing maneuverability or by providing more space for egg production  <cit> ? more research is required to elucidate the adaptive value of the different triturus body shapes against distinct ecological backgrounds.

CONCLUSIONS
although it has proven difficult to resolve the rapid radiation of crested newts, by employing full mitochondrial dna sequence data we now have a precise estimate of the chronology of branching events. the relationship among the four crested newt morphotypes found agrees with a maximally parsimonious interpretation of nrbv evolution, increasing our confidence in the accuracy of the branching order. the basal dichotomy sorting out the crested newt morphotypes can be associated with a major vicariant event, but we cannot pinpoint drivers for the other two splits sorting out the morphotypes. we propose that  undiscovered vicariant events and/or ecological divergence  resulted in a disruption of gene flow. crested newts are a suitable model to study eco-evo-devo in a rapid radiation and the new phylogenetic framework presented here serves as a baseline for future research.

