BACKGROUND
more than one million species of nematodes are estimated to exist  <cit> , but only a small fraction of this huge diversity has been described so far. nematodes are among the most successful groups of animals: they are abundant, diverse and live in virtually all marine, freshwater and soil habitats. they occupy most trophic levels and play important roles in the soil ecosystem where they may cause large economic losses as parasites of animals and plants  <cit> . total losses caused by plant-parasitic nematodes are estimated at $ <dig> billion annually  <cit> , and most of these, including cyst, lesion and root knot nematodes, belong to the order tylenchida  <cit> . furthermore, nematodes are suitable indicators of soil health as they are highly affected by nutrient status and the level of toxic compounds in the soil  <cit> .

to overcome previous limitations in assessing nematode diversity, the efficiency of next-generation sequencing  technologies has been demonstrated. porazinska et al.  <cit>  sequenced a fragment of the ribosomal small subunit  and found that both qualitative and quantitative sequence data were consistent and reproducible using a nematode mock community. studies of soil nematode communities by morise et al.  <cit> , darby et al.  <cit>  and porazinska et al.  <cit> , however, relied on enrichment of nematodes by sucrose flotation or by the baermann funnel method to avoid amplification of dna from other taxa that are abundant in soil such as fungi or plantae. this enrichment step is laborious and may be biased towards particular genera or developmental stages of nematodes.

we are using ngs to study soil communities and their effect on plant health and we are interested in different taxa such as fungi, oomycetes, bacteria and nematodes. in order to reduce biases and work load, primers that could selectively amplify different groups of organisms directly from one total soil dna extraction would be desirable. therefore, the aim of this study was to optimize a sequencing strategy that would allow us to study nematode diversity without the need for a nematode enrichment step. we tested the developed amplification strategy using total dna from a number of agricultural soils as template.

RESULTS
an in silico analysis indicated that pcr amplification of dna extracted from soil using the primers nf <dig> and 18sr2b would potentially amplify not only nematodes but also other metazoans, plantae and fungi, although the primers have been used previously in several metagenetic studies of nematode communities  <cit> . in an initial experiment, we confirmed this by using these primers to amplify total dna extracted from soil, without any steps to enrich for nematodes. sequencing this amplicon resulted in only 3% sequences of nematode origin whereas the remaining sequences belonged to fungi, plants, rhizaria and metazoans  . to obtain a higher proportion of nematode sequences without the need for nematode enrichment, we designed a forward primer aimed at being specific for nematode dna amplification and used this in a semi-nested amplification strategy with nf <dig> and 18sr2b. this strategy was tested using total dna extracted from  <dig> agricultural soils from different areas of denmark to evaluate the consistency of the amplification protocol. in total,  <dig>  quality-filtered sequences were obtained and these could be clustered into  <dig> otus at 99% similarity. of the total number of sequences,  <dig> % were classified as belonging to nematoda. the remaining sequences were dominated by tardigrada , annelida , arthropoda   and rotifera  and only very few sequences that could be classified as belonging to plantae  or fungi  . the remaining  <dig> % were unclassified . in individual soils, between  <dig> and 97% of sequences were of nematode origin . in the few soils with a relatively high amount of sequences belonging to other taxa such as tardigrada or annelida, these were usually dominated by one group .figure  <dig> 
the relative distribution of sequences in the total dataset at phylum rank  for all soils  and for each of the  <dig> analyzed soils .




a taxonomic classification of the nematodes using the silva  <dig> release as the reference set in qiime  <cit>  showed that a broad diversity of nematode taxa had been captured . the taxa represent most of the orders defined in blaxter et al.  <cit>  except that we did not find otus belonging to orders such as strongylida, spirurida or oxyurida, members which are parasites in vertebrates. almost all orders of nematodes could be found in all soils, however, there was a noticeable variation in the relative composition of nematode groups among the individual soils from  <dig> agricultural fields .figure  <dig> 
the relative distribution of sequences in the nematode dataset within different nematode orders for all soils  and for each of the  <dig> analyzed soils .




to confirm the broad distribution of sequences among taxa, we picked a representative sequence from each otu  and used these sequences together with a reference set of genbank sequences assembled by morise et al.  <cit>  to construct a phylogenetic tree. as can be seen from figure  <dig>  sequences generated in this study were distributed among the main taxonomic groups of nematodes. most otus clustered in tylenchida, rhabditida, dorylaimida, triplonchida and araeolaimida, but some of the otus were clustering within mermithida, mononchida, diplogasterida, enoplida, chromadora, desmodorida, monhysterida, rhigonematida and ascaridida.figure  <dig> 
neighbor-joining tree of ssu rdna barcode sequences illustrating the phylogenetic relationship for otus in the soil dataset  together with reference sequences  covering most taxonomic groups within nematoda. for simplicity, bootstrap values are not shown, and the tree is shown with topology only. nematode orders are indicated with different colors.



discussion
traditionally, nematodes are enriched by e.g. sucrose flotation  or by using the baermann funnel method  <cit>  before microscopy and morphological identification, and even before most molecular analyses. however, this may not be practical when several groups of organisms such as nematodes, fungi and bacteria are of interest from one sample. in such cases one dna extraction for all groups of organisms is desirable and allows direct comparisons between taxa. furthermore, an enrichment step may introduce biases as particular nematode taxa or developmental stages are not necessarily enriched at the same efficiency, depending on the method used  <cit> . in a laboratory dealing with numerous samples, enrichment may easily become a bottleneck in the workflow and may require specialized equipment and expertise.

currently used primers for studying nematode diversity also amplify fungi, plants and other metazoa from soil and therefore require an enrichment step to increase the proportion of nematode sequences. to overcome these limitations, we have developed an amplification strategy, including a newly developed primer, that efficiently amplifies nematode dna  while excluding the amplification of fungal and plant dna. when used on dna extracted directly from  <dig> agricultural soils this amplification strategy resulted in  <dig> % nematode sequences in total and very few plant or fungal sequences. the remaining 30% sequences were of other metazoan origin. in the individual soils, the proportion of nematode sequences varied from  <dig> to 97%. the relatively low proportion of nematode sequences in a few samples could generally be attributed to the dominance of one single group belonging to annelida or tardigrada .

according to the classification in qiime using the silva  <dig> reference set, the majority of sequences of nematode origin recovered in this study belonged to rhabditida, tylenchida, diplogasterida, dorylaimida and araeolaimida, which is in general accordance with other studies of nematode diversity in agricultural soils using morphology  or sequencing  <cit>  for identification , although a larger diversity is generally recovered in sequencing studies compared to classical morphology-based methods. there was a significant variation of nematode community structures between soils, probably reflecting different soil types, different crop plants and different agricultural practices. however, it was outside the scope of this study to compare nematode communities in the soils in detail.

to further investigate the diversity of nematode otus, a detailed survey of the taxonomic coverage of the assembled sequences was done by constructing a phylogenetic tree including a set of nematode reference sequences  <cit> . this tree confirmed that a broad taxonomic range of nematodes had been collected as sequences were found in all major branches of the tree. the highest numbers of otus were found to group with tylenchida, rhabditida, dorylaimida, triplonchida and araeolaimida reference sequences. these are taxa that are known to include many plant parasites  or bacterivores   <cit>  and thus they are expected to be found in soil .

in our approach, we obtained a relatively large portion of metazoan sequences not belonging to nematoda , annelida , arthropoda  and rotifera ); these sequences were disregarded as nematodes were the focus of this study. it remains to be tested whether the developed strategy can be used for studying this diversity too.

the development of new strategies for metagenetics often include sequencing of mock communities, however, we did not have access to a large collection of nematode specimens and thus we could not test our strategy on an assembled community. however, we found that our sequencing strategy recovered proportions of nematode taxa that were comparable to quantities obtained in an initial experiment using the previously published nf1/18sr2b primer set . the distribution of nematode taxa in our study was also comparable to what has been observed in other studies using morphology for identification of nematodes from agricultural soils, indicating quantitative recovery. however, it has previously been shown that pcr based sequencing studies do not recover all species in a mock community quantitatively  <cit> . within-sample comparisons of different nematode taxa may therefore be critical, whereas between-sample comparisons are probably still valid, as concluded by amend et al.  <cit>  using a fungal mock community and porazinska et al.  <cit>  using nematode mock communities.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed an amplification strategy, including a newly developed primer, for high-throughput sequencing. the strategy is efficient for studying nematode diversity in soil samples and most likely also from other habitats. the strategy does not require any nematode enrichment steps before pcr amplification, steps that might introduce biases in nematode sequence recovery. we show that by using this strategy, sequences from a broad range of nematode taxa, including economically relevant plant parasites, are recovered.

