BACKGROUND
frankia is a genus of soil actinobacteria with unique abilities to fix atmospheric dinitrogen  and establish endosymbiotic associations with actinorhizal plants comprising various non-leguminous trees from eight dicotyledonous families . this symbiosis, in which frankia reduces n <dig> to ammonium and supplies the resulting product to host plants, takes place in root nodules. as a result of the symbiosis, actinorhizal plants grow rapidly, even in nutrient-poor soils, and improve soil fertility. frankia strains are classified into four host-specificity groups  that establish symbiosis with distinct host plant families  <cit> . “alnus” strains infect plant species in myricaceae and the genus alnus of betulaceae. “casuarina” strains infect plant species in the genera casuarina and allocasuarina of casuarinaceae. “elaeagnus” strains exhibit a broader host range, infecting plant species in five families  of the orders fagales and rosales. “rosaceous” strains infect plant species in four families of orders rosales and cucurbitales, although no strains have yet been isolated in pure culture. in a phylogenetic tree generated from 16s rdna sequences, strains belonging to each hsg cluster together in distinct clades  <cit> .

in  <dig>  complete genome sequences were determined for representative frankia strains from alnus, casuarina, and elaeagnus hsgs  <cit> . a surprising finding was that despite close phylogenetic relationship , genome sizes were very different among hsgs. the largest genome  is  <dig>  mbp and contains approximately  <dig>  genes, whereas the smallest one  is only  <dig>  mbp and comprises about  <dig>  genes. alnus strain acn14a possesses an intermediate-sized genome  of approximately  <dig>  genes. this size divergence is the largest reported for any such closely related soil bacteria. genome size of these strains correlates with the breadth of their host ranges. comparative genome analysis has revealed that the difference in genome size is due to acquisition, loss, and duplication of genes occurring at different rates in different strains  <cit> .

two studies have uncovered evidence suggesting how such extensive diversification has occurred in frankia genomes. since they are particularly prevalent in frankia genomes and indeed retain the ability to be excised from chromosomes, actinomycete integrative and conjugative elements  may play a role in gene loss and acquisition  <cit> . homologous recombination between insertion sequences  could have also caused deletions of chromosomal segments, as genes contained in is-rich regions of acn14a and ean1pec genomes are absent in the smallest genome, that of cci <dig>  <cit> .

in the present study, we analyzed content and size of  <dig> frankia genomes using in silico comparative genome hybridization  and pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  to investigate within-hsg diversity of frankia genomes.

RESULTS
genome sequencing of frankiastrains
we analyzed genomes of four strains each of alnus, casuarina, and elaeagnus hsgs . strains belonging to the same hsg were phylogenetically very close, showing > 99% identity in 16s rdna sequences  and > 95% identity in gyrb  and reca  sequences . we obtained tens of millions of 50-bp reads from each query genome and conducted in silico cgh  using a reference genome from the same hsg: acn14a for alnus, cci <dig> for casuarina, and ean1pec for elaeagnus hsgs . figure  <dig> contains histograms of coverage rates for all segments. distributions were bimodal; most segments displayed either very low  or very high  coverage rates, with few intermediate values. this result indicates that in silico cgh  can discriminate among genes shared between reference and query genomes and those absent in a query genome. hereafter, we refer to segments that showed coverage rates of < 20% as low-coverage-rate  segments, consisting of lcr genes and lcr intergenic regions . an lcr segment is likely absent from a query genome, either as a consequence of its deletion from the query genome or its insertion into a reference genome.table  <dig> 
frankia
strains used in this study


alnus viridis subsp. crispa
ah1a
a. hirsuta
ahm01a
a. hirsuta ssp. microphylla
a. sieboldiana
myrica rubra
casuarina cunninghamiana
c. equisetifolia
cae04a
c. equisetifolia
c. equisetifolia
t7a
c. cunninghamiana
elaeagnus angustifolia
e. macrophylla
ep01a
e. pungens
eu05a
e. umbellata
eur01a
e. umbellata ssp. rotundifolia

aobtained in this study.
phylogenetic tree constructed from 16s rdna sequences of
frankia
strains used in this study. reference strains are boxed. nucleotide sequence identities  between query and reference strains of the same host-specificity group  are shown. identities between strains of distinct hsgs were 98–99% for alnus vs. casuarina hsgs, 97–98% for casuarina vs. elaeagnus hsgs, and 97–98% for alnus vs. elaeagnus hsgs. frankia from a purshia tridentata nodule was used as an outgroup.
histograms of coverage rate for all segments in  alnus,  casuarina, and  elaeagnus strains. the total number of segments was  <dig>  for alnus,  <dig>  for casuarina, and  <dig>  for elaeagnus strains.



table  <dig> lists the number of lcr genes detected for each query genome. lcr genes were most prominent in elaeagnus strains, accounting for 22–32% of all genes in the corresponding reference genome. the number of lcr genes varied among elaeagnus strains; more were absent in strains ep <dig> and eur <dig> than in ema <dig> and eu <dig>  compared with elaeagnus strains, alnus strains featured fewer lcr genes, which accounted for 14–18% of genes in the reference genome. in casuarina strains, lcr genes were much rarer; they were not detected for two strains , and accounted for at most only 4% of total genes . we plotted coverage rates of all segments in order of their appearance in the reference genome . lcr segments did not distribute randomly, but tended to be clustered in particular regions of the reference genomes.

in genomes of acn14a, cci <dig>  and ean1pec, respectively,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  genes were scored as lcr genes for at least one of the four query strains . in alnus and elaeagnus hsgs, about 40% of nonredundant lcr genes were scored as lcr genes for all four query strains , indicating that they were commonly absent in genomes of these strains. the remaining genes were scored as lcr genes for one to three strains; the distribution of these genes was apparently unbiased, except that lcr genes specific to asi <dig> and those shared with ep <dig> and eur <dig> predominated. in the casuarina hsg, 99% of nonredundant lcr genes were missing only in strain ceq1; only a few or no lcr genes were associated with the other strains.table  <dig> 
number of low-coverage-rate  genes


a

atotal number of protein-coding and rna genes in the reference genome.


bpercentage of genes in the reference genome with low-coverage rates .
distribution of coverage rates over genomes. coverage rates of segments  are represented by vertical black bars arranged in order of their appearance in the genome. horizontal and vertical axes indicate segment position and coverage rate , respectively.
venn diagram representing overlap of lcr genes among
frankia
strains belonging to  alnus,  casuarina, and  elaeagnus hsgs. the total number of nonredundant lcr genes is shown above the diagram. numbers in the diagram are percentages of the nonredundant lcr genes associated with the indicated overlapping strains.



confirmation by pcr
we used pcr to confirm whether the identified lcr segments were structurally missing in the query genomes. we designed primer sets that flanked individual or clustered lcr segments and performed pcr using asi <dig>  ceq <dig>  and ema <dig> genomic dna as templates. most amplification products  were smaller than the size expected based on reference genome sequences , indicating that those lcr segments were missing in the query genomes. in contrast, some bands were larger than the expected size, suggesting insertion of dna segments at these loci .

lcr gene properties
gc content at the third codon position  and codon adaptation index  of all genes are shown in figure  <dig>  nonredundant lcr genes exhibited lower average gc <dig> and cai values than other genes, suggestive of foreign origin, possibly through horizontal gene transfer. dominant functions of nonredundant lcr genes are listed in table  <dig>  in all hsgs, the vast majority  encoded hypothetical proteins with unknown functions. three functional categories—transcriptional regulation, transport-associated, and transposase—were commonly associated with genes in the three hsgs. in the alnus hsg, functional categories related to nonribosomal peptide and polyketide synthetases and acyl-coa metabolism, involved in synthesis of bioactive secondary metabolites such as antibiotics and siderophores  <cit> , were prevalent. in the casuarina hsg, bacteriophage-related functions, such as restriction and modification system, crispr  <cit> , integrase, and excisionase, were prominent.figure  <dig> 
average  gc content at the third codon position  and  codon adaptation index  of nonredundant lcr genes  and other genes .



dominant functions of the top  <dig> nonredundant lcr genes identified in each studied
frankia
host-specificity group


pfge
we estimated genome sizes of studied frankia strains via pfge of genomic dna digested with drai or psii. sizes obtained using either restriction enzyme were mostly consistent . results from two reference strains  revealed that the estimated sizes were slightly smaller than actual genome sizes  for two reasons: i) small bands less than 50 kb migrated out of the gel; and ii) the relative migration rate of frankia dna was faster than that of yeast marker dna . expected sizes of query genomes, based on the assumption that they lacked all lcr segments, are shown in figure  <dig>  genome sizes of the four alnus query strains after the above underestimation was taken into account were larger than expected , but were similar to that of the reference genome . estimated genome sizes of the four elaeagnus query strains were apparently larger than expected. two strains  appeared to have genome sizes similar to the reference strain ean1pec when underestimation was taken into account. notably, the estimated genome size of ep <dig>  in spite of the absence of more than 30% of genes, was much larger than that of ean1pec . an opposite situation was observed in casuarina query strains. although few genes were missing in genomes of cae <dig>  cae <dig>  and t <dig> , their estimated genome sizes were significantly smaller than the reference strain cci <dig>  little similarity in banding patterns was observed among or even within hsgs , suggesting divergence of genome structure. as reported for the reference strains  <cit> , genome sizes of the query strains were correlated with extent of their host ranges: casuarina strains possessed the smallest genomes, elaeagnus strains the largest, with alnus strains intermediate.figure  <dig> 
genome size estimated by pfge. sizes estimated with drai- and psii-digested genomic dnas are indicated by closed and open circles, respectively. blue bars represent actual genome sizes of reference strains . black bars correspond to expected sizes of query genomes, calculated by subtracting total length of lcr segments from reference genome size.



clustering of lcr genes
to evaluate clustering of lcr genes, we searched reference genomes for consecutive arrays of lcr segments, which were considered to be lcr gene clusters if they contained two or more lcr genes. size and number of identified lcr gene clusters are shown in figure  <dig>  in every hsg, the vast majority of clusters were small, containing less than  <dig> genes. a substantial number of independent lcr genes that did not form clusters were also detected . fewer lcr gene clusters were found in ceq <dig> since the strain is associated with only a small number of lcr genes . data for strains cae <dig>  cae <dig>  and t <dig> was not shown because they were associated with a few or no lcr genes  and no lcr gene cluster was detected.figure  <dig> 
size and number of lcr gene clusters. the number of lcr gene clusters containing the indicated number of genes, as well as the number of independent lcr genes, is shown for each studied query strain.



lcr gene clusters would be a kind of genomic islands typically integrated into chromosomes by site-specific recombination at a trna gene through the action of integrase  <cit> . we searched both ends of each lcr gene cluster for direct repeats of trna sequences, but only two clusters were associated with such sequences  .table  <dig> 
lcr gene clusters associated with potential insertion/deletion elements


a
b

anumber of nonredundant lcr gene clusters found in all query strains.


bdirect repeats of trna sequences are not included.



aices are prevalent in frankia genomes, and have been experimentally confirmed to retain their ability to be excised from chromosomes  <cit> . although three aices have been identified in acn14a and cci <dig> genomes, and four in the ean1pec genome  <cit> , only one aice—in acn14a —corresponded closely to any lcr gene clusters in our study .

dna segments flanked by homologous sequences  or flanked by iss from the same family can be excised from chromosomes. lcr gene clusters associated with direct repeat sequences were relatively frequent in acn14a and ean1pec, but nevertheless represented only a small fraction of observed clusters . in the ean1pec genome, several clusters were associated with iss belonging to the same family. to summarize, however, few lcr gene clusters were associated with elements previously known to be involved in insertion and deletion of dna segments.

discussion
in this study, we used an in silico cgh method based on the application of next-generation sequencing technology. resolution obtained using in silico cgh is higher than that available from dna array-based cgh. in addition, in silico cgh experiments are less time-consuming, as this technique does not require construction of dna arrays. on the other hand, this method is inferior to comparative analyses that use assembled genome sequences and homology search programs. when a large number of undetermined genomes need to be compared, however, in silico cgh is useful, because complete genome assembly is very laborious.

recent comparative genomic studies have revealed that bacterial genome contents vary greatly, even among closely related species and strains . as confirmed in our study, this is also true for alnus and elaeagnus hsg frankia strains. an unexpected and novel finding of our study, however, is that this diversity varies depending on the hsg. alnus strains lacked 14–18% of genes present in a reference genome from the same hsg, whereas more than 20% of genes were absent in elaeagnus strains, with over 30% lacking in two strains  . these divergences are much greater than that observed between the actinobacterial species streptomyces coelicolor and streptomyces lividans   <cit> . in the case of escherichia coli, a comparable level  of divergence occurs between pathogenic and non-pathogenic strains  <cit> . because frankia and streptomyces occupy the same ecological niche, i.e. soil, environmental factors offering differing opportunities for horizontal gene exchange within the bacterial community cannot be responsible for the discrepancy. inherent properties specific to frankia, such as domino effects , may allow such dynamic changes.

in spite of these remarkable levels of gene loss, pfge revealed that actual genome sizes of alnus and elaeagnus query strains were not as small as expected based on total lcr gene length . this result indicates that these query strains carry genes that are absent in the reference genomes, thus compensating for the reduced genome size due to gene loss. insertion of additional dna segments was indeed observed in query strains  based on genomic pcr. these strains have thus both lost and acquired significant numbers of genes over the course of evolution; as a consequence, genome contents have diverged greatly, even within the same hsg. interestingly, such shuffling of genome content appears to have occurred to different extents between the two hsgs. more dynamic shuffling has taken place in genomes of elaeagnus strains than in alnus, as evidenced by the greater extent of gene loss  and higher compensated genome size  in the elaeagnus hsg. in alnus strains, gene acquisition and loss seems to have been mostly balanced, because the number of lcr genes and genome size are similar among strains ; this balance was not well maintained in elaeagnus strains.

unlike the other two hsgs, very few lcr genes were identified among casuarina strains , indicating that genome contents were highly similar within the hsg. in particular, strains cae <dig> and cae <dig> were missing only two or no lcr genes, respectively , revealing that these query strains possessed almost all the genes in the reference genome . genome sizes of the query strains were significantly smaller than that of cci <dig>  however . these results suggest that some components of multigene families in the cci <dig> genome were missing in cae <dig> and cae <dig>  normand et al.  <cit>  have pointed out that transposase genes are frequently duplicated in the cci <dig> genome, forming large multigene families. loss of such transposase genes may consequently be responsible for the observed size reductions.

when complete sequences were obtained for three representative frankia strains, the most surprising finding was their unusual size divergence. to explain the biological significance of this divergence, genome size and content have been proposed to influence host range and biogeographical adaptation of bacterial strains  <cit> . casuarina strain cci <dig> has the smallest genome, consistent with the narrowest range of hosts and the limited environment of its host plants’ habitat   <cit> . in contrast, elaeagnus strain ean1pec has the largest genome, helping it to achieve the broadest host range and to adapt to the wide range of soil types and climates under which its host plants grow  <cit> . our pfge results support this hypothesis, as this correspondence between genome size and hsg held true for the  <dig> strains analyzed . in addition, our results suggest that the dynamics of genome content shuffling, along with genome size, have contributed to these symbiotic and biogeographic adaptations. genomes of elaeagnus strains have likely discarded and acquired a greater number of genes to manage adaptation to a wider range of hosts  and encountered environments. alnus strains may have also done so, but to a lesser extent, because their host range  is not as broad as that of elaeagnus strains. indeed, lcr genes are associated with regulatory, metabolic, and transport functions  suggestive of such adaptive roles. in bradyrhizobium, acquisition of genomic islands is reported to influence symbiotic nitrogen fixation properties  <cit> . in contrast to elaeagnus and alnus, casuarina strains have not acquired new genes, but have instead discarded them to reduce their genome sizes; this suggests an evolutionary orientation towards existence as specialist symbionts  <cit> . casuarina strains infect only a narrow spectrum of hosts, spanning two genera, and show reduced saprophytic activity which is evidenced by the fact that these strains have not been isolated from soils outside the native habitats of their host plants  <cit> . such reductive genome evolution is often observed in obligate symbiotic bacteria  <cit> .

most detected lcr gene clusters were not flanked by elements known to be associated with genomic islands  <cit>  . this is similar to the case of e. coli
 <cit> . because current cluster structure is a product of multiple dna rearrangement steps, elements functional in the past may no longer be located at cluster termini. we therefore cannot determine whether the disparate occurrence of such elements explains differences in genome stability.

on the other hand, den bakker et al.  <cit>  have proposed a “domino” effect theory to explain why a particular genomic region is subject to active gene acquisition and loss. if a genome has acquired a genomic island that encodes beneficial gene products, the island will be maintained. most parts of the island will be functionally neutral, however; they may easily accept insertion and deletion of genes without losing the island’s adaptive value, making the region a hot spot for gene exchange. we can use this hypothesis to explain the different dynamics of genome content shuffling observed in frankia; the more genomic islands  in a genome, the more chances for gene acquisitions and losses.

CONCLUSIONS
our results suggest that two genomic properties have affected diversity in host plant range and biogeography in frankia strains. the first property, genome size, was previously proposed by normand et al.  <cit>  and has been validated by our study. the second property is the dynamics of genome content shuffling. in other words, elaeagnus strains have both retained and exchanged a large number of accessory genes to adapt to diverse host plant species, soil types, and climates. in contrast, casuarina strains have discarded rather than acquired genes to limit hosts and inhabited environments, suggestive of an evolutionary preference for specialist symbiosis. differences in the extent of genome content shuffling can be partially explained by domino effects: if a strain carries more genomic islands, then more neutral regions accompany them, thus enhancing genome flexibility towards gene acquisition and loss.

