BACKGROUND
eukaryotic gene expression and its regulation by means of transcription is one of the most significant areas of research currently. regulation of gene transcription relies on interactions among transcription factors  which bind to specific dna cis sites to form a conglomeration of proteins which guide the polymerase binding  <cit> . these cis sites include enhancers, core promoters, matrix or scaffold attachment regions, insulators and silencers. of these, enhancer elements are an important class of cis-regulatory sequences that are usually present upstream of the transcription initiation site and contain multiple short binding site sequences for targeting several activators and repressors of transcription. these short binding site sequences are often referred to as sequence motifs and occur in recurring patterns across dna  <cit> . it is generally accepted that sequence motifs co-evolve with their core promoter in both sequence specific and location specific ways to achieve a directed target function  <cit> . comparative studies show conserved regions of promoters are expressed widely across genomes of various species, indicating directed evolution  <cit> , correlating with the notion that functionally less important regions of dna evolve  faster than more important ones  <cit> . for example, in a comparison of the  <dig> base pair early enhancer of hoxc <dig> in  <dig> species of mammals the complete nucleotide sequences of this region were 90% similar across all taxa, confirming that this enhancer sequence has been specifically conserved  <cit> . apart from the sequence of these motifs, the positional and inter-motif distances within the enhancers also play a critical role in interactions between transcription factors  <cit> , as the spacing and intermediary sequences control the size and strength of interactions of tf binding  <cit> , subsequently affecting the gene expression  <cit> . in fact, unless helical phasing is conserved to provide allowance for protein binding, even a change in spacer length by one base pair can drastically alter gene expression levels  <cit> . holistically, this implies that conserved sequences  occurring in higher numbers as compared to what is probabilistically expected may be of specific functional significance.

in plant genomes, one such sequence motif – the acgt core sequence – is functionally important in a variety of promoters that respond to different stimuli like light  <cit> , anaerobiosis  <cit> , jasmonic acid  <cit>  and hormones such as salicylic acid  <cit> , abscisic acid  <cit>  and auxin  <cit> . this core element is present at different relative positions in multiple copies upstream of the transcription start site  <cit> , and any alterations in this core sequence reduce the overall promoter activity significantly, for it contributes synergistically to gene expression by stabilizing the transcription complex formed on the minimal promoter  <cit> . co-occurring acgt elements are over-represented in arabidopsis and rice genomes, emphasizing their functional relevance when compared to single acgt core elements  <cit> . as discussed, the inter motif distance between these co-occurring acgt sequence is of particular importance as promoter activation by acgt is differentially regulated by the spacing between two copies of the motif  <cit> . additionally, the copy number of acgt elements in a promoter and distance from the transcription start site also drastically alter gene expression  <cit> . while most reports on the acgt core sequence are based on arabidopsis thaliana, the acgt family of promoters  have also been identified in wheat  <cit>  rice  <cit>  and barley  <cit> , suggesting that aces are conserved across plant species.

given that the acgt core sequence is dispersed across promoters of various plant species; and that they occur in multiple copies with a variable number of base pairs separating them, we have attempted to analyze patterns in occurrence of acgt core element repeats in plant genomes. we performed an in-silico search for acgt elements separated by spacers of varying lengths in all identified promoters for two monocots – sorghum and rice, and two dicots – arabidopsis and soybean. our data indicated similarities in the frequency patterns across the four plant species, with correlations for particular spacer lengths between acgt core elements. in order to analyze if a specific sequence motif is preferred as a spacer between multiple acgt elements across all promoters, we developed consensus sequences from all spacers observed. additionally, we studied the evolution of co-occurring acgt elements by analyzing their prevalence among orthologous genes in arabidopsis, rice and sorghum. further, to understand the functional significance of these elements, we used microarray data to analyze which conditions might be responsible for regulation of genes consisting of multiple acgt cis-elements.

methods
data extraction
focusing our analysis on promoters, we extracted 1 kb sequences upstream of all identified chromosomal genes from the following genomes - arabidopsis thaliana , oryza sativa  , glycine max  , v.  <dig> , 2010) and sorghum bicolor   using the ncbi reference sequence database  <cit> . using a code , we extracted gene annotation information  from gene bank files and the corresponding 1 kb upstream region from the fasta sequence. we searched for co-occurring acgt elements of the form acgt  acgt, where 0 ≤ n ≤  <dig> in all extracted 1 kb regions for our analysis. as it has been previously seen that cooperatively binding transcription factors are usually spaced within 25 bp, we limited our analysis to a spacer distance of 30 bp. the sequence of each spacer  was extracted and the total number of occurrences for each spacer length was determined for each species. in order to test the significance of these frequencies, we used four palindromic – tagc, cgta, gcta, atgc, and four non-palindromic – agct, tgca, ctag, gatc sequences as controls. using the place database, we ensured that each of these 4 bp sequences are not conserved cis element themselves  <cit> . by performing a similar analysis on each control sequence, we compared the frequency of the acgt  acgt motif with the corresponding frequencies of control sequences for the same n.

spacer sequence analysis
spacer sequences occurring in all promoters of arabidopsis thaliana were analyzed to identify preferences for a particular nucleotide at each position within the spacer sequence. the percentage of a, g, c and t at each position for all spacer lengths  was calculated to identify preferences at particular positions within the spacers. since the genome wide gc content for arabidopsis thaliana is known to be around 36%  <cit> , we chose threshold occurrence percentage of 25% for c/g and 40% for a/t for a particular position in all spacers of the same length . single letter iupac dna codes were assigned to each position to generate consensus sequences for all spacer lengths.

ortholog analysis
in order to understand the mechanism of evolution of the acgt  acgt cis-element in the aforementioned plant species, we analyzed its predominance for n = 0– <dig> in all identified in-paralogs/orthologs among arabidopsis, rice and sorghum  <cit> . gene names for rice were converted from msu annotation to rap annotation prior to analysis  <cit> . frequencies for co-occurring acgt elements were analyzed from extracted genes.

functional analysis
using published microarray data from the ebi gene expression atlas  <cit>  for arabidopsis thaliana, we analyzed whether genes containing multiple core acgt cis-elements were unregulated/down regulated during developmental stages , by hormones , in different plant parts  and by environmental conditions . in addition, we extended our functional analysis to rice by extracting genes up regulated by salt and drought stress in 7 day old seedling from publically available microarray data  <cit> . by comparing genes regulated by a condition with genes containing multiple acgt elements, we calculated the likelihood of occurrence by the following formula:

 likelihoodofoccurrence=x/yforaparticularspacerlengthn 

where x = / b and y = p;

a = event that a given gene is regulated  by a particular condition b = event that a given gene contains multiple acgt elements separated by n base pairs. further, we calculated the overall likelihood of occurrence for each condition . all conditions with likelihood of occurrence >  <dig>  were subjected to further statistical analysis using the  <dig> control sequences described earlier.

statistical analysis
wherever possible, statistical analysis was performed to determine the significance of results. the frequency of acgt  acgt was assessed for significant peaks by box and whiskers plots, with 10% and 90% whiskers. the outliers were considered as potential peaks, especially if they were present across all species. the degree of correlation between the two monocot and dicot species was calculated by taking the frequencies for n consecutive spacer lengths at a time, beginning from  <dig> till  <dig> for each of the species, where n > = <dig>  by assuming gaussian distribution, the pearson’s correlation coefficient was calculated for each of the cases to determine significance. consecutive spacer lengths of n with the highest degrees of correlation were interpreted as the most conserved spacer distances.

to identify conditions regulating acgt  acgt containing promoters over the  <dig> control elements, a grubb’s outlier’s test was performed on the likelihood of occurrences for each condition, assuming the data set was normally distributed. if the acgt  acgt likelihood emerged significantly higher than the controls by this test for a certain condition, it was interpreted to be specifically regulated by that condition.

RESULTS
spacer frequency comparison shows common peaks and dips for different spacer lengths across species
we extracted 1 kb regions upstream of the atg site for  <dig>  genes in arabidopsis,  <dig>  genes in soybean,  <dig>  genes in rice and  <dig>  genes in sorghum. in total, the number of cis-elements of the form acgt  acgt  per  <dig> promoters was found to be  <dig> for arabidopsis,  <dig> for rice,  <dig> for sorghum and  <dig> for soybean. our data indicated an overall frequency variation for n = 0– <dig> for the four species under analysis. attempting to identify conservation between monocots and dicots, we identified potential peaks at spacer lengths of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> for dicots  and lengths of  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  across monocots. following this, the box and whisker’s plot  interestingly indicated that while spacer length  <dig>  i.e., two acgt’s in tandem, appeared to be significantly high across all species, there was no common peak across all four genomes . frequencies for n =  for arabidopsis,  for soybean,  for rice and  for sorghum emerged to lie outside the 90th percentile. a particularly surprising observation was that spacer length  <dig> and the region from 11– <dig> had the lowest frequencies across both dicots, whereas spacer length  <dig> was present as a common dip between monocots.

local regions of conservation in monocots and dicots
based on trends in variation of frequencies in the four species, we observed patterns of high correlation specific to monocots and dicots . the two dicotyledonous plants involved in our study - arabidopsis and soybean, depicted high correlation in frequencies for spacer distance  = 6– <dig> . similarly, rice and sorghum, both monocotyledonous plants, showed regions of high correlation for spacer distance  = 0– <dig>  and  = 18– <dig> . comparisons across monocots and dicots, for the most part, were found to be not as significantly correlated .

limited preference for acgt elements compared to random elements
the frequency of occurrence of random 4 bp nucleotide sequences separated by varying spacer lengths in arabidopsis, soybean, rice and sorghum was determined, and compared within each species. a dot plot indicated that contrary to our hypothesis, acgt elements are not drastically preferred over other elements across all species . in fact, acgt elements usually lay around the mean of the frequencies of the control elements, with the exception of sorghum, for which the frequency of acgt elements was lower. for arabidopsis and rice, spacer lengths  <dig> and  <dig> were present in higher frequencies, being surpassed only by atgc, gatc and tgca, which were predominantly high across all species .

patterns of acgt cis elements are highly conserved among orthologous gene groups
we performed a frequency analysis for acgt repeats in promoters of all orthologous gene groups reported between arabidopsis , rice  and sorghum . interestingly, orthologous genes in all three species exhibit similar trends in spacer distance frequency , with significant correlations across all spacer lengths for arabidopsis and rice  , arabidopsis and sorghum  , and rice and sorghum  .

the first and last positions within a spacer sequence are conserved for all spacer lengths in arabidopsis
consensus spacer sequences for spacers of length 0– <dig> were determined to be majorly composed of random nucleotides, shown as n in the sequence . however, the consensus sequences indicate a marked preference for g at the first position in the spacer sequences . similarly, a majority of the sequences indicate the presence of a c  at the terminal end of the sequence. as an exception from all the other spacer sequences, the consensus sequence of spacer length  <dig>  is composed of conserved nucleotides at most  of the positions. such a trend is not noted in any other spacer length, indicating a high degree of conservation for the sequence of this particular spacer length.

acgt repeat elements across species are preferentially regulated by salt and drought stress conditions
we identified the genes regulated by specific conditions, which also contain an upstream acgt  acgt element. the overall likelihood of occurrence was calculated for each condition, with a likelihood of  <dig> being that of random chance. therefore, conditions greater than  <dig>  were selected for further analysis ; including environment conditions such as salt and drought, and hormones such as jasmonic acid. the likelihood for each of these conditions was compared with that of the same condition for the previously described  <dig> control sequences. dot plots for each of the conditions and a grubbs’ test for outliers indicated a significant effect for acgt containing promoters to be up-regulated by salt  and drought  . an individual spacer distance -wise split up revealed considerable fluctuation in the likelihoods for each spacer length, and despite no clear pattern emerging over all functions , suggested potential spacer length specific gene regulation. further, from microarray data for oryza sativa we performed an identical analysis for our two candidate functions – salt and drought up-regulation. both conditions showed likelihood of occurrences greater than  <dig> , and the grubbs’ test for outliers emerged to be significant for both salt  and drought up-regulation . interestingly, similar fluctuating spacer length-wise patterns were observed for this dataset.

discussion
the acgt core motif forms an important class of cis-elements implicated in a variety of functions. multiple acgt motifs have been shown to form enhancer elements which bind synergistically to transcription factors for gene regulation  <cit> . our data indicates that certain spacer lengths are preferred over others in plant promoters. it is possible that these spacer lengths are present in abundance due to extra stability conferred by helical phasing at these particular lengths  <cit> . a major finding was the peak at spacer distance  =  <dig> for rice, which is noteworthy as it is almost twice of the next highest frequency observed in the distribution. to the best of our knowledge, there are no previous reports describing an interaction between cis-elements in rice with such spatial constraints. therefore, a further investigation for this observation could be interesting. unfortunately, the peaks observed in frequency distributions were not consistent throughout the four plant species, or even among individual classes. however, a consistency in the frequency dips observed among monocots and dicots suggests a class specific mode of gene regulation. a possible explanation for the consistent dips could be that certain spacer lengths might cause sterically incompatible binding of transcription factors, explaining why they could be less preferred as compared to an otherwise compatible binding caused by other spacer lengths  <cit> . the theory of a class specific mode of regulation is also supported by differences in regions of high correlation in monocots and dicots.

the correlations in the patterns of acgt repeat frequencies led us to speculate the precise mechanism of conservation of these repeats. the similar trends and subsequent functional significance of acgt elements suggest two possible mechanisms of progression - either parallel or convergent evolution. we expect that a significant correlation in the spacer patterns of orthologous/paralogous genes groups would confirm the evolution of acgt elements being a result of parallel evolution, whereas no correlation would suggest convergent mechanisms. our results strongly suggest proof for parallel evolution, as patterns in acgt elements appear to have evolved from a common ancestral gene and subsequently persisted in the descendent genes across species.

the subsequent comparison of co-occurring acgt elements with random 4 bp nucleotides indicated that acgt elements are not as predominant in plant promoters as compared to other random elements. this observation indicates that although a higher frequency results from a preferred occurrence, it might not be a result of conservation in the genome. nevertheless, on analyzing the same random elements for functional preference using microarray data, acgt  acgt elements were found to be predominant in spite of lower frequencies than random elements in all promoters. this fact underscores the functional relevance of acgt  acgt cis-elements.

based on our functional analysis, we deduced that co-occurring acgt elements are involved in gene regulation in response to stress conditions in both arabidopsis and rice, suggesting species-wide functional significance. genes which were up-regulated by salt and draught stress were much more likely to contain cis-elements of the form acgt  acgt in their promoters. this observation is supported by previous reports that multiple basic leucine zipper transcription factors, which recognize the acgt core site, have been implicated in response under drought and high salinity conditions in arabidopsis  <cit> . similarly, bzip transcription factors have been shown to be involved in regulation under drought stress in rice and soybean  <cit> . further, although regulation by jasmonic acid could not satisfy the criteria for the grubs’ outlier tests, the likelihood of occurrence of genes regulated by jasmonic acid was higher than the cutoff of  <dig> . with jasmonic acid’s conventional involvement in mediating stress responses in plants  <cit> , this observation is extremely interesting in light of our findings.

spacer sequence results showed a clear preference for g at the first and c at the terminal position for almost all spacer lengths. this validates previous reports which state that the sequence requirement of the acgt-containing abre is acgt-g g/t c  <cit> . the cacgtg motif, or the g-box, is recognized in rice , and our results clearly show a predominance of g at + <dig> and c at - <dig> positions. this result also corresponds to reports which state that the bzip class of tfs show enhanced binding to acgt elements with the presence of the g box  <cit> . it can therefore be inferred, that a majority of tfs which bind to acgt elements have stronger interactions if the flanking nucleotides are c and g. while the overall spacer sequence did not show any clear consensus sequence, spacer distance  <dig> showed a large amount of conservation. spacer sequence between two acgt motifs in a cis-element can be crucial for gene regulation  <cit> . from our frequency analysis, we determined that spacer length  <dig> also appears to be preferred in arabidopsis. in light of these observations, it is possible that a spacer of  <dig> bases might be functionally relevant in arabidopsis.

determining the optimum spacer length and preferred spacer sequence could dramatically enhance promoter designing techniques. if a particular spacer length is confirmed to be implicated in regulation of a particular function, e.g. - stress response, a cis-element containing the acgt repeated motif can be incorporated within promoters to give rise to sturdier and more resistant genetically modified crops  <cit> . therefore, identifying the mechanism and implications of the conservation of specific spacer lengths and sequences is of prime importance for various genetic engineering techniques. having identified spacer lengths between acgt elements which can up-regulate gene expression in conditions of draught and salt stress, these results suggest improved methods for promoter design and creating hardy plant varieties.

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study which has attempted to analyze patterns of acgt repeat cis-elements in four plant genomes. we established that each species exhibits preferences for particular spacer lengths and demonstrated the existence of spacer lengths preferentially avoided in monocots and dicots. this suggests that a class specific mechanism of gene regulation might be present for acgt  acgt elements. we further identified parallel evolution to be the underlying mechanism for acgt co-occurrences across species. moreover, by indicating that genes up-regulated by salt and drought stress are more likely to contain acgt repeat cis-elements in their promoters, our in-silico results suggest a significant role of these elements in these pathways.

competing interest
authors are not having any competing interest.

authors’ contributions
rm conceived the study and participated in its co-ordination. rm also gave critical inputs on designing of experiments. ss and iz designed the experiments, conducted the analysis and drafted the manuscript. pb and sm provided valuable inputs in shaping the manuscript to its final form. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1: table s2
frequency analysis of control cis-elements across four plant species. a comparison of the frequency of occurrence of each of the  <dig> palindromic and  <dig> non-palindromic control elements used for n= in - <dig> bp regions of arabidopsis, soybean, sorghum and rice.

click here for file

 additional file 2: table s3
functional analysis of arabidopsis and rice genes containing acgt cis-elements. the  total number of acgtacgt  containing promoters in arabidopsis that are also regulated by certain conditions, with a spacer-length wise frequency analysis,  likelihood of occurrence to contain acgtacgt, calculated for each of these conditions,  identical analysis conducted for each of the eight control elements used previously ,  comparison of the likelihoods for acgt and each of the controls, with conditions highlighted in green being those for which the likelihood of acgt is significant in the grubbs’ test for outliers  total number of acgtacgt  containing promoters in rice that are up-regulated by salt and drought stress, with a spacer length wise analysis and a similar analysis for control elements and  comparison of the likelihoods for acgt and for each of the controls in rice with both conditions emerging significant in grubbs’ test for outliers.

click here for file

 acknowledgements
we thank the biological sciences department at birla institute of technology and science, pilani for their cooperation. we also thank bits pilani, pilani campus for their support in terms of infrastructure and facilities which were critical for completion of this project. we thank the editor and the reviewers for their valuable inputs.
