BACKGROUND
speciation is a central process in evolution, but its complexity and duration render it difficult or impossible to observe and study as a whole. studies dealing with the functional and genetic divergence between taxa, particularly when reproductive isolation is incomplete  <cit> , allow the distinction and analysis of the various stages of this process. the relative influence of the different mechanisms involved in the initiation and maintenance of divergence can then be inferred. understanding the complexity of evolutionary and ecological mechanisms leading to reproductive isolation and speciation through integration of in situ observations, theoretical models and molecular analysis of genomes, is today one of the major challenges in evolutionary ecology  <cit> . important efforts towards modeling the processes acting in hybrid zones and understanding the maintenance of divergence have focused on the balance between dispersal and hybrid depression  <cit> . in these studies, incompatibility resulting from the allopatric divergence between two genomes is considered as a predominant factor causing hybrid depression. during the last decades, the development of the use of molecular markers in a population genetics framework made possible the testing and improvement of these theoretical models in hybrid zones. this screening of genome divergence and incompatibility also allowed testing the schematic models describing speciation as the result of processes spanning from pure vicariance  to differential level of gene flow .

from a statistical point of view however, analyses at both the scales of populations and genes are still limited by the panel of tools available. at the population level, the analysis of molecular data is limited by the fact that most mathematical models underlying classical population genetics analysis have been developed in an intra-specific framework, and some underlying hypotheses such as random mating or hardy weinberg equilibrium do not necessarily stand in real natural populations and are out of scope in hybrid zones. moreover, the detection and screening of hybrids requires an analysis of the populations and hybrid zones at the individual level whereas most summary statistics deliver estimates at the population level.

two families of analyses have been proposed recently in order to partially release the underlying assumptions of most classical population genetics data analyses, and take better advantage of the information contained in a given dataset. the first family is built around the coalescent theory and is mostly based on bayesian computation methods of analysis. it allows individual-centered analyses of genotype clustering  <cit> . the second family is built around the network theory and proposes an exploratory approach centered on the population or individual , illustrating the relationship among those agents and inferring their respective roles and importance in the studied system  <cit> .

methods based on the coalescent theory trace the ancestral genealogy of a sample rather than modeling changes of gene frequencies in the population as a whole. these methods have recently been explored in order to improve mathematical models and take advantage of all the information contained in the data  <cit> . they have proven useful in studying hybrid zones  <cit>  although they remain complex and time-consuming. on the other hand, this combination between high load of information not being optimally exploited by the summary statistics, and statistical tools available requiring heavy underlying hypotheses, suggests the use of another possible family of methods, coming from science of complex systems based on network theory  <cit> . network tools have indeed been developed to take the best advantage of the information contained in a complex data set, while minimizing the assumptions required for the analysis and interpretation of the complex system behavior  <cit> .

a first step towards the use of the network theory to unravel gene flow has recently been proposed for inter-population analyses by dyer and nason  <cit> . they applied the graph theory developed by erdös and renyi  to describe the complex topology resulting from both history and contemporary genetic interactions among populations of a widely distributed species of cactus. this was further improved to extract from the graph topology hints as the dynamics of information  flow through the system at the inter-individual  <cit>  and inter-population levels <cit> . compared to classical methods  <cit> , these first steps proved useful in illustrating the genetic relationship, and identifying clusters of individuals as well as agents acting as preferential links or sources in the metapopulation system of a threatened seagrass.

in the present study, we explored the usefulness of network analysis to study hybrids identified as agents linking two differentiated clusters of individuals, or gene pools. we tested network analysis in the hybrid zone between our two model species, the two sister species of brown seaweeds fucus vesiculosus  and f. spiralis . both species are ecologically successful and widely distributed . they are characteristic of respectively upper and mid-shore zones on rocky shores. although distinct genetic entities have been identified within the species f. spiralis  these are nevertheless still one single monophyletic entity, here designated as f. spiralis, distinct from its sister f. vesiculosus  <cit> . these two sister taxa are a good model system because, despite displaying diagnostic reproductive system , they may hybridize when encountered in sympatry  <cit> , resulting in individuals with intermediate genotypes whose fitness in terms of reproductive investment is not significantly reduced  <cit> . whether the occurrence of hybridization is the result of an ongoing and incomplete speciation process or of a secondary contact with ongoing re-homogenization of the two entities is still unclear and a matter of debate  <cit> . in order to test for the hypothesis of ongoing speciation  versus present day hybridization due to secondary contact , we studied the genetic relationships among samples collected both in sympatric and allopatric regions of f_ves and f_spi ranges . the global pattern of genetic relationships among individuals was illustrated by networks built with two different metrics integrating different genetic information in term of time and divergence history: the rozenfeld distance   <cit>  and the shared allele distance   <cit> . rd, based on loci, helps to resolve ancestral polymorphism through allele length impinged by slow evolutionary processes, while sad, based on shared alleles, helps to understand recent gene flow characterized by direct allelic exchange free from slow evolutionary process. we aimed at comparing the performance of network and bayesian coalescent analysis  to test whether the shared polymorphism and the absence of diagnostic locus was mainly due to retained ancestral polymorphism, or to present day hybridization in sympatric zone. in the first case, we expected shared polymorphism at neutral microsatellites to be distributed evenly across the species distribution range, whereas in the other case a higher proximity among species may be expected in sympatric zones.

RESULTS
networks of individuals f. spiralis and f. vesiculosus
networks were analyzed at the percolation threshold . this approach is based on the analysis of the network keeping only essential links illustrating the minimum genetic distance necessary to maintain connectivity across most components of the system. the network based on the rozenfeld distance  reveals diagnostic rd distances among both species. at the percolation threshold distance , genotypes corresponding to sampled f_spi  versus f_ves  clearly segregate into two sub-clusters linked through a succession of  <dig> nodes . below this percolation threshold, the network loses its integrity and the species-specific sub-clusters split into distinct clusters , each exclusively composed of either f_spi or of f_ves individuals. the ensuing clusters of individuals present a hierarchical structure supported by a significant average clustering coefficient: < cc > =  <dig>  higher than the one expected after randomly rewiring the links . thus illustrating the modularity of the network composed of two clusters of species, with greater internal interconnection than would be expected by chance.

the network based on shared alleles distance , only influenced by allele frequencies and not by their divergence, does not discriminate the species as clearly as the rd did . its different topology reveals hierarchical clustering reflected already on the percolation profile  where the single peak with rd is replaced by three peaks with the sad. at the percolation threshold , the segregation of the sister species is not as clear as with rd. a large number of pathways still connect the two species and the decrease of threshold does not lead to a clear separation of f_spi and f_ves. indeed, the first disconnecting cluster corresponds to the northern american f_ves , followed by the cluster of f_ves from south portugal and morocco  while the last cluster of f_ves from the sympatric zone of northwest iberia  remains linked to the complete cluster of f_spi. these observations are consistent with a significant average clustering coefficient value inferior with sad than rd: < cc > =  <dig>  .

the individuals of f_spi that are sharing the higher number of links with individuals f_ves were also coming from northwest iberia. despite the global differences denoted for our networks, this last observation is common to both the sad and rd network topologies. indeed, both highlight individuals of f_spi and of f_ves from northwest iberia relaying gene flow among their two clusters. the combination of our two network analyses with different distances indicates hybridization in our dataset at the northwest iberia area.

hybridization assessment through network analysis
as the network topology built with sad was not discriminative for the  <dig> species, a method was developed to derive expectations of sad network topology under the hypothesis of hybridization . indeed, at the threshold value of  <dig> , on the network topology , some natural individuals of f_spi and f_ves of the sympatric zone of north iberia are making the link between the two species. these  <dig> intermediate individuals were considered as putative hybrids. the threshold value of  <dig>  was selected because of the background noise at  <dig>  illustrated by direct links between individuals of f_spi and f_ves coming from different geographic area. hybridization simulations were thus conducted under  <dig> different conditions  and network analysis was employed to compare the behavior of these hybrids when integrated into the initial natural dataset .

the topologies of derived networks were compared across the  <dig> hybrids datasets at decreasing thresholds,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>   allowing networks to pass from a connected state to a disconnected one preventing gene flow between the two species. at the threshold of  <dig> , f_spi are connected to f_ves through synthetic hybrids for all datasets. nevertheless, differences appear during the decrease of the threshold highlighting the closer behavior of bc_f_ves and bc_f_spi_f_ves hybrids datasets to the initial natural dataset than hybrids f <dig> and bc_f_spi.

the comparison of network topologies with rd and sad helped to test for the hybridization scenario best fitting the natural dataset network topology. as revealed by the percolation curves , the percolation thresholds shift globally to lower values except for the bc_f_ves dataset . as for the natural dataset, at the percolation threshold, hybrids datasets have only one pathway making the connection between each of the two clusters of species . nevertheless, the network topologies, according to the percolation threshold, reveal an intermediary state between bc_f_ves and bc_f_spi_f_ves datasets where the natural dataset seems to fit in.

hybridization assessment through a bayesian clustering approach
in order to highlight the potential differences existing between the two methods and to depict their advantages and disadvantages in hybridization assessment, we compared the networks with the software structure  <cit> , that assigns genotypes proportionally to clusters defined based on minimizing linkage and hardy-weinberg disequilibria. the results obtained with structure for two clusters  are coherent with mainly two categories of individuals in agreement with the morphological determination of the natural dataset of all individuals into the two species . nevertheless,  <dig> intermediate individual genotypes  are counted:  <dig> f_spi and  <dig> f_ves. it appears that only few of them  are among the  <dig> putative hybrids detected with the sad network and relocated at the end of the dataset . it is also noticeable that although most of the individuals  considered as admixed in structure are in the sympatric zone of northwest iberia, some  do not have a clearly intermediate position on the sad network, with even one coming from an allopatric area .

when analyzing the datasets where putative natural hybrids were replaced by synthetic hybrids, admixture is mainly recovered. as with network analysis, all individuals of hybrids f <dig> are clearly recognized as such by structure . this result is coherent with the network topology, as for backcrosses bc_f_spi, bc_f_ves and bc_f_spi_f_ves, 15/ <dig>  11/ <dig> and 14/ <dig>  individuals are detected, respectively . nevertheless, it should be noticed that individuals bc_f_ves are less detected by structure as admixed than bc_f_spi . this result is different from the network analyses because individuals bc_f_spi tend to be closer to natural individuals of f_spi than bc_f_ves to natural individuals of f_ves.

discussion
in this study, we developed a novel application of network analysis to the study of hybridization phenomena between sister species. networks were constructed based on distinct genetic distances , differently sensitive to time since divergence , allowing the comparison of the divergence degree at different time-scales.

the first important picture obtained on network built with rozenfeld distance  is the straightforward recognition of two well-defined clusters of f. vesiculosus and f. spiralis . this confirms that reproductive isolation and genetic divergence is rather advanced between those two species, despite a significant amount of shared polymorphism. thus this multi-locus phylogenetic distance may be used to assign individuals to their species of origin. this result also supports the existence of phylogenetic information from microsatellite loci  <cit>  which is accurately delivered by rd.

the second important result is the occurrence of clusters of individuals exhibiting an intermediate position between both species and maintaining a connection between some f. vesiculosus populations and the f. spiralis cluster as revealed on the sad network . this intermediate cluster is formed by tens of individuals, among which those pointed out as intermediate with the rd. in case of the shared polymorphism being mostly ancestral, one may expect to observe some connections anywhere in the distribution range including in allopatric zones, but these f. vesiculosus individuals of intermediate genotypes are only detected in the northwest iberia, located specifically at the edge of the locations where both species occur in sympatry. interestingly, intermediate individuals, although much less numerous, also emerge in two other sympatric areas: northeastern america and the english channel, whereas no such individuals are observed in any of the allopatric zones, further supporting the hybridization hypothesis. the sad distance integrates more recent history, therefore giving it more weight than the rd, which takes into account phylogenetic divergence  <cit> . it is therefore likely to better reflect present day exchange of genes between the two species. those intermediate individuals that did cluster with the main f. vesiculosus cluster with rd, with sad do now connect closer to f. spiralis than to the other con-specifics. this is likely caused by these individuals sharing more alleles with f. spiralis than with the other f. vesiculosus , but the alleles they do not share with f. spiralis exhibit a strong divergence with this last species and are typical from f. vesiculosus . the occurrence of all those individuals in the sympatric zone supports these intermediate genotypes as the product of present day hybridization between anciently diverged lineages/species.

the four additional networks built including simulated synthetic hybrids from f <dig>  as well as backcrosses with each of the mother species , confirm this scenario. indeed, the synthetic hybrids are present at the interface of the two sister-species, although they tend to be more isolated than most of the natural putative hybrids. this isolation seems due to the f <dig> nature of synthetic hybrids, truly half f. spiralis/half f. vesiculosus, while naturally occurring hybrids may be the product of backcrosses. when the backcrosses are plugged into the network, all possible backcrosses do not lead to a convergence towards the initial topology based on real data only. the admixture of  and  in the same dataset show the most similar network topology to the original one, while backcrosses resulting from  or  plugged alone tend to cluster closer to their species of origin without fitting exactly the same position as the natural intermediates.

the use of network here provides specific advantages, mainly the ability to identify agents  connecting identified clusters through genetic distance . hybridization indeed usually results in a reticulate tree that cannot be built with classical phylogenetic methods but can be easily grasped on a network. moreover, the possibility to follow the evolution of network topology through a gradient of genetic distance threshold helps to visualize and understand the attachment preferences to one or the other of the species clusters.

the use of structure also illustrates the clear separation between the two species and allows the identification of admixed individuals, although not systematically the same as the intermediate agents appearing on the networks. in order to test for the accuracy of each method in those doubtful cases, the discrepancies between results obtained with both methods can be considered in perspective with geographical locations and ecological conditions in which intermediate agents  do not appear as admixed individuals , or the other way round. interestingly, intermediate agents unidentified by structure as admixed individuals correspond to samples collected at the edge of the zone where the two species occur in sympatry, northwest iberia. on the contrary, the admixed individuals detected by structure that do not appear as intermediate agents were collected in the allopatric zone, thereby rendering enigmatic the origin of such admixture.

when analyzing the accuracy of both methods with synthetic hybrids and backcrosses, structure shows high reliability in detecting f <dig> hybrids , whereas only 71% of those are emphasized by an intermediate position on network. the detection of mixed individuals with structure logically decreases to 92% for backcrosses with f. spiralis and to 64% for backcrosses with f. vesiculosus. this difference between the two species can be explained by the lower genetic diversity of f_spi, likely due to its reproductive mode, as illustrated by their gds , resulting in an easier detection of the insertion of new alleles in the genetic pool. on the opposite, network analysis, by relying on shared links, shows backcrosses with f_spi having a stronger assimilation to its species of origin than backcrosses with f_ves. the integration of backcross events into the species gene pool seems to be rapid and renders them hard to identify. as a synthesis, both approaches appear as complementary, as structure may perform slightly better in the systematic detection of admixed individuals, an advantage however balanced by a lower amount of misleading detection of hybrids  obtained with network analysis. besides, network analysis allows further screening of links and connections among geographic areas to describe patterns of spatial connectivity.

at the within species scale, finally, network analysis revealed two main genetically distinct clusters across the distributional range of both sister species f. spiralis and f. vesiculosus,  a southern cluster in south portugal, morocco, azores and canary islands, and  and a northern cluster in north america, north sea and channel . these two regions are common to both species indicating a similar evolutionary history. indeed, oscillations of climate during the past thousands of years have caused repeated geographic distributional shifts and extinction/recolonization events often experienced by many marine taxa. during the last glacial maximum  in europe, permafrost extended south at 47° n  <cit> , leaving temperate species to shift their distribution to potential refugia. marine species, including intertidal taxa, are also thought to have been displaced to small refugia in the north around the british isles, norway or in the brittany region and more southerly from the iberian peninsula to mauritania  <cit> . as the ice melted, species ranges were able to expand back to previous latitudes  <cit> . on the north american coast, the lgm may have covered by ice the complete hard substrate available there  <cit>  and have caused the extinction of rocky shore species in this region. north american rocky shores are thought to have later been recolonized by european populations  <cit> . for species in the genus fucus, glacial refugia have been inferred along the brittany area for f. serratus  <cit>  or along northwest iberia for f. ceranoides  <cit>  and f. vesiculosus along the american coast shows a genetic signature of a recent recolonization from europe  <cit> . in f. spiralis and f. vesiculosus, clustering on our networks is consistent with the presence of two refuge areas in europe, possibly a northern refuge  and a southern one . these inferences are thus consistent with a recent mitochondrial phylogeography of these two species for f. spiralis but are contradictory for f. vesiculosus, as the mitochondrial genome of f. vesiculosus supports a single refugial zone  <cit> . organelle genomes, with smaller effective population size than nuclear ones, are however more prone to being highly affected by introgressive sweeps, and indeed introgression and massive expansion of f. vesiculosus organelles into other fucus species has been documented  <cit> . isolation into distinct glacial refugia would have been followed by a post-glacial expansion during which the northern and southern populations might have converged in a contact region along northwest iberia  where despite hybridization genetic differentiation is still maintained nowadays  and which now also extends into the brittany region  <cit> , although in regions not included in our sampling. in the southern region, f. spiralis occurs only on the open coast whereas f. vesiculosus is present only in isolated sheltered areas such as estuaries and coastal lagoons  <cit> . consequently, along the broad areas of sympatry of their northern distribution, the two sister species can hybridize  <cit> , whereas in southern europe, their distribution is allopatric and hybridization is highly unlikely due to the limited dispersal capability of their gametes  <cit> .

a more complex pattern appears on the networks in northwest iberia area . the northwest iberian close connection to the northern cluster  indicates a recent secondary expansion either from north iberia into the northern region or vice versa, having kept restricted gene flow with the southern clusters.

another interesting point is the fact that hybrids are mostly localized in the southern limit of the sympatric zone, where it contacts the allopatric zone ranging from southern portugal-northwestern africa and atlantic islands. hybridization may be favored by unknown factors in this area, such as the rate of hybrid fertility that may change between geographical locations, possibly being higher in northwest iberia area as suggest by billard et al.  <cit> . also, reinforcement may be weak due to the recent gene flow from an allopatric zone where it would be lacking, whereas in the middle of the sympatric zone such mechanism would already have developed to maintain species integrity. this is further supported by the peculiar position and clustering of the individuals from the extreme edge of the sympatric zone in mindelo, where more than half intermediate individuals were detected on the network, and which is the only sympatric population of f. spiralis clustering with the allopatric ones with structure . these results are in agreement with a recent multi-gene phylogeny of these species that reveals that in northwest iberia f. spiralis from southern origins become extremely introgressed  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the results of the present study suggest three main conclusions:  the accuracy of network analysis to unravel hybridization phenomena. the detection of hybrids and introgression is possible and reliable through network analysis, although not systematic as some remain apparently undetected in any analysis attempted, either networks or structure.  the putative hybrids detected in the sad network seem more similar to backcrosses  than to f <dig> hybrids. this may be interpreted as a seldom occurrence of first generation hybrids, with a dilution effect on the mosaic genomes produced after backcross events.  the biogeography of both fucus species addressed through the examination of networks supports the existence of northern and southern glacial refuges where both species differentiated in two clusters that came back into contact in northwest iberia during post-glacial range changes. interestingly, this area corresponds to the boundary between the allopatric/sympatric zones, where most putative hybrids were detected, suggesting weaker reinforcement in this area.

