BACKGROUND
rnase r is an important escherichia coli exonuclease
 <cit> . the enzyme is distinguished from other exoribonucleases by the ability to degrade rna secondary structures without the aid of a helicase activity
 <cit> . it is able to degrade these secondary structures only in the presence of a 3′ single-stranded overhang to which it can bind and initiate degradation. the structure of this protein remains unknown and most of the knowledge on rnase r structure is based on the available structures of rnase ii and rrp <dig>  rnase r has a rnb catalytic domain flanked by rna binding domains: csd <dig> and csd <dig> located at the n-terminus and a c-terminal s <dig> domain, following the typical modular organization on rnb family of enzymes. rnase r was shown to be involved in several cellular processes. it is a cold induced protein suggesting its involvement in bacterial adaptation to low temperatures
 <cit> . its importance for rna metabolism in the cold relies on the ability to remove highly structured rnas that are stabilized under these conditions
 <cit> . rnase r takes part in the degradation of mrnas, and is especially important in the removal of mrnas with stable stem loops such as rep elements
 <cit> . in vitro this enzyme is able to digest highly structured rnas like rrna suggesting that rnase r is involved in the removal of these molecules in vivo <cit> . some helicase activity independent on exonuclease activity was shown for rnase r
 <cit> . moreover, rnase r in concert with pnpase was shown to be involved in rrna quality control
 <cit> . recent studies show that rnase r is involved in ribosome quality control and degradation, working together with the newly discovered endonuclease ybey
 <cit> .

in stationary phase or upon drop of the temperature, rnase r transcript and protein are considerably stabilized. due to its stabilization, rnase r levels increase dramatically with an increase of about  <dig> fold upon a temperature downshift and about  <dig> fold in stationary phase
 <cit> . protein stability changes rely on the specific acetylation of the c-terminal lys <dig> residue. acetylation of the lys <dig> residue regulates the tmrna and smpb binding to the c-terminal region of rnase r
 <cit> . in stationary phase the acetylating enzyme is absent. as a consequence tmrna and smpb bind poorly to the c-terminal region of rnase r and the enzyme is stable
 <cit> .

large-scale analysis of protein complexes in e. coli growing under exponential phase did not detect strong interactions between rnase r and other proteins
 <cit> . however, immunoprecipitation studies suggest that rnase r may interact with other proteins such as the components of tmrna machinery
 <cit> .

in this study we employed the tap tag purification method together with mass spectrometry to identify the proteins that co-purify with rnase r after a temperature downshift and in exponentially growing cells . despite not having identified any stable complexes, our rnase r purifications were enriched with ribosomal proteins. this enrichment was still observed after rnase a treatment suggesting that rnase r could be bound to the ribosome. at least for rrna degradation, it was shown that pnpase works in concert with rnase r in the ribosome quality control process and only the deletion of both proteins gives a lethal phenotype characterized by the accumulation of undegraded, deficient ribosomal subunits
 <cit> . moreover, while this manuscript was in review an independent laboratory came out with similar evidences using different approaches
 <cit> . our results using sucrose polysome gradients combined with western blot technique demonstrated that in vivo most of the rnase r signal is connected with the 30s ribosomal subunit. all of these results, together with reports on the involvement of rnase r in ribosome quality control, show that rnase r interaction with the ribosomes may be an important physiological phenomenon.

RESULTS
preparation of rnase r-tap strain
we used the tap tag purification method to obtain information about proteins interacting with rnase r in vivo 
 <cit> . the tap tag sequence followed by a kanamycin resistance cassette was integrated into the e. coli genome to form a c-terminal translational fusion with rnase r protein
 <cit> . a control strain with one of the rna polymerase  subunits - rpoc fused with a tap tag was also constructed. since rnap is a well-defined protein complex, it served as a control for our purification method
 <cit> . additionally, we created a strain with rnase r protein fused with gfp that served as a negative control for tap tag purification.
 <cit> , final elutions from calmodulin resin were separated on sds-page gel. chosen bands  were extracted and proteins were identified using mass spectrometry. position of fusion proteins in the gel is indicated with stars.

chosen clones obtained after integrations of the cassettes were monitored by western blot to confirm the presence of the fusion proteins . additionally it was verified that c-terminal tap tag fusion does not affect rnase r induction after temperature downshift . the first purifications were performed according to the standard tap tag procedures
 <cit> . we detected sufficient amounts of target proteins in the final elutions in the case of both fusion proteins .

analysis of coomassie-stained sds-page gels showed almost no background on the rnase r gfp fusion purification which proved specificity of the method used. in the case of the rpoc tap fusion we saw enrichment on other rnap subunits in the final elutions. one of the bands was extracted and mass spectrometry analysis proved that it corresponded to the rnap subunit rpoa. in the rnase r-tap fusion purification we mainly detected our target protein in the final elution, although there was some background enrichment compared to rnase r-gfp preparation. this result suggests that rnase r does not form stable complexes and that eventual interactions are rather transient. similar results were obtained in several independent experiments using cells grown under different conditions , and varying the amount of the background signal between the experiments . even though stable complexes formed by rnase r were not detected, some bands were found to be enriched in the rnase r-tap preparation in relation to rnase r-gfp and rpoc-tap. one of these bands was extracted from the gel and subjected to mass spectrometry analysis; which resulted in the detection of three ribosomal proteins: rpsd, rpsc and rplc .

rnase r does not form stable complexes but it does co-purify with ribosomal proteins
in order to obtain more comprehensive information about the transient interactions caused by rnase r we subjected the whole elution fraction to mass spectrometry analysis. for this analysis we chose the material obtained from cells subjected to cold shock treatment, since in this condition purification was the most efficient, probably due to increased levels of cellular rnase r
 <cit> . we detected  <dig> proteins in the rnase r-tap elution and  <dig> proteins in the control rpoc-tap elution. mass-spectrometry data were subsequently subjected to the label free quantification using maxquant software
 <cit> , which allowed relative values to be obtained that corresponded to the amount of each protein in the sample .

in the graphical representation of the results the intensity values of the proteins identified in rnase r and rpoc samples were plotted against the specificity value of the protein in the samples. specificity value corresponds to the ratio between the intensity of a given protein detected in the sample and the respective intensity of the protein in the control. data obtained from rnase r-tap purification were used as a control for the analysis of the data obtained from rpoc-tap purification, and vice-versa.

proteins detected with the highest intensity in rpoc tap purification were all main rna polymerase components 
 <cit> . the intensity values of the rnap complex components were comparable to the value obtained for tagged protein rpoc, confirming that we could purify a stable rna polymerase complex. a decrease of specificity for some of the complex components was due to their detection in the rnase r-tap preparation. interaction between rnase r and rnap could not be ruled out under the chosen experimental settings. apart from the five rnap subunits, proteins more loosely connected with rna polymerase were also detected, proving the sensitivity of the method. interestingly, two proteins of unknown function, ygfb and ymfi, were detected with relatively high intensity values, suggesting that they may cooperate with the bacterial rna polymerase complex .

proteins detected in the rnase r tap sample generally had much lower intensity values compared to the tagged rnase r, going in agreement with the results observed with sds-page gels, and confirm the lack of stable complexes formed by rnase r . surprisingly, most of the proteins detected with relatively high intensities were ribosomal components. as in the case of rpoc-tap, the specificity values of many proteins decreased due to its detection in the control sample. in order to check whether ribosomal proteins co-purified with rnase r due to an unspecific interaction provided by rrna, we repeated the experiment adding rnase a during the purification steps. results showed that after rnase a treatment the proteins detected with the highest intensities were still ribosomal components . to check whether rnase r interaction with ribosomes was specific for cold shock, we performed mass spectrometry detection of proteins that co-purified with rnase r-tap in exponentially growing cells. comparison of the results showed that most of the proteins detected were the same under both conditions . this suggests that interaction between rnase r and ribosomes is not an artifact of the growth conditions.

there was a drop in the intensity value of rnase r obtained by mass spectrometry between rnase r tap sample after rnase a treatment and the sample from exponentially growing cells. we consider it as a method artifact since this effect did not reflect the amount of rnase r in the sample estimated by sds-page gels .

rnase r interacts mostly with non-translating ribosomes in vivo
analysis of the mass spectrometry data suggested that there can be physical interaction between rnase r and the ribosomes. to explore this we used sucrose polysome gradients and detected the rnase r position in the gradient using antibodies against rnase r. during centrifugation of total bacterial extracts in sucrose gradients, the soluble proteins stay at the top, whereas ribosomes migrate deeper into the gradient due to their size. the relation between the position of rnase r and ribosomes along the gradient should reveal eventual interactions between these two particles. the use of anti rnase r antibodies to detect the rnase r position in the gradient enables the observation of the behaviour of the endogenous untagged proteins.

western blot analysis of the gradient fractions showed that the rnase r signal reached maximal intensity not at the top of the gradient, as expected for soluble proteins, but a few fractions deeper . similar results were obtained for the cells grown at 37°c and the cells after the cold shock treatment; although cold shock treated cells gave a stronger signal due to the increase in the rnase r level. as a control we have used rnase ii, a protein from the same family. in contrary to rnase r, rnase ii does not migrate along the sucrose gradient. this protein remains mostly in the fraction of the gradient corresponding to the soluble proteins, showing no interaction with the ribosomes . if we compare the signal intensity and position of the ribosomal subunits using less dense gradients, we can observe that the rnase r enrichment corresponds mostly to the single 30s ribosomal subunit. interestingly, interaction between rnase r and the small ribosomal subunit protein s <dig>  encoded by the rpsl gene, has recently been proposed, leading credence to our 
CONCLUSIONS
 <cit> . after reaching its maximum, rnase r signal intensity decreased along the gradient, but it could still be detected in the fraction corresponding to the 50s subunit and until the peak of the 70s ribosome . the weaker detection of rnase r in the 50s subunit can be explained by the interaction of this enzyme with dead . dead is a helicase involved in the biogenesis of the 50s ribosomal subunit and its deletion leads to the dysfunction in biogenesis of this ribosomal subunit
 <cit> .

sample treatment with edta, which results in ribosome disruption and subunit separation, causes a change in the rnase r signal pattern, indicating that the position of rnase r in the gradient was due to an interaction with the ribosomes .

rnase r deletion does not impact ribosome formation
our results show that rnase r in vivo interacts with the ribosomes. data from independent studies suggest that rnase r is involved in the ribosome quality control
 <cit> , so interaction with the ribosomes can be important for this function. overexpression of rnase r rescues phenotype of dead helicase deletion at low temperatures. one of the phenotypes of dead deletion is the dysfunction in biogenesis of 50s ribosomal subunit
 <cit> . the suppressing role of rnase r suggests that it may also be involved in the ribosome biogenesis.

if rnase r is important for ribosome biogenesis, deletion of this enzyme may cause changes in ribosome number or accumulation of deficient ribosome species. to check such a possibility, the sucrose polysome profile of an rnase r deletion strain was compared to those obtained with the wild type cells. polysome samples were analyzed from the cells growing under different temperatures: 37°c, 20°c and after four hours of cold shock treatment . we did not noticed significant difference in polysome profiles between wild type and rnase r deleted strain in none of the conditions tested . the relative amount of whole ribosomes and the single subunits were comparable, as well as the amount of polysomes that reflect the conditions of the translation machinery. also, no accumulation of new dysfunctional ribosome species was observed. we did not detect any significant difference after a prolonged incubation of the cells at low temperature . this suggests that rnase r function in ribosome biogenesis is redundant and can be executed by other enzymes under its absence.

discussion
in this study we investigated potential interactors of e. coli rnase r using tap tag purification in combination with mass spectrometry protein identification. our results suggest that rnase r does not form stable complexes in vivo, but it can interact with ribosomal proteins. surprisingly, among the proteins that co-purify with rnase r we did not detect any components of the trans-translation pathway, although interaction of rnase r with ssra and smpb complex was previously detected using smpb immunoprecipitation
 <cit> . during trans-translation, rnase r is recruited to stalled ribosomes by an interaction of its c- terminal region with the components of the trans- translation machinery
 <cit> . because in our experiments we used a c-terminal tap tag fusion, part of the interactions in this protein region could have been lost.

the detected interaction of rnase r with the ribosomes was supported by the analysis of sucrose polysome gradients with antibodies against rnase r. endogenous rnase r migrates in the sucrose gradients in a similar fashion as the 30s ribosomal subunit. moreover, treatment of the sample with edta changed the rnase r migration pattern. previous studies suggested an interaction between rnase r and the 30s ribosomal protein s <dig>  which is in agreement with our observations
 <cit> .

although our work proves an interaction between ribosomes and rnase r, we did not detect any difference in the ribosome profiles after rnr gene deletion. this suggests that whatever is the biological function of rnase r connected to the ribosomes it is redundant, and can be executed by other enzymes. redundancy of exonucleases functions is common in e. coli and deletion of any of the three main exonucleases has any or minimal, effect on the cell fitness
 <cit> .

based on the results provided by other independent study we believe that the main function of rnase r connection with the ribosomes is its involvement in ribosome quality control. recently, it was shown that rnase r together with ybey nuclease can efficiently degrade deficient ribosomes in vitro, and this function is dependent on the presence of both enzymes
 <cit> . rnase r and ybey can only degrade complete 70s ribosomes, but not single subunits
 <cit> . although we observed that most of cellular rnase r signal co-migrates with the ribosomes at the sucrose gradient, it does not mean that all cellular ribosomes are linked with rnase r. based on approximate estimations of protein copy numbers in the cell, we can predict that in exponentially growing cells ribosomes are at least  <dig> fold more abundant than rnase r, which means that rnase r is only connected to a small fraction of the cellular ribosomes
 <cit> . we are tempted to speculate that rnase r can specifically target deficient ribosomal 30s subunits, which subsequently results in the specific 70s ribosome degradation by ybey and rnase r. this explains why we could see a specific enrichment of rnase r on 30s subunit but not on the 70s ribosome, which would be rapidly degraded . we aim to explore this hypothesis in our future work.

