BACKGROUND
social mammals have been arguably one of the most extensively studied groups of taxa over the last few decades and scientists have gathered valuable information spanning a large array of biological fields in many species  <cit> . for example, we know that most group-living mammals exhibit a polygynous mating system in which one dominant male usually monopolises reproduction with a number of adult females in the group  <cit> . a direct consequence of this non-random mating system is high variance in mating success among males, so that most offspring are sired by only one  adult male. from an evolutionary standpoint, the resulting presence of a large number of individuals that are closely genetically related to each other  may have created social conditions from which kin selection developed; that is, individuals gain inclusive fitness benefits by enhancing the reproduction of their relatives  <cit> . individuals remaining at or near their natal location may therefore benefit from the opportunity to interact with kin, but may also risk competition with kin or inbreeding . furthermore, evidence of inbreeding depression  has been reported for many groups of mammals . as a result, for an individual, there are incentives both to leave  and to remain  in its natal area. importantly, these incentives need to be weighed against the costs of dispersal, which are likely to differ not only between males and females but also among same-sex individuals of a given species  <cit> . for that reason, dispersal patterns almost always differ between sexes and in most social mammals the males leave their natal group at a higher average frequency  <cit> .

in addition to differences in dispersal frequency, it is also interesting to consider variation in dispersal distance among individuals of the same or different sexes  <cit> . proper assessment of the extent of dispersal is an arduous task in mammals and feasible study areas may not encompass the actual dispersal distance achieved by individuals  <cit> . thus, dispersal distance estimates derived from field studies may be highly biased, and even estimates derived from indirect genetic methods ,  <cit> ) suffer from a lack of realism in the model assumptions. over the last 10– <dig> years, following important developments in statistical methods applicable to the field of population genetics , there has been an increasing number of studies performing spatial genetic structure analyses using hypervariable genetic markers  <cit> . spatial genetic structure analyses aim to detect non-random spatial distribution of genetic variation, ideally at different spatial scales, and are assumed to reflect the long-term effect of the reproductively effective dispersal of individuals  <cit> . investigating sex-specific patterns of spatial genetic structure in social mammals at the levels of both within and among groups appears a promising avenue for shedding light on the evolutionary factors affecting dispersal in a given species .

in this study, we use a set of  <dig> microsatellite genetic markers to investigate the spatial genetic structure of a primate species exhibiting routine male and female dispersal from stable mixed-sex social groups, the mountain gorilla . the study site is the virunga massif  and wholly encompasses the range of this population. we first describe and link our genetically-based observations with some key demographic and behavioural data from this population, which has been extensively monitored in the field over the last 45 years  <cit> . we then briefly discuss our results in terms of their implications on the role of inbreeding avoidance as an ultimate cause of female dispersal in the mountain gorilla.

the mountain gorilla is one of two eastern gorilla subspecies  <cit>  and members of both sexes are known to disperse from their natal group around reproductive maturity . not all females however disperse before reaching reproductive maturity and these females often reproduce in their natal group  <cit> . in comparison with western lowland gorilla populations , mountain gorillas exhibit much lower rates of male dispersal and a correspondingly higher proportion of multi-male groups  <cit> . assessing the fate of dispersing silverback males is a difficult task since they first enter a solitary phase, usually lasting for several years, before potentially forming and leading new groups  <cit> . each group is led by a dominant silverback male who sires most or all of the offspring in the group, although copulations can also be performed by subordinate males in multi-male groups  <cit> . it has been suggested from analyses of genetic data from other gorilla populations that dispersing females may form kin associations within a group  and live spatially close to other female relatives . controversy still exists regarding males for which both the presence of dispersed male kin networks  <cit>  and the absence of spatial genetic structure  <cit>  have been reported. based on these observations and the typical male-biased dispersal pattern in social mammals  <cit> , we predict a spatial genetic structure for females but not males at the group level. within a group, we expected mature same-sex individuals to be on average more genetically related to each other than to same-sex individuals of different groups.

RESULTS
individual identification
during the two-month sampling period, a total of  <dig> fecal samples were collected. roughly one-third  of these originated from the unhabituated groups. we extracted dna from a total of  <dig> samples, namely  <dig> and  <dig> samples originating from unhabituated and habituated groups, respectively. we used proportionally fewer of the habituated gorilla samples since their identity  was known with certainty for most of them. we attempted genotyping from the  <dig> extracts  that yielded positive results in the amelogenin sexing assay. of these,  <dig> extracts produced genotypes at six or more loci. when using the software cervus to identify potential replicate samples of an individual, we obtained a low number of pairs of potential replicates matching at a minimum of six loci but mismatching at up to two loci . after considering information regarding dung size, date of nest site, group of residence and sex identification, and after combining genotypes perfectly matching at all loci, we were able to create a list of  <dig> unique individuals whose genotypes were on average  <dig> % complete. a genotype is complete at a locus when both alleles are confirmed at this locus. of these  <dig> unique individuals,  <dig> were classified as a silverback male or adult female based on field and genetic data. the genotypes from an additional  <dig> individuals from habituated groups sampled as part of another study  <cit>  were added to our dataset, since they represented mature individuals known to indeed be part of such groups but not sampled during the  <dig> census . therefore, for the purpose of the genetic structure analyses, the number of mature individuals was  <dig>  representing  <dig> silverback males and  <dig> adult females. for all  <dig> individuals, data were available for  <dig> microsatellite loci and we used the information at these loci to perform all subsequent genetic structure analyses.

standard genetic analyses
there were between four and seven alleles per locus, with an average of  <dig>  . observed heterozygosity values ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  per locus, while expected heterozygosity values ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  per locus. fis values at each locus were all nonsignificant  after the bonferroni correction factor was applied. global fis value was also not significant . seventeen pairs of loci deviated significantly  from linkage equilibrium, a higher proportion  than what would be expected by chance alone. as these deviations are very likely to be the result of the significant spatial genetic structure detected in the subsequent analyses , all loci were assumed to be statistically independent and were retained for further analyses. null alleles were suggested to be present at two loci , so we manually eliminated all apparent homozygotes at both loci by replacing one allele by a missing value. for all subsequent genetic structure analyses, we used the same  <dig> loci for all individuals.

sib
h

o
h

e
f

is
genetic data was obtained from the entire sample of  <dig> individuals. plsib is the probability of the identity among siblings; ho is the observed heterozygosity; he is the expected heterozygosity; fis is the inbreeding coefficient. no. alleles denotes the number of alleles observed at a given locus. fis values are all nonsignificant  after the bonferroni correction factor is applied.

group-based genetic structure
analyses of patterns of genetic variation used data only from samples known or estimated  to be from fully mature individuals living in groups . analyses of both sexes incorporated information from  <dig> groups , for analyses of adult females we used  <dig> groups , and for analyses of silverback males we used  <dig> groups . only groups containing two or more individuals of the same category were used for the analyses, and results did not differ when using only groups with four or more individuals per category.

mantel tests revealed a significant and positive relationship between pairwise fst/ ratios and ln-distance among groups for the comparisons involving all mature individuals as well as adult females only . therefore, a pattern similar to an isolation-by-distance scenario was suggested by both of these comparisons. for this reason, it was inappropriate to run any large-scale population genetic software like structure  <cit>  on the whole data set since the underlying model is not suited to such kinds of data. in contrast, the regression involving exclusively silverback males was nonsignificant . no significant relationship was found for any comparison involving the difference in altitude among groups as the independent variable when regressed against pairwise fst/ ratios .

a significant difference between the average dyadic relatedness values calculated within and among groups was found in all three types of comparisons. for all mature individuals, the observed mean within-group value was  <dig> , as compared to the among-group mean value of − <dig>  . for adult females, these values were respectively  <dig>  and − <dig>  , while for silverback males these values were respectively  <dig>  and − <dig>  . in other words, for both males and females, two mature individuals belonging to the same group were on average more genetically related to each other than two mature same-sex individuals living in different groups. when considering mixed-sex pairs of individuals, we found that the average dyadic relatedness value within groups was significantly higher than among groups .

individual-based genetic structure
spatial autocorrelation analysis of all mature individuals and adult females, respectively, revealed a positive and significant r value at the  <dig>  km distance class , which was not the case for silverback males  although there was a significant result at the 6 km distance class for the males, hinting at longer dispersal distance for males. figure  <dig> illustrates the effect of successively increasing the size of the second distance class, from  <dig> to 10 km. positive r values for all mature individuals as well as for adult females had a tendency to decline but remained significant beyond the distance class size of 10 km . in contrast, analyses using silverback males did not reveal a significant positive autocorrelation at any of the distance class sizes . therefore, the interpretation of the results presented here is not dependent on the second distance class size defined.

observed female dispersal events
we analyzed a total of  <dig> female dispersal events occurring between  <dig> and  <dig> . the magnitude of the movements varied from  <dig>  to  <dig>  km, with an average dispersal distance  of  <dig>  km . this value is similar to the mean shortest distance separating a group and its second nearest neighbouring group . the limited number of observed male dispersal events for which the fate of the male is known precludes a similar analysis in males.

discussion
the main objective of our study was to investigate the genetic signal of dispersal in the mountain gorilla population of the virunga massif by means of spatial genetic structure analyses. the results obtained here were largely consistent with our predictions, which were mainly based on results from field observations of dispersal patterns among the habituated groups of the virunga mountain gorilla . first, the detection of population genetic structure at the group level was primarily driven by adult females, since a pattern of isolation-by-distance  was observed in females but not males. in addition, we found a positive genetic signal for females at the  <dig>  km distance class in the spatial autocorrelation analyses. therefore, adult females living in adjacent groups were on average more genetically related to each other compared to females living in more distant groups. this observation is in accord with observations that females during inter-group encounters almost exclusively transfer to neighbouring groups  <cit> . in support of this observation, we found that the mean distance of movements  achieved by  <dig> dispersing females between 1995– <dig> in the virunga massif is similar to the mean shortest distance separating a group and its second nearest neighbouring group .

in contrast to the ibd pattern detected in females, the absence of genetic structure among adult males belonging to different groups is suggestive of a random spatial distribution of male genotypes within the whole area. the lack of a discernible genetic variation pattern in males was also observed in a study of the western lowland gorilla  in which males were also found to form a single undifferentiated population based on y-chromosomal microsatellite markers  <cit> . however, another study of that same gorilla subspecies using autosomal microsatellite data suggested the presence of so-called “dispersed male networks”, namely a structure in which the single males leading multi-female groups had a tendency to settle closer to same-sex relatives after dispersal  <cit> . our analyses were not designed to examine this scenario, which would require extensive investigation of dyadic genetic relationships among individual silverback males living in neighbouring groups . however, we note that several of the habituated groups formed after  <dig> are led by males known from paternity analyses to be related  <cit> . nonetheless, differences in sample size, ecological parameters such as population density, size of the area under analysis, type of genetic markers used and type of analyses performed, make comparisons between studies a challenging process. among these factors, it is likely that the size of the study area under investigation plays an important role, although a detailed study looking specifically at various spatial scales is needed to confirm this hypothesis.

we suggest that the spatial genetic structure signal detected for females but not males at short distances likely reflects an intersexual difference in dispersal distance rather than dispersal rate. female mountain gorillas appear to exhibit a stronger tendency to disperse from their natal group than in most other social polygynous mammals , although a large proportion of female gorillas are known to be philopatric  <cit> . a recent study of groups in the virunga massif suggested that around 60% of  <dig> natal nulliparous females dispersed from their natal group before reproducing  <cit> . likewise, in the core area of the virunga massif, about 47% of silverback males dispersed from their natal group  <cit> . therefore, despite a similar dispersal rate among sexes, we observed different genetic patterns, which we argue is best explained by intersexual differences in dispersal distance rather than dispersal rate. interestingly, the detection of female spatial genetic structure was possible despite the frequent occurrence of female secondary transfer in mountain gorillas  and the possibility for females to transfer multiple times throughout their lives .

a similar sex-specific genetic pattern was found in the other mountain gorilla population in bwindi impenetrable national park, uganda  <cit> . in that study, it was proposed that female dispersal is influenced by the distribution of gorilla food according to altitude. however, in contrast to that study for which geographic distances, altitude differences and changes in plant composition were each found to be significantly correlated with genetic distances for females, we found that among these factors only geographic distance is correlated with genetic distance in the virunga mountain gorillas. although we did not test for effects of plant composition on the genetic structure due to the lack of data in certain areas, this factor is not likely to be influential in the virunga massif since most group’s home ranges encompass multiple altitudinal and vegetation zones.

another outcome of our analyses is the finding of significantly higher average dyadic relatedness values among adult members of the same group as opposed to that of members of different groups, independently of the sex considered. for females, this is in accordance with a finding in the western lowland gorilla that female kin associations could be present despite frequent natal and secondary dispersal events  <cit> . in that study, 40% of adult females had a female close relative in the same group, based on data from six groups. in social groups in which reproduction is dominated by a single male, as in the one-male groups of the western gorillas, females are presumed to emigrate to avoid inbreeding. in western gorillas, it has been proposed that females within a group could reach reproductive maturity at similar ages, thus allowing subsequently a potential “natal co-dispersal” of related female siblings  <cit>  and this may also occur in the virunga mountain gorillas. in addition, in the virunga massif, the high frequency of multi-male groups and reduced reproductive monopolization by the dominant male  <cit>  may reduce the impetus for reproductive-age females to emigrate to avoid inbreeding, thus permitting the co-residence of natal female relatives  <cit> . alternatively , these female kin associations might have evolved due to social benefits such as higher frequency of affiliative behaviours, higher display of tolerance, and better support in conflicts among related female mountain gorillas than among unrelated ones  <cit> . in some other social mammals, associating with female kin was found to expedite the age of first reproduction , reduce the length of inter-birth interval , and increase weaning success . finally, we cannot rule out the possibility that the significantly higher average dyadic relatedness values among adult females within a group might be due in part to the presence of some pre-dispersal females in the dataset. indeed, it is very difficult to know from the field data alone whether a female is mature, since this status would only be confirmed when smaller dung belonging to another individual  was found in the same nest. only eleven such cases could be confirmed based on genetic data in the unhabituated groups, despite the high proportion  of adult females in the whole population of gorillas and the fact that 75% of them  are assumed to have offspring at a given time.

for males, our relatively high and significant within-group mean relatedness value is consistent with an age-graded social system in which related adult males  are members of the same group for an extended period of time. this system could result from three main factors, namely the long breeding male tenure, the non-dispersal behaviour exhibited by some individuals and the high variance in reproductive success among silverback males. first, it is worth mentioning the long breeding tenure displayed by dominant males in several monitored groups over the last two decades , which has contributed to the relatively high stability of group composition observed during that time. second, in a recent demographic and behavioural study conducted in the core area of the virunga massif, and in stark contrast to what has been observed in the western lowland gorilla, approximately half of silverback males were not seen to disperse from their natal group during the course of the 40-year study  <cit> . as a consequence of this male philopatric behaviour, a significant proportion of groups  contains silverback males that are presumably first or second degree genetic relatives  <cit> . the advantages for subordinate silverback males in adopting this reproductive strategy are numerous and include queuing for dominance status  <cit> , performing a significant proportion of copulations with females in the group  and thereby achieving occasional reproductive success  <cit> , and potentially an average lifetime reproductive success higher than that of dispersing males  <cit> . lastly, higher genetic similarity among males of the same group was also facilitated in our study area by the fact that the dominant male sires on average 85% of offspring in the group, as revealed by previous genetic paternity analyses  <cit> . the existence of kin groups of philopatric males is not the norm in mammals, but it has been reported in a few other species where females routinely disperse before reproduction, such as the ethiopian wolf  <cit> , chimpanzee  <cit>  and hamadryas baboon  <cit> .

the proximate and ultimate causes of male dispersal in mountain gorillas remain puzzling. remaining in the natal group would seem to be the best strategy, as only about one-third of dispersing males were observed to form reproductively successful groups  <cit> . models show that males should remain philopatric even under a wide range of conditions such as the presence in the natal group of multiple males and reproductive monopolization by the dominant  <cit> . nonetheless, approximately half of monitored subordinate silverback males in the virunga massif dispersed from their natal group  <cit> . these dispersal events were characterized as voluntary, as they were not correlated with changes in rates of affiliation or aggression with the dominant silverback, and also appeared unrelated to myriad other factors such as the number of females, the group sex-ratio, or age of dominant silverback  <cit> . the lack of clear advantages to male dispersal suggests that males may disperse despite unfavorable fitness consequences and raises the intriguing possibility that male life history strategies in mountain gorillas are not yet consistent with the social dynamics that would be optimal under the extreme ecological conditions experienced by mountain gorillas, who live at a higher altitude and with less fruit resources than all other gorillas  <cit> .

the ultimate cause of natal dispersal for females has long been a subject of discussion  <cit> . based on the observation that all females disperse from one-male groups before reproducing while some of them stay when an additional male is present in the group  <cit> , harcourt & stewart  <cit>  suggested that inbreeding avoidance is the main factor triggering female natal dispersal in mountain gorillas, as proposed previously for other great ape species  <cit> . a similar conclusion was reached by clutton-brock  <cit>  in a meta-analysis of data collected from several polygynous mammal species, in which he showed that females usually transfer to other groups before first breeding when there is a chance that the resident males at the time of first conception are their father or other close relatives. this hypothesis also received support in a recent paper contrasting female dispersal strategies across  <dig> plural-breeding mammal species  <cit> . in contrast, robbins et al.  <cit>  did not find much support for the inbreeding avoidance hypothesis in the virunga mountain gorilla population, although most nulliparous females were residing in multi-male groups and thus had potential mates that were not their father. the authors instead hypothesized that infanticide avoidance could be the ultimate cause of dispersal by natal nulliparous females, relying on the observation that these females are more likely to leave one-male groups  <cit> , but recent analyses showed that the rates of infanticide and infant mortality do not vary between one-male and multi-male groups  <cit> . our genetic study, by showing significantly higher average relatedness between co-residing males and females, provides results consistent with the idea that females may disperse in order to minimize close inbreeding with highly related males . however, we note the possibility that some females might disperse to groups whose dominant male is a close relative , thus raising the question of the limits of kin recognition. further genetic data and dyadic analyses are required to better assess the relationship between the dispersal distance and the probability of mating with unrelated individuals, and ultimately to better infer the relative importance of inbreeding avoidance as an incentive for female dispersal in mountain gorillas.

CONCLUSIONS
our isolation-by-distance and spatial genetic structure analyses, performed on a sex-specific basis, provide evidence for an intersexual difference in dispersal distance as the main factor describing the genetic structure patterns observed in the mountain gorilla. whilst the ultimate cause of dispersal for males remains to be elucidated, we argue that females might disperse in order to decrease the probability of mating with a highly genetically related male. we note, however, that the risk of close inbreeding might still exist despite female dispersal. future studies aiming to shed light on the evolutionary causes of dispersal in mammal species should consider performing a close examination of dyadic relationships in addition to group- and individual-level analyses.

