BACKGROUND
magnolia sprengeri pamp is one of the most valuable medicinal and ornamental plants of the magnolia family, which is native to the qinling mountains of shaanxi province and the daba mountains of hubei province, china  <cit> . the flower color  of m. sprengeri varies widely from white to red. flower color has evolved via interaction with evolving pollinating insects. the extreme color variation ranges from pure white color, with only the faintest pale purple stripe on the base of the petals abaxially, to an intense red color on both sides. previous studies showed that red and white were the two main types of abaxial color patterns. anthocyanin is the primary flower pigment in higher plants, and its accumulation is tightly linked with flower development and color changes in most cases  <cit> . natural phenotypic variations offer an opportunity to elucidate the role of anthocyanin genes that lead to extreme colors of m. sprengeri. anthocyanin biosynthesis via the flavonoid metabolism pathway has also been well studied in flower development because of its high anti-oxidation properties and ultraviolet protection . anthocyanin is synthesized from phenylalanine, and catalyzed by phenylalanine ammonia-lyase , which is controlled by two groups of genes. the first group consists of the structural genes, including pal, chalcone synthase , flavanone 3-hydroxylase , dihydroflavonol-4-reductase , anthocyanidin synthase , and udp-glucose flavonoid 3-o-glucosyltransferase , which represent the enzymes responsible for the biochemical reactions of anthocyanin synthesis  . the second group involves regulatory genes or transcription factors , which regulate the structural genes expressions during anthocyanin biosynthesis. the important tfs for anthocyanin biosynthesis belong to the myb, bhlh, and wd <dig> families . the coordinated expressions of the two categories of genes lead to anthocyanin accumulation during the color development process.figure  <dig> 
simplified scheme of the flavonoid pathway, comprising the general phenylpropanoid pathway, the anthocyanin branch, and other subgroups of flavonoid endproducts. abbreviations: pal, phenylalanine ammonia lyase; c4h, cinnamic acid 4-hydroxylase; 4cl,  <dig> coumarate coa ligase; chs, chalcone synthase; chi, chalcone isomerase; f3h, flavanone 3-hydroxylase; f3′h, flavanone 3′-hydroxylase; dfr, dihydroflavonol reductase; fls, flavonol synthase; ans, anthocyanidin synthase.



transcriptome analysis of an organism is a particularly effective method for gene discovery, especially in non-model plants for which no reference genome sequences are available  <cit> . at the same time, it may provide powerful tools to identify differentially expressed genes, and its possible use in modern plant breeding continues to attract the attention of many plant biologists . sequencing technologies have dramatically accelerated genome-wide studies of transcriptomes and have been widely used to explore gene structure and gene expression, even in plants without a genome reference . illumina sequencing technology has been applied recently to transcriptome analyses of plant and animals, and can generate large amounts of sequence data cheaply and quickly .

in this study, we first sequenced the transcriptomes of white and red petals of m. sprengeri using illumina technology . we focused on the discovery of structural genes and regulatory genes encoding enzymes involved in the anthocyanin biosynthetic pathway. we obtained sets of upregulated and downregulated genes from red and white flowers, and identified some candidate genes related to anthocyanin synthesis in m. sprengeri. the assembled annotated transcriptome sequences provide a valuable genomic resource to further understand the molecular basis of variations of flower color in m. sprengeri.figure  <dig> 
white and red petals of
m. sprengeri. .



RESULTS
sequencing and sequence assembly
a cdna library from red and white petals was sequenced using illumina sequencing in a single run which generated  <dig> , <dig> sequences with  <dig> , <dig>  nucleotides  from red petals and  <dig> , <dig> sequences with  <dig> , <dig>  bp from white petals. after the removal of the low-quality raw reads , we obtained  <dig> , <dig>  and  <dig> , <dig>  high-quality sequences . these short reads were assembled into  <dig>  total genes,  <dig>  total isogenes, and  <dig> , <dig> total resides with an average length of  <dig> .71 bp. the largest isogene was  <dig>  bp and the smallest was 351 bp . the sequence length distribution is shown in figure  <dig> table  <dig> 
summary of sequencing for
m. sprengeri


m. sprengeri

length distribution of sequencing reads and contigs of
m. sprengeri
.




in this study, we obtained  <dig> , <dig> sequences and  <dig> , <dig> high-quality sequences in red and white petals of m. sprengeri, respectively . by comparison, the assembly of  <dig>  m. sprengeri sequences from genbank  led to only  <dig>  unique sequences. the unique sequences derived from genbank sequences and illumina sequences were compared by a blast search, where matches were defined as having an identity > 90% and an overlap >100 bp. our illumina sequencing efforts produced  <dig>  unique sequences. unique sequences that were not present in genbank were considered as the novel transcripts of m. sprengeri. the large quantity of unique sequences should cover the vast majority of genes from m. sprengeri petals, providing, for the first time, a powerful gene resource for this medicinal and ornamental plant.

gene ontology  annotation
go annotation provides a description of gene products in terms of their associated molecular functions, cellular components, and biological processes  <cit> . go functional interpretations for plants are primarily based on the arabidopsis thaliana genome. go terms were assigned to  <dig>  m. sprengeri sequences based on sequence similarities with known proteins and annotated using the arabidopsis information resource  using go slim. among the  <dig>  spliced transcripts,  <dig>  had go annotated transcripts while  <dig>  had no annotated transcripts . the go annotations of the unique sequences were most frequently related to molecular function , followed by biological processes  and cellular components . for each sequence, the specifically annotated go terms provide a broad overview of the groups of genes cataloged in the transcriptome. finally, the functions of the identified transcripts were determined to be involved different biological processes. the best represented groups were protein metabolism, developmental processes, response to abiotic or biotic stimuli, and response to stress and transport. these go annotations provided valuable clues to investigate the specific processes, molecular functions, and cellular structures of the m. sprengeri transcriptome.figure  <dig> 
histogram representing gene ontology  classification. go categories, shown on the x-axis, were grouped into three main ontologies: biological process, cellular component, and molecular function. the right y-axis indicates the number of genes in each category, while the left y-axis indicates the percentage of total genes in that category. the ‘all gene’ indicates that the unigenes were those assembled from reads from the red and white sample.



clusters of orthologous group  and eukaryote clusters of orthologous groups  classification
the go analysis identified well-represented categories within the cellular component group, including sequences related to the chloroplast, the plasma membrane, and the ribosome. additionally, the sequences encoded a broad set of transcripts that could be assigned to molecular function categories. to further examine the integrity of our transcriptome library and the effectiveness of the annotation process, we identified the unigene numbers with cog and kog classification. altogether, there were  <dig>  unigenes identified from all unigenes with cog  and kog classifications . among the  <dig> cog categories, the cluster of “general function prediction” accounted for the largest proportion  followed by “replication, recombination and repair” , “transcription”  and “signal transduction mechanisms” . the categories of “nuclear structure”  accounted for  <dig> %, “secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism”  accounted for  <dig> %, and “rna processing and modification”  accounted for  <dig> %. among the  <dig> kog categories, the cluster of “general function prediction” accounted for the largest proportion , followed by “signal transduction mechanisms” , “posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones”  and “transcription” . the categories of “nuclear structure” , “secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism”, “rna processing and modification” , and “extracellular structures”  had the least proportions.figure  <dig> 
histogram representing clusters of orthologous groups  classification. a total of  <dig>  unigenes were assigned to  <dig> categories in the cog classification. the y-axis ‘frequency’ indicates the number of genes in a specific functional cluster. the right side legend shows a description of the  <dig> functional categories.
histogram representing clusters of orthologous groups  classification.  <dig>  unigenes were assigned to  <dig> categories by kog classification. the y-axis ‘frequency’ indicates the number of genes in a specific function cluster. the legend on the right shows a description of the  <dig> functional categories.



pathway assignment based on the kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes  classification system
the kegg classification system provides an alternative functional annotation of genes according to their associated biochemical pathways  <cit> . kegg annotations for m. sprengeri transcripts were based on sequence similarity searches against the kegg database, and matches were assigned the corresponding enzyme commission  number. overall,  <dig>  m. sprengeri unique sequences were assigned kegg annotations, of which only  <dig>  unique sequences were assigned to the biosynthesis of secondary metabolites pathways.

metabolic pathways were well represented among m. sprengeri unique sequences, most of which were associated with amino acid metabolism, galactose metabolism, biosynthesis of secondary metabolites, aminoacyl-trna biosynthesis, and flavonoid biosynthesis. notably, the transcripts encoding all the enzymes involved in the flavonoid biosynthesis pathway were present in our illumina sequences dataset . the expression of all candidate genes in the petals  was confirmed by quantitative real-time pcr  .table  <dig> 
genes encoding enzymes involved in flavonoid biosynthesis in
m. sprengeri



pal

c4h

dfr

f3h

f3′h

chi

fls

chs

anschanges in transcript levels of genes of red and white petals. a. relative transcript levels of regulatory genes in red and white petals. 1: gene 55739; 2: gene 53876; 3: gene 43573; 4: gene 47103; 5: gene 49650; 6: gene 50438; 7: gene 51086; 8: gene  <dig>  b. relative transcript levels of transcript factors in red and white petals. 9: gene 45264; 10: gene 45298; 11: gene 46821; 12: gene 47225–0; 13: gene 47225–1; 14: gene 47747; and 15: gene  <dig>  the amount of transcript was normalized to the level of m. sprengeri act gene. mean values and standard errors  were obtained from three independent experiments per timepoint.



candidate genes encoding enzymes involved in the biosynthesis of flavonoids
flavonoid biosynthesis is an integral part of secondary metabolism; therefore, it should be considered within the context of cellular metabolism. the color of the petal is affected by the flavonoids metabolism pathways. changes in the transcript abundances of the genes encoding enzymes in these pathways are listed in tables  <dig> and  <dig> table  <dig> 
differentially expressed genes related to flavonoid biosynthesis in
m. sprengeri
red and white


fpkm-r, fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped red; fpkm-w, fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped white.



the levels of transcripts encoding the first enzymes in the flavonoids biosynthesis, such as pal , were markedly higher in red petals than in white petals. the transcript abundance of the flavonoids biosynthesis enzymes, including c4h , dfr , f3h , flavonoid-3′-hydroxylase , flavonol synthase , chs , and ans , were also higher in red petals.

the plant transcription factor database was used to search the m. sprengeri transcripts dataset to identify the genes encoding putative tfs or transcriptional regulators  <cit> . a total of  <dig> transcripts were predicted to be tfs and were sorted into three families . of these genes, the expression of eight myb genes showed 4-fold or greater changes in red petals compared with white petals. further studies are needed to determine whether the changes in transcript abundance of these putative tfs could be related to the regulation of flavonoid metabolism.

flavonoids are a large group of polyphenolic compounds and are a structurally diverse class of plant secondary metabolites. they are important for defense against pathogens and herbivores, protection from harmful ultraviolet radiation, and flower pigmentation for attracting pollinators . in addition to their physiological functions in plants, flavonoids display a wide range of anti-oxidant, anti-microbial, anti-inflammatory, and anti-cancer activities  <cit> . as a dietary component, flavonoids are considered to have health-promoting and disease-preventing properties. recently, flavonoids have been intensively investigated as potent pharmaceuticals for treating chronic human pathological conditions .

according to the present transcriptomic analysis, the expression of eight genes was altered in flavonoid biosynthesis, including pal, c4h, f3h, fls, chs, dfr, and ans. it has been known for decades that flavonoids are synthesized from phenylalanine. this process involves three steps: first, pal, cinnamic acid 4-hydroxylase, and 4-coumarate coenzyme a ligase catalyze the conversion of phenylalanine to; second, chs, chi, f3h, f3′h, and dfr catalyze the conversion of p-coumaroylcoa to leucoanthocyanidins; and third, ans catalyzes the conversion of leucoanthocyanidins to form anthocyanidins  <cit> . in this process, any changes in the expression of the genes encoding these enzymes can lead to the production of different anthocyanidin species , and such changes may lead to the production of the red petal phenotype of m. sprengeri. our study also identified certain genes encoding tfs related to flavonoid biosynthesis, such as mybs, bhlhs, and wd40s. the differentially expressed structural genes and differentially expressed tf genes that may be associated with flavonoid biosynthesis are shown in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  such information would help provide a deeper understanding of how changes in gene expression are related to the changes in the color of m. sprengeri flowers.table  <dig> 
changes in transcript abundance of predicted transcription factors and regulators about flavonoid biosynthesis in
m. sprengeri
red and white


fpkm-r, fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped red; fpkm-w, fragments per kilobase of transcript per million fragments mapped white.



based on this comparison, almost all of the candidate genes involved in the flavonoid biosynthesis were present in the transcriptome datasets of m. sprengeri in this study. these results highlight the immense capacity of high-throughput sequencing to discover genes in metabolic pathways.

anthocyanin accumulation
anthocyanin accumulation is tightly linked with flower development and color changes in most cases  <cit> . to examine the accumulation of anthocyanin in the petals of red and white m. sprengeri, the flower extracts were subjected to high-performance liquid chromatography  analysis. the hplc data showed that the main anthocyanin in the petals of m. sprengeri is cyanidin-3-o-glucoside chloride. the accumulation of cyanidin-3-o-glucoside chloride in petals of red and white m. sprengeri was  <dig>  and  <dig>  mg per 100 g samples, respectively , our results indicate that red petals accumulate 26-fold more cyanidin-3-o-glucoside chloride than white petals .figure  <dig> 
accumulation of anthocyanidin in petals of red and white
m. sprengeri
. red: anthocyanidin concentrations in the petals of the red flower; white: anthocyanidin concentrations in the petals of the white flower. concentrations in the petal of the red and white flowers were determined by measuring the absorbance at 350 nm using hplc analysis with cyaniding-3-o-glucoside chloride as the standard. data are the mean ± sd of three replicates.



CONCLUSIONS
illumina next-generation sequencing technology was used for sequencing and transcriptome analysis of the non-model plant m. sprengeri pamp. we identified the genes encoding key enzymes and reconstructed the metabolic pathways involved in biosynthesis and catabolism of flavonoid of m. sprengeri. our results promote understanding of the mechanisms underlying various metabolic processes, and will enable the genetic manipulation of flower color in m. sprengeri.

the accumulation of flavonoids and the discovery of genes associated with their biosynthesis and metabolism in m. sprengeri are intriguing and worthy of further investigation. the sequences and pathways identified here represent the genetic framework required for further studies. quantitative transcriptomics in concert with physiological and biochemical analysis in m. sprengeri under conditions that stimulate production and accumulation of flavonoids could help provide insights into the regulation of, and links between, these pathways.

