BACKGROUND
in many animals, sexual signals vary with the degree of kinship as well as with geographical distribution. this has been shown for numerous species with acoustical courtship signals  <cit> , but also for several taxa with sex pheromones  <cit> . previous studies on chemical signals, however, have focused on pheromones produced by females; evidence for geographical variation in male sex pheromones is largely lacking .

since there is usually a conflict of interest between the sexes  <cit> , male sex pheromones are expected to underlie completely different selective pressures than female pheromones  <cit> . male sexual signals often enable females to choose adaptively among potential mates by providing information on species affiliation and mate quality  <cit> . if males vary in their ability to provide essential resources to the females  <cit>  or in their parasite or disease load  <cit>  and such differences in quality are indicated in the males' signals females could benefit directly by choosing a high-quality male. females may also benefit indirectly, if offspring quality depends on the genetic background of the male. several models have been proposed to explain female choice based on indirect benefits, the most prominent of these being the "good genes" model  <cit> , and the model of the "best compatibility"  <cit> .

the genetic compatibility of a mate depends, among other things, on the degree of kinship which ranges from strict inbreeding to extensive outbreeding, both of which have certain advantages  <cit>  and disadvantages  <cit> . according to the model of optimal outbreeding, females should choose a mate of a certain genetic distance to balance negative effects of inbreeding and outbreeding  <cit> .

male european beewolves establish small territories in the vicinity of female nest aggregations, and territories do not contain any resources essential for beewolf females  <cit> . the males apply a marking pheromone from a cephalic gland  onto plants within their territory and defend the territory against intruding males in combat flights without physical contact  <cit> . the marking pheromone of male european beewolves comprises a complex blend of up to  <dig> compounds  <cit>  that might contain important cues for females to assess male quality and/or compatibility.

behavioral observations provide clear evidence that the marking pheromone of beewolf males attracts receptive females to the males' territories  <cit> . females approach territories in a zigzagging flight pattern from the downwind side, probably orienting towards the windborne pheromone  <cit> . copulations usually occur within the males' territories  <cit>  and seem to be under the control of females since they can easily repel unwanted males by virtue of their larger body size  <cit>  or refuse copulation by bending their abdomen tip downwards . territories of different males are often aggregated, thereby constituting a lek situation in which the females have an ideal opportunity to compare among potential mates and choose the most suitable  <cit> . since the copulation is not preceded by any kind of visual display, female choice appears to be, at least predominantly, based on information obtained from the male sex pheromone . the amount and composition of the male ppg content have been shown to differ between families  <cit>  and to vary with the age of the males  <cit> .

beewolves have good flying abilities and it is likely that individuals from different populations meet in the field. thus, the discrimination between males belonging to different populations may be an important factor influencing female mate choice decisions. using combined gas chromatography-mass spectrometry , we investigated whether the marking pheromone of male european beewolves varies between populations, between subpopulations, and among families within subpopulations in a way that might provide a basis for female choice. we compared the relative effects of population and family association on the composition of the pheromone and discuss the consequences for optimal mate choice.

RESULTS
pheromone amount and composition
using coupled gc-ms, we found a total of  <dig> substances in the male sex pheromone: - <dig> -dihydrofarnesoic acid ; -9-octadecen-1-ol; -10-nonadecen-2-one; 1-octadecanol; heneicosane; "unidentified substance 1" ; "unidentified substance 2"; docosane; -11-eicosen-1-ol; a mixture of -9-, -7-tricosene, and Δx, y-tricosadiene; 1-eicosanol; tricosane; a mixture of -9-, -7-tetracosene, and Δx, y-tetracosadiene ; tetracosane ; a mixture of -9-, -7-pentacosene, and Δx, y-pentacosadiene ; pentacosane ; a mixture of 7-, 11-, and 13-methyl pentacosane ; -9-hexacosene ; hexacosane ; Δ-16-pentacosen-8-one ; a mixture of -9-, -7-heptacosene, and Δx, y-heptacosadiene ; heptacosane ; octacosane ; nonacosane ; hentriacontane . several peaks had to be combined for the analysis, because they were not always clearly separated by the gc-ms. this applies to -9-octadecen-1-ol and -10-nonadecen-2-one , 1-octadecanol and heneicosane , "unidentified substance 2" and docosane , -11-eicosen-1-ol and tricosenes/tricosadiene , and 1-eicosanol and tricosane . thus, the  <dig> detected substances were reduced to  <dig> variables that were included in the analysis. this procedure is conservative with regard to the hypotheses tested.

the total amount of pheromone extracted from p. triangulum males varied between  <dig> and  <dig> μg . in both data sets, the sampled populations differed significantly in their total amount of pheromone .

chemical dimorphism
the pheromone composition showed a distinct dimorphism . the two morphs differ mainly in the relative proportions of pentacosene -9-pentacosene as the main component) and heptacosene -9-heptacosene as the main component), and they can be distinguished unambiguously by the relative amount of heptacosene, which shows a clearly bimodal distribution  <cit> . the morph with the high proportion of pentacosene  was overall the more common type  compared to the one having approximately equal proportions of penta- and heptacosene  . the frequency of the c25-type varied considerably between the sampled populations from  <dig>  to  <dig> % in the sampled populations . since chance variations in the proportion of c25- and c25/c27-type males among families and among populations can greatly influence the outcome of statistical analyses on the chemical differentiation, all of the following analyses were performed on c25- and c25/c27-type individuals combined as well as on c25-type individuals only.

population differentiation
the analysis of geographical variation in the male beewolf sex pheromone was conducted with two data sets on two geographical scales. the first data set  was focused on a local scale , the second data set  with emphasis on a regional scale . populations in both data sets and, thus, on two different spatial scales could be significantly separated by discriminant analyses  . this was irrespective of the inclusion or omission of the c25/c27-type in the analysis. classification of da revealed that  <dig>  to  <dig> % of males were correctly assigned to the populations, depending on the data set and inclusion or omission of the c25/c27-type . despite the higher number of groups in the da, the classification results were generally more accurate for the samples on the regional than on the local scale, indicating that the chemical distances were positively correlated with the geographical scale.

"type" indicates, whether only the c25-type or both c25- and c25/c27-type were included in the analysis. for pcas, the number of factors as well as the cumulative explained variance is given. for das, the number of functions, wilk's-λ, χ <dig>  degrees of freedom, p-value, and the percentage of correct classifications by da are given. .

family differentiation
families within populations could be significantly separated in six out of eight populations by das . individual males were correctly classified in  <dig>  to  <dig> % of cases . although das were not always significant, the overall classifications of families within populations were more accurate than classifications between populations even if different numbers of groups in the da are taken into account. thus, males belonging to different populations and males belonging to different families within a population can be separated from each other on the basis of quantitative differences in some of the pheromone compounds.

relative effects of family and population affiliation on pheromone composition
to assess the relative effects of family and population affiliation on the pheromone composition of male european beewolves, we conducted a multivariate nested anova on the aitchison-transformed relative peak areas with family membership as a nested factor within populations. both family and population affiliation had significant effects on the pheromone composition in each dataset, regardless of the omission or inclusion of c25/c27-type males in the analysis . together, family and population affiliation explained between  <dig>  and  <dig> % of the variance in peak areas. the distribution of η2-values did not deviate significantly from a normal distribution for any of the analyses .

proportions of variance explained by family and population membership in nested manovas are estimated for each peak by partial η2-values. manova results are given for each data set, including and excluding c25/c27-type males, respectively .

on a local scale , family membership explained a significantly higher proportion of the variance in pheromone composition than subpopulation affiliation . on a regional scale , however, this effect was reversed, with population affiliation explaining more of the variance, although this effect was only significant when both c25- and c25/c27-type males were included .

correlation between geographical and chemical distance
to test for a correlation between the matrices of geographical and chemical distances of the populations we performed a mantel test. we detected a strong correlation between geographical and chemical distance for data set  <dig> and the normalized combination of both datasets irrespective of which combination of populations was used as a reference for normalization and independent of the inclusion or omission of the c25/c27-type in the analysis . a mantel test restricted to data set  <dig> revealed no significant correlation.

given are coefficients of determination  and p-values of mantel tests. the column "type" indicates, whether only the c25-type or both c25- and c25/c27-type were included in the analysis. data sets  <dig> and  <dig> were normalized to würzburg – schweinfurt , würzburg – düsseldorf , or schweinfurt – düsseldorf . for population abbreviations see table  <dig>  p-values <  <dig>  are given in bold.

chemical distances  are displayed in italics in the lower left half of the table, geographical distances in the upper right half of the table. for population abbreviations see table  <dig> 

discussion
in the present study, we investigated inter-individual differences in the pheromone composition of male european beewolves on three different levels: between families, among subpopulations on a local scale, and among geographically distant populations on a regional scale. our results show that there are significant differences in pheromone composition on all three levels and that the chemical distance between populations is correlated with the geographical distance.

although local subpopulations as well as geographically distant populations of beewolves could be separated on the basis of the male sex pheromone, only  <dig> – 56% of the individual males were classified correctly by the discriminant analyses, and chemical profiles of different populations overlapped considerably. however, the existing differences might be sufficient for females to reduce the incidence of outbreeding, especially because the sensitivity of female chemoreceptors and the discriminatory ability of their central nervous system may exceed that of our analytical methods by several orders of magnitude  <cit> . furthermore, our data provide only a lower boundary for the actual effect of geographical origin on the pheromone composition, since all the animals were reared under identical conditions in the laboratory. in the field, developmental conditions certainly vary between populations. differences in environmental factors during larval development have been shown to affect the pheromone composition of male beewolves . therefore, actual differences between populations in the field may be much larger than those observed under controlled conditions in the laboratory and might allow females a better discrimination of males from different populations.

since beewolves have good flying abilities and are pioneer species that frequently colonize new habitats  <cit> , females are likely to encounter males from other local subpopulations in the field . thus, female beewolves may use the information contained in the male pheromone to avoid outbreeding depression. deleterious effects of extensive outbreeding have been demonstrated in many recent studies  <cit> , and several hypotheses have been proposed to explain why outbreeding depression occurs .

within populations, beewolf male pheromones differ significantly among families . the family-related differences may enable females to reduce the chances of mating with close kin and thereby avoid inbreeding depression, which is likely to impose especially high costs on beewolves. kin recognition in animals is generally mediated by one of three mechanisms: phenotype matching, recognition of genetically compatible mates, or imprinting or learning of the individuals that occur in the same nest or birth place  <cit> . the mechanisms by which female beewolves could distinguish between kin and non-kin are unclear . the discrimination of males from different populations may be possible for females by sampling pheromones from different males in a lek and avoiding individuals with a pheromone blend that differs markedly from the population mean. further studies are necessary to elucidate the mechanisms of kin- and population-recognition in european beewolves.

the multivariate nested anovas indicate that pheromone composition is affected more strongly by family than subpopulation affiliation on a local scale, whereas the effect of population affiliation on a regional level is larger than the family effect . these results are consistent with the positive correlation between chemical and geographical distance  and suggest that  the subpopulations sampled on the local scale may be connected by a relatively frequent interchange of individuals and might, thus, represent a single population, and  small differences in the chemical profile between local subpopulations may add up on a regional scale according to an isolation-by-distance model  <cit> . interestingly, the family effect exceeds the local subpopulation effect, making family differentiation potentially easier for beewolf females than subpopulation discrimination.

generally, conspecific populations differ genetically only if the gene flow is sufficiently counterbalanced by the divergent forces of genetic drift or natural selection  <cit> . the reasons for the geographical differentiation in pheromone composition of male european beewolves are not yet known. however, selection pressures might vary among populations and may account for the observed differences. males in colder regions, for example, may be selected for a greater abundance of pheromone substances with high volatility compared to males from warmer regions. alternatively, female preferences for pheromone characteristics may vary among populations and cause a divergence of the pheromone composition at different localities.

CONCLUSIONS
using gc-ms, we were able to detect differences in the sex pheromone composition of male european beewolves between families as well as among populations on both a regional and a local scale, with pheromone differentiation being significantly correlated with geographical distance. if female beewolves use this information on kinship and geographical origin contained in the male sex pheromone, they may be able to choose adaptively among potential mates according to the model of optimal outbreeding, thus, avoiding the deleterious effects of both in- and outbreeding by choosing a mate of intermediate genetic distance  <cit> . studies considering both in- and outbreeding avoidance in an integrated model of "optimal outbreeding" are scarce . the european beewolf constitutes an interesting model system to test for optimal outbreeding in a species with a complex male sex pheromone, and further studies may show whether females indeed use the male pheromone to avoid in- and outbreeding.

