BACKGROUND
bacterial toxin-antitoxin  systems are complexes of a stable toxic- or growth-arresting factor and its unstable inhibitor  <cit> . they are diverse, abundant in all bacteria, except a few intracellular parasites, and are found in many archaea  <cit> . on the basis of their ubiquity and diversity, we can assume that regulation by ta must be common and beneficial in a wide range of microorganisms. however, their role in bacterial physiology is unclear  <cit> , in part due to redundancy  <cit> . they were first discovered in plasmids and characterized as addiction systems, which are responsible for post-segregational killing  <cit> . however, because of its high cost to the host, such a stability mechanism is used only in rare cases  <cit> . chromosomal ta loci were found thanks to full genome sequencing  <cit>  and were demonstrated to be functional, expressed at significant levels, and activated by various stressful conditions, particularly by amino acid starvation  <cit> .

our current study focuses on type ii ta systems. in this group, both the toxin and the antitoxin are proteins, which are encoded by adjacent co-transcribed genes. in a growing cell, toxins are neutralized by tightly bound antitoxins. antitoxins are degraded by proteases much more quickly than toxins, and if antitoxin production stops, toxins target vital functions of the producer through diverse mechanisms. many toxins  are endoribonucleases and inhibit protein synthesis through cleavage of free or ribosome-bound mrna  <cit> . mazf also cleaves 16s rrna  <cit>  and vapc endonucleases of enteric bacteria cleave initiator trna  <cit> . another group of toxins  interferes with dna gyrase  <cit> , whereas hipa is a protein kinase  <cit> , and zeta toxins  inhibit cell wall synthesis  <cit> . activation of toxins causes growth inhibition and dormancy that may be transient  <cit>  but in some circumstances is irreversible and leads to cell death  <cit> .

besides direct protein-protein interaction, antitoxins regulate toxin activity at the level of transcription. antitoxins are dna-binding proteins and specifically repress transcription of their own ta operons both alone and, even more effectively, in complexes with their cognate toxins. degradation of an antitoxin causes de-repression of the ta promoter  <cit>  and allows the toxin activity to be detected indirectly by measurement of transcript levels. gerdes and colleagues have demonstrated fine-tuning of transcription by the toxin:antitoxin ratio for the relbe system  <cit> . the relb antitoxin in excess of the rele toxin promotes formation of the relb:rele  complexes that bind to the operator sites and repress transcription. rele toxin in excess promotes formation of the reb:rele  complexes that are unable to bind dna  <cit> . as a result, over-expression of rele causes substantial increase in the relbe mrna level. these authors suggested that such transcriptional regulation by the t:a ratio is commonplace for ta loci  <cit>  and demonstrated it recently for vapbc  <cit> . importantly, the levels of ta mrnas were increased in cell populations enriched for persisters, thereby linking ta systems to antibiotic susceptibility  <cit> . persisters are transiently dormant bacteria that remain non-dividing under growth-supporting conditions and are not killed by bactericidal antibiotics  <cit> . ta systems, by their very nature, may be primarily responsible for persister formation. mutations that increase toxicity of the ta toxins were shown to increase the frequency of persisters and cause high persistence phenotypes  <cit> ; and deletion of the yafq toxin significantly decreased persister frequency in e. coli biofilms  <cit> . a recent study reports that successive deletion of  <dig> endoribonuclease-encoding ta loci progressively reduced the level of persisters while single deletions of ta systems had no effect on persister frequency in planktonic e. coli <cit> . hence, it is extremely important to consider redundancy and possible cross-talk when we study ta-related phenotypes, because most bacterial genomes contain multiple ta loci.

in the current study we found that uninhibited toxins can activate transcription of the other ta operons. cleavage of these transcripts by endoribonuclease toxins adds another layer of complexity. reciprocal transcriptional de-repression and transcript cleavage predict that toxin-antitoxin systems have a potential to form a complex network of regulators that controls growth and dormancy of bacteria.

RESULTS
uninhibited toxins can activate other toxin-antitoxin systems
excess of a toxin has been shown to destabilize binding of the toxin-antitoxin complex to operator dna and to activate transcription of its own operon  <cit> . to test whether toxins can activate transcription of other ta operons, we measured the transcription of relbe in response to ectopic expression of toxins mazf, mqsr, yafq, hica, and hipa by northern hybridization . since the relbe genes are co-transcribed with the downstream relf <cit> , which encodes a hok-like toxin targeted against the inner membrane  <cit> , we analyzed the transcription of the full relbef operon. in a reverse experiment, we over-expressed rele and monitored the transcription of several chromosomal ta operons . amino acid starvation is known to upregulate relbef transcription  <cit>  and was induced by addition of mupirocin   <cit>  as a positive control. ectopic expression of rele served as an additional positive control for activation of relbef transcription whereas synonymous substitutions were introduced into the plasmidal rele sequence  to enable unambiguous detection of the chromosomal rele transcript. active rele toxin could be expressed from the altered gene  and the plasmidal transcript was not detectable in the Δrelbef strain, showing that our hybridization probes are specific and do not cross-hybridize . toxins were induced in log phase cultures and concomitant measurements of optical density confirmed growth inhibition in all cultures tested . samples for rna isolation were collected before induction  and during a two hour time-course post-induction ; mrna of the chromosomal ta operon was analyzed by northern hybridization using dna oligoprobes complementary to relb, rele, and relf .

as shown in figure  <dig>  we indeed saw a clear cross-activation of relbef in response to all toxins tested except yafq. induction of rele, mazf, mqsr, hica and hipa conferred a clear increase in the relbef mrna level in an hour. use of three separate probes revealed, however, that different mrna species pile up in response to different toxins. before induction and  <dig> min after, all three probes – relb, rele and relf – detected a transcript of the same size corresponding to the full-length mrna of the operon  <cit> , as confirmed later by primer extension mapping of the 5′ end . only after mazf expression a shorter transcript, a putative cleavage product, could be detected at the  <dig> min time point using rele probe . at later time points, hybridization with relb  and rele  probes gave different signals: in response to induction of mazf, mqsr, and hica we saw cleavage of the full-length mrna and massive accumulation of the toxin-encoding part, while the antitoxin-coding portion could not be detected and was apparently degraded . such cleavage and accumulation of the toxin portion also occurred in response to rele. hybridization with relf probe revealed additional cleavage, both within rele and downstream, in response to expression of all these toxins, and the relf part accumulated as the most abundant portion of the relbef transcript . also, some transcripts larger than the full relbef mrna appeared, particularly after induction of rele and mqsr. production of hipa, which is not a ribonuclease, conferred strong induction of full-length relbef mrna but cleavage and uneven accumulation of different mrna fragments could not be seen. mup treatment produced overproduction of the full relbef mrna as well as accumulation of some cleavage products. production of yafq did not lead to a clear cross-activation of relbef transcription. however, rele probe showed accumulation of a short rna fragment in response to this toxin. it is possible, that transcription of the operon is activated by yafq but the transcript is degraded to small fragments. clearly, these fragments cannot serve as templates for synthesis of rele and, therefore, functional cross-activation does not occur. modest induction of relbef with no cleavage was evident in the 1h and 2h samples of control cultures, lacking artificial production of any free toxin. we have to consider that, at this stage, the control cultures were approaching stationary phase, and induction of toxin-antitoxin modules has been described in similar conditions  <cit> .

probes complementary to yiaf and rpss were used for control because the levels of transcription of these genes did not differ between log phase cells and the ampicillin-refractory non-growing subpopulation, where ta operons were highly expressed  <cit> . rpss is a part of the large s <dig> ribosomal protein operon with an estimated transcribed length of  <dig> bp  <cit> ; yiaf  encodes for a putative membrane protein of unknown function; it is located between genes pointing in the opposite direction and must form a single-gene operon. the control mrnas were not induced by toxins . after induction of toxins, the yiaf transcript was degraded without accumulation of any stable fragments. . surprisingly, mupirocin initially induced transcription of yiaf whereas the level of the transcript dropped after longer incubation . the s <dig> transcript was degraded as well. some accumulating stable fragments of the s <dig> transcript were detectable after mazf, rele and mqsr production .

to be sure that the accumulating rna fragments, which correspond to the 3′ portion of the relbef mrna, are not initiated from toxin-inducible cryptic promoters within the operon, we deleted the promoter of the relbef operon. in the promoterless bw <dig> Δprelbef strain, we did not see induction of the relbef mrna nor the characteristic accumulation of its 3′ portion . we still saw a transcript that could be detected by the rele and relf probes  but the level of this transcript did not depend on the rele production. it might be initiated from a constitutive promoter that was newly created by deletion of prelbef. transiently induced smear of rna that was detected in bw <dig> Δprelbef with the relb probe  is transcribed from the relb-expression plasmid pkp <dig>  that is the reason why we omitted this plasmid when we studied induction of relbef in response to rele . thus, we can be sure that the shorter transcripts that massively pile up in response to toxins are indeed cleavage products and are initiated at the genuine prelbef promoter.

next, we tested whether over-production of the toxin rele activates other toxin-antitoxin genes in the chromosome. the northern hybridization results show strong induction of the mqsra, mazef, dinj-yafq, hicab, yefm-yoeb, and prlf-yhav ta systems . similarly to relbef, the induced transcripts were cleaved and the toxin-encoding parts seem to accumulate preferentially while the antitoxin-coding parts are more effectively degraded. that appears to be true irrespective of whether the toxin is encoded by the first  or the second  gene of the operon . reliable testing of this phenomenon requires characterization of the cleavage products and additional experiments in the future.

additional experiments indicated that transcriptional cross-activation of ta operons does not occur between all possible ta combinations. northern hybridization using mqsr probe showed that overproduction of mazf and hica does not induce the mqsra promoter while yafq and hipa induce it , as well as rele .

activation of mazef by amino acid starvation is dependent on relbe
we wanted to test whether ta cross-activation happens also during natural physiological stresses. amino acid starvation has been shown to induce transcription of the relbe <cit>  and mazef <cit>  genes. we induced amino-acid starvation by addition of mupirocin to the cultures of bw <dig>  and bw25113Δrelbef. northern analysis indicated that transcription of mazef is upregulated only in wild type bacteria and not in the relbe deficient strain . transcription of mqsra, the other ta operon that we tested, was induced in both strains, independently of the relbe system . thus, relbe system activates another ta system, mazef, in response to amino acid shortage. this evidences that ta cross-activation is not a mere artifact of toxin overexpression but occurs as a part of a real physiological response.

cross-activation occurs in lon, ppk, clpp, and hslv deficient strains
since it is widely accepted that ta loci are activated by proteolytic degradation of antitoxins, we tested whether transcriptional cross-activation is affected by lon, clpp or hslv proteases. besides, we tested the requirement of polyphospate, which has been shown to activate lon  <cit> . we expressed rele, mazf, and mqsr toxins in bw <dig> strain lacking lon or ppk, which encode for lon and polyphosphate kinase, respectively, and observed chromosomal relbef transcript by northern hybridization using probes rele and relf . deletion of lon or ppk did not abolish cross-induction of relbef by mqsr, and as seen on relf probed blot , by mazf. we further tested relbef activation in a double-knockout strain lacking lon and clpp, and a triple-knockout lacking lon, clpp and hslv proteases. again, expression of mazf and mqsr obviously induced relbef in the strains deficient for multiple proteases . accumulating rele-, mazf- and mqsr- specific cleavage intermediates produced similar patterns in all tested strains . production of yafq did not cause a clear activation of relbef transcription in the protease-deficient strains, similarly to the wt strain. accumulation of a small fragment hybridizing to the rele probe can be detected in the ΔclppxΔlonΔhslvu strain . ectopic production of rele induced transcription of chromosomal relbef in all strain backgrounds, as expected. essentially, we can conclude that cross-activation of ta transcription occurs also in lon-, ppk-, clppx-lon-, and clppx-lon-hslvu- backgrounds.

cleavage of the relbef mrna in vivo
to characterize the in vivo cleavage of relbef mrna in more detail, we mapped the 5′ ends of the cleavage products using primer extension analysis . as seen in figure  <dig>  the cleavage sites in the mrna, which was purified from the cells with over-expression of the nucleases mqsr and hica, are distributed all over the operon. several specific cutting sites of the mazf nuclease are found in the relb-encoding part. no cleavage is detected in response to production of the protein kinase hipa, as expected. most of the cutting sites were unique for each toxin indicating that the cleavage in vivo was a result of primary activity of the over-produced toxin. rna from mazf and mqsr over-expression samples was mostly cleaved at the specific cutting sites of these toxins, i.e. aca  <cit>  and gcu  <cit> . however, several unique cleavage sites in the mazf and mqsr over-expression samples do not contain these sequences and might be generated by unidentified ribonuclease, possibly cross-activated toxins . we also observed that not all aca and gcu sequences were cleaved in the relbef mrna by mazf and mqsr, respectively. as before  <cit> , the cleavage preferences of hica could not be identified.

to confirm our notion of ta cross-activation, we hoped to see some cleavage hotspots. at those sites, strong cleavage by an overproduced toxin occurs at its specific cutting sequence . cleavage at the same site in response to expression of another toxin would indicate activation of the primary cutter by the over-produced toxin. we tested possible cross-activation at three of these sites. at position  <dig> , the relbef transcript is cut by mazf and in response to the over-produced hica. the mqsr-specific cleavage sites at positions  <dig>  and  <dig>  are also cleaved in the samples from hica over-production . we found that these cuts were not due to the activation of mazf and mqsr, since they occurred in rna extracted from the bw25113Δmazef and bw25113Δmqsra cells . chpbk, a homolog of mazf with similar but relaxed sequence specificity  <cit>  may be accountable for the cleavage at  <dig> .

the cleavage products of relbef mrna can be translated into proteins
the toxin-encoding parts of the ta transcripts seem to be generally more stable than the antitoxin-encoding parts and accumulate after cleavage . if the toxin open reading frame  on these cleavage products is intact and translated into a functional protein, the t:a balance must be shifted towards toxin followed by more cleavage, cross-activation of other ta systems, and inhibition of protein synthesis. that creates the possibility of a positive feedback circuit and even a network of them. a positive autoregulatory loop, in turn, could explain the bistability of bacterial growth observed in response to toxin expression  <cit> .

to test whether proteins are translated from the cleaved relbef mrna, we used the t <dig> promoter for expression of two transcripts, which begin at the sites of mazf-inflicted cleavage, at positions + <dig> and + <dig> from the 5′ end of the full-length transcript, and extend downstream of the rele orf. the + <dig> rna starts immediately upstream of the relb orf . thus, the relb orf is leaderless and lacks the upstream untranslated region with the ribosome binding site . the + <dig> rna starts in the middle of the relb orf. to allow rele to be detected, we added the his <dig> tag to the c-terminus of the toxin and introduced substitutions r81a and r83a, which reduce its toxicity  <cit> . expression of these rnas in bl <dig> resulted in production of the toxin rele-c-his, although in smaller quantities than from the control transcript with the intact 5′ end . thus, the accumulating cleavage products of ta mrna can be translated into proteins, although less effectively than full transcripts with intact rbs in front of relb. reduced translation of the downstream rele-c-his open reading frame in shorter transcripts suggests that rele lacks its own rbs and it is produced due to translational coupling of relbe genes. translational coupling of polycistronic ta mrna has been demonstrated previously for pard  of plasmid r <dig>  <cit> .

transient expression of toxins can induce bistability of growth
production of toxins causes an extensive rearrangement of bacterial physiology. it can inflict dormancy and antibiotic tolerance  <cit>  if the toxin level exceeds a threshold  <cit> . fluctuations in toxin levels above and below the threshold have been used to explain the coexistence of dormant and growing cells in a population  <cit> . the possibility of positive feedback by the generation and selective buildup of the toxin-encoding mrna fragments may explain this heterogeneity in growth. therefore, we wanted to evaluate the recovery of single bacteria and test possible growth heterogeneity after over-production of a toxin and the resulting activation of the chromosomal ta loci. we monitored growth resumption by individual cells using dilution of previously synthesized green fluorescent protein   <cit> . the plasmid ptm <dig> was inserted into the chromosome of bw <dig> to allow iptg-inducible gfp to be expressed, and this strain was transformed with plasmids for l-arabinose-inducible production of toxins rele, mazf, mqsr and hipa. expression of gfp was induced for  <dig>  h; thereafter, the cells were transferred into medium containing l-arabinose to induce the toxins. after  <dig> min, the growth medium was changed again to shut down toxin synthesis and allow recovery . analysis of the bacterial gfp content by flow cytometry  showed that after temporary expression of rele and hipa the bacteria resumed growth rather uniformly, while after expression of mazf and mqsr a subpopulation started to grow with a delay. thus, expression of these toxins created bistability in a population. most importantly, all bacteria resumed growth after the transient expression of toxins. although inhibition by mazf and mqsr was apparently stronger and induced growth heterogeneity, it did not generate a subpopulation of persistently non-dividing bacteria .

discussion
mutual cross-activation of ta systems
sequential or simultaneous activation of different ta systems has been reported elsewhere. transcription of several ta operons was induced in the persister-enriched subpopulation  <cit> . amino acid starvation in e. coli activated both rele and mazf   <cit> . we observed induction of the mqsra system in response to hipa activation  <cit> , whereas overproduction of mqsr induced transcription of relbe and relf  <cit> . also, ectopic expression of vapc toxins originating from salmonella and shigella activated yoeb  <cit>  and production of the doc toxin activated rele in e. coli <cit> . here, we show that overexpression of several toxins can activate transcription of the other ta operons. since toxins and ta operons in this study present a random sample, such cross-interactions might be common and be the rule rather than the exception. consequently, ta systems have a potential to form a cross-activation network, which operates at the transcriptional level . the presence of such network versus lone and uncoordinated ta systems must have an impact on ta activity during the stress response and setup of dormancy.

induction of the chromosomal relbef in response to the ectopically produced rele can be explained by conditional cooperativity   <cit> . however, according to our current knowledge, such mechanism is not applicable to cross-induction. activation of yoeb by vapc depended on lon protease  <cit> . also, lon was required for induction of ta operons in response to amino acid starvation and chloramphenicol  <cit> . our experiments do not provide a solid support for the role of lon and clpp in cross-regulation between ta systems of e. coli . since the cross-induction was present in the knock-out strains, an additional, lon-, clpp-, hslv-, and polyphosphate-independent mechanism of regulation must be involved. unlocking this mechanism remains a task for future studies. the simplest explanation to activation of ta systems would be depletion of antitoxins. it must inevitably happen when protein synthesis decreases. that predicts nonselective induction of all ta operons in response to inhibition of translation, no matter if it is caused by starvation or artificial production of a toxin. requirement of relbe for transcriptional activation of mazef during amino acid starvation  contradicts this prediction as well as the lack of mqsra induction in response to overproduction of mazf and hica . an option for a mechanism of cross-activation is positive feedback regulation due to selective accumulation of toxin-encoding fragments upon mrna cleavage. as we saw, after cleavage by overproduced toxin, the antitoxin-encoding rna fragments are rapidly degraded while the toxin-encoding fragments may serve as templates for translation of toxin. different toxins produce different cleavage products. that can potentially explain why they cause unequal level of trans-activation when overproduced.

another intriguing issue of ta cross-reaction is the possible cross-inhibition due to non-cognate interactions. some authors report such cross-reactions  <cit>  while others have tested but not found them  <cit> . as a part of this study, we examined non-cognate inhibition between e. coli toxins and antitoxins of the relbe, mazef, mqsra, and hipba systems in vivo. in this attempt, we run into a previously described phenomenon that may become a source of erroneous results. if toxins are expressed from the arabinose-inducible pbad promoter and antitoxins from an iptg-inducible promoter, it is important to consider that iptg inhibits pbad directly  <cit> . when we used an expression vector that encoded for the iptg-insensitive c280* version of arac transcriptional activator, we could not see any cross-inhibition. based on that, a recent report on functional non-cognate ta interactions in mycobacterium tuberculosis <cit>  may require retesting.

selective targeting of mrna by toxins as a mechanism of gene regulation
in the current study, we found that the cleavage products produced by ta toxins differ in stability. selective targeting of mrnas by endoribonucleolytic toxins and different stabilities of the resulting cleavage products may constitute another layer of gene regulation in the bacterial stress response. differences in half-life and translational efficiency of mrna cleavage products, along with generation of a pool of ribosomes lacking the anti-shine-dalgarno sequence , could profoundly affect the proteome composition. an example of such an effect is the occurrence of a mazf-resistant protein pool in e. coli <cit> . the accumulation of toxin-encoding mrna fragments may have potential use as a marker of toxin activation in studies of stressed and non-growing bacteria. increase of the t/a ratio may possibly trigger a positive feedback loop consisting of transcriptional activation of the ta operon, successive cleavage of the ta transcript, buildup of the toxin-encoding mrna fragments, and translation of them, shifting the t/a balance . thus, it can be related to ta-linked growth heterogeneity in bacterial populations   <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the main finding of this study is that bacterial toxin-antitoxin systems affect mutually each others’ expression and activity . we show that overexpression of one toxin can activate transcription of the other ta operons. toxins with endoribonuclease activity add another layer of complexity to these interactions. they cleave ta mrna, which is followed by degradation of the antitoxin-encoding rna fragments and accumulation of the toxin-encoding fragments. we show that these accumulating mrna fragments can be translated to produce more toxin.

most of bacteria have many different ta systems. although their function is debatable, many ta toxins have similar activity and the inhibitory effect on bacterial cells is common to all of them. therefore, an important question is whether ta systems are redundant or not. another intriguing issue is whether different ta systems are functionally connected and do cross-talk  <cit> .

here we over-expressed toxins to show that ta systems have a potential to form a network of cross-reacting regulators in e. coli. we found an example of such cross-reaction, which occurs without artificial overexpression: the relbe-dependent transcriptional activation of mazef during amino acid starvation. it remains a rather difficult task to identify the mechanism of ta cross-activation. currently we know that cross-activation is not dependent on major proteases lon, clpp, and hslv. also, it cannot be a self-evident outcome of antitoxin shortage since we know examples where shutdown of protein synthesis does not activate a ta promoter.

