BACKGROUND
transcription factors  are regulatory proteins that interact with specific dna sequences to control gene expression. the dna binding domains of tfs bind to specific upstream sequences  of target genes and modulate the transcription process. protein-dna binding properties have been investigated by traditional procedures, such as the electrophoretic mobility shift assay  and filter binding assay  <cit> . however, these methods are labor-intensive and are restricted to the intended application in that they are usually designed with prior knowledge obtained via promoter-reporter assays. comprehensive genome-wide methods, along with the availability of whole-genome sequences and advances in microarray technology, have been developed to characterize protein-dna binding specificities  <cit> .

some of well-known high-throughput methods are chromatin immunoprecipitation -chip, dna adenine methyltransferase identification , protein microarray and protein binding microarray   <cit> . chip-chip is a combinational procedure of chromatin immunoprecipitation and dna microarray experiment. to enrich protein-bound dna fragments, cells are treated with a reagent to form cross-links between dna and a protein, typically formaldehyde, and immunoprecipitated with a protein-specific antibody. the enriched dna fragments are labeled with a fluorescent dye by pcr amplification and hybridized to dna microarrays. many chip-chip studies have been performed for transcription factors  <cit> , rna polymerases  <cit>  and replication-related proteins  <cit>  to identify their recognition sequences. chip-chip might be applicable under the restrictions of the antibodies available for each protein.

damid has been applied to survey in vivo binding sites of a protein with combination of targeted dna methylation and microarray. dam is a dna methyltransferase, which can be targeted to specific sequences by fusion to a dna binding protein of interest. the binding of the fusion protein leads to dna methylation of adjacent sequence and these methylated regions can be discriminated by methyl-specific restriction enzyme. the digestion fragments are labeled with fluorescent dye by random priming and applied to microarrays  <cit> . although damid is independent of antibody, it may not be suitable to a protein which depends on post-translational modification in order to potentially interact with dna  <cit> .

alternatively, protein microarray was used to identify corresponding sequences representing binding affinity against potential dna-binding proteins which were attached on a slide  <cit> . however, the cloning of a vast number of proteins is a major limitation in the fabrication of protein microarrays.

pbm was introduced to conveniently determine protein-dna interactions in vitro  <cit> . the whole-genome yeast intergenic microarray is prepared by spotting double-stranded dna. separately, glutathione s-transferase -tagged proteins of interest are expressed, purified and applied to microarrays. the protein-bound microarrays are labeled with alexa 488-conjugated antibody to gst and fluorescent images are obtained with microarray scanner. the dna binding sequence specificities of three transcription factors are identified by these pbms.

more recently, pbm was improved by adapting de bruijn sequences and in situ synthesis of dna oligonucleotides on slide  <cit> . the de bruijn sequences represent not only all contiguous 10-mers, but also all 10-mers with a gap size of  <dig> nucleotide. the double-stranded microarrays were prepared by primer extension and gst-tagged proteins applied to the slides. the protein-bound microarray was stained with a fluorophore-conjugated polyclonal antibody against gst, and binding strength was analyzed based on the fluorescence intensity to determine the consensus sequence. this technology has proven to be useful with well-known tfs, such as cbf <dig> , zif <dig> , and oct- <dig> . the researchers showed known 8-mer or extended motifs by computing rank-based statistics between the k-mer-containing and non-containing groups. they successfully overcame the variability associated with the compact design, which might confound direct assignment of preferences between k-mers. additionally, a recent study characterized the protein-dna binding specificities of apicomplexan ap <dig>  putative transcriptional regulators in malaria-causing parasites using pbm technology  <cit> .

here we demonstrate pbm can be conveniently performed using a dsred-monomer fluorescent protein and quadrupled oligomer sequences. the wild-type dsred was cloned from discosoma sp. reef coral and displays a tendency to aggregate tetrameric structure  <cit> . however, the folding structure of dsred is identical to that of avgfp consisting of 11-stranded β-barrel. also, as a mutated variant, dsred-monomer has been used to examine subcellular localization of the tagged proteins because dsred-monomer is monomeric and stable.

RESULTS
design of the q9-protein binding microarray 
we designed a pbm, which we refer to as q9-pbm, in such a way that target probes are synthesized as quadruples of all possible 9-mer combinations. a total of  <dig>  features were selected after consideration of the reverse complimentary sequences of all 9-mer combinations, and  <dig>  features were replicated to confirm the binding consistency. each 9-mer was quadrupled and linked to a pcr-primer binding site following five thymidine linkers to the slide . these repetitive sequences provide highly consistent results by which consensus binding motifs can be extracted, thereby allowing unequivocal interpretation. the microarray was manufactured by agilent technology, and the reverse complementary dna strand of each probe was synthesized on the slide via thermo-stable dna polymerase.

expression of dsred-fused transcription factors and determination of binding motifs
in the present report, all tfs were expressed with an n-terminal fusion to dsred fluorescent protein . full-length cbf <dig>  and cbf1/dreb1b  were amplified from the s. cerevisiae and a. thaliana genomes, respectively, and full-length osnac <dig>  was amplified from oryza sativa cdna by pcr  <cit> . all amplified clones were inserted in the pet32-dsred recombinant vector, sequenced to verify the absence of mutations in the dna-binding domains, and introduced into escherichia coli strain bl21-codonplus for protein expression.

the complementary dna strand was synthesized by primer extension according to the previous report  <cit> . the resulting microarray was scanned and cy <dig> red spots throughout the microarray suggested reverse complementary strands are successfully synthesized. dsred-fused dna binding protein was applied to the double-stranded q9-pbm, and the fluorescence intensity of the bound protein was acquired using a microarray scanner . the cbf <dig> pbm image shows that dsred-fused cbf <dig> was efficiently targeted to the specific double-stranded sequences .

the consensus binding sequence was determined based on signal strength. in general, the rank-ordered signal distribution of the bound protein showed a deep leftward slope followed by a heavy right tail , as observed in a previous report  <cit> . because the probes in the deep slope region differed by only one base, we assumed that the signal distribution was due to a specific interaction between the protein and features on the microarray. two independent linear models, y = ax+b, were applied to the deep and the heavy right tail region using r statistical language. the spot intensities were rank-ordered, and enrichment scores of 5-, 6-, and 7-mers were determined. spots that exhibited strong intensity and high enrichment were subject to alignment. these groups were denoted with seqlogo  <cit> .

binding evaluation of well-known transcription factors
as an initial test, we verified that the dsred protein alone did not demonstrate any significant binding to the double-stranded microarray . we then inspected the results for cbf <dig>  a well-characterized, basic helix-loop-helix-leucine zipper family transcription factor that binds to the 'cacgtg' motif as a homodimer in yeast  <cit> . we observed the coefficient of variation  for replicated probe pairs to verify the binding consistency in the cbf <dig> microarray . the cv value for high-intensity probes approached '0', which indicates that highly ranked probes reliably determine consensus-binding sequences. based on the rank-ordered signal distribution and statistic algorithm previously described, the cbf <dig> binding motif generated was 'cacgtg' .

we chose the cbf1/dreb1b transcription factor as another well-known example that binds to the crt/dre  sequence in arabidopsis  <cit> . crt/dre contains the conserved 'ccgac' sequence, which is an important element in the promoter regions of cold-inducible genes. the cbf1/dreb1b binding sequence determined included the previously defined motif .

determination of an unknown osnac <dig> motif
because q9-pbm confirmed well-known cis-acting elements of cbf <dig> and cbf1/dreb1b, we applied the microarray to elucidate unknown binding motifs of the osnac <dig> transcription factor considered to play critical roles in abiotic and biotic stress-involved responses in oryza sativa. although the binding affinity was weaker than that observed in the former cases, we were able to determine that osnac <dig> binds not only to 'agtaa' , but also to g-rich sequences. to validate the pbm results, we chose the  <dig> bp candidate sequences 'ttacgtaag' gtaa') and 'ccgggggag'  from the microarray and analyzed them using a gel retardation assay  <cit>  . the results showed that osnac <dig> can bind to either sequence, but osnac <dig> seems to displace more of 'ttacgtaag' motif over 'ccgggggag' in our experimental setup. additionally, we found that the presence of the 'agtaa' motif in the  <dig> kb promoter region of four rice genes  which were previously proposed to associate with direct regulation by osnac <dig>  <cit> .

discussion
transcription factors  are regulatory proteins that interact with specific dna sequences to control gene expression. the dna binding domain of tfs combines with specific upstream sequences  of target genes and modulates the transcription rate of genes. the binding of tfs plays an important regulatory role in various metabolic pathways, developmental differentiation, and environmental responses, as well as in basal biological processes. therefore, many applications have been developed to elucidate the interactions between tf and dna motifs.

a genome-wide survey was conducted by berger et al. using a compact microarray design  <cit> . they identified 8-mer or extended motifs by computing rank-based statistics between the k-mer-containing and non-containing groups. they successfully overcame the variability inherent to this compact design, which could have confounded the direct assignment of preferences between k-mers. the recently developed agilent technology provides researchers with denser microarrays , and we designed a 9-mer-based microarray that permits straightforward interpretation of binding sequences. we also demonstrated that dsred-fused recombinant tfs can bind to their corresponding cis-acting elements. our method provides convenient identification of protein-dna binding interactions after a simple, one-step incubation with the microarray.

we designed a pbm, denoted as q9-pbm, in such a way that target probes are quadruples of all possible 9-mer combinations.  <dig>  features were selected from the total of  <dig>  reads after consideration of the reverse complimentary sequences because a double-stranded dna has a bidirectional aspect. the quadruple sequences can provide highly consistent and concrete results for consensus binding motifs. our q9-pbm employs dsred fluorescent protein, which eliminates multiple wash and hybridization steps.

the reverse complementary dna strand of each probe was synthesized on the slide, and dsred-fused protein was applied to the double-stranded q9-pbm. the rank-ordered signal distribution showed a deep leftward slope followed by a heavy right tail, suggesting a specific interaction between the protein and features on the microarray. we verified the well-known cis-acting elements of cbf <dig> and cbf1/dreb1b, which originate from s. cerevisiae and a. thaliana, respectively. although a direct comparison is not applicable, the cbf <dig> binding intensity of q9-pbm was compared to de bruijn sequence-based microarray to verify the consistent binding of dsred-fused protein  <cit> . in the result of de bruijn sequence-based microarray by berger et al., totally  <dig> features include "rtcacgtg" sequence in their double-stranded microarray, which was referred to cbf <dig> binding motif. the normalized signal intensities of these  <dig> features were between  <dig>  and  <dig> , and their ranks were between  <dig> and  <dig>  out of  <dig>  probes  <cit> . from our cbf <dig> q9-pbm result, the background-subtracted intensities of  <dig> features which include cbf <dig> motif were between  <dig>  and  <dig> , and their ranks were between  <dig> and  <dig> out of  <dig>  probes. although almost these features still comprise the higher intensity group in both results, q9-pbm presents less variable intensity in the case of cbf <dig> 

moreover, we applied the pbm to identify the unknown cis-acting element of the osnac <dig> transcription factor considered to play critical roles in stress-involved responses in o. sativa. osnacc <dig> binds not only to 'agtaa', but also to g-rich motifs. we performed a gel retardation assay to validate the pbm results; these results showed that osnac <dig> can bind to either sequence, but osnac <dig> seems to displace more of 'ttacgtaag' motif over 'ccgggggag' in our experimental setup. the presence of a 'agtaa' motif was detected in the promoter region of rice genes directly regulated by osnac <dig> 

pbm has limitations itself because some transcription factors have to be modified or multimerized after translation process in order to potentially interact with dna. the former issue of post-translational modification could be overcome by choosing appropriate host organisms to express tagged transcription factors. the latter of multimerization is more complicate issue, however pbm is still an appropriate method if tagged proteins may sustain weak affinity to dna by themselves. also, there has been a concern about the position effect of a tag protein which affects the specificity of a tagged protein. it might be overcome by tagging dsred to the other side of the protein. our method significantly facilitated the pbm in two ways:  the use of quadruple 9-mers may increase protein-dna binding interactions and  the one-step incubation shortens the wash and hybridization steps. the pbm with our technology will improve researchers' ability to obtain a genome-wide understanding of protein-dna interactions.

CONCLUSIONS
in the present paper, we demonstrated that dsred-fused recombinant tfs can bind to their cis-elements, and that binding affinity can be simply detected by dsred fluorescence intensity. moreover, the concatenated microarray is advantageous because repeated sequences were used to elucidate the interactions between the tf and dna motifs observed via other methods. although some limitations  impact these experiments, this method permits convenient identification of protein-dna binding interactions after a simple, one-step incubation with the microarray.

