BACKGROUND
life is dependent on a number of chemical elements. besides common elements, several trace elements are utilized, including certain metals and metalloids. because these elements play important roles in cellular metabolism, efficient mechanisms of uptake, storage and utilization are required for many of them. among biometals, nickel  and cobalt  are utilized at particularly low levels but play important roles in several biological systems.

ni is an essential component of several metalloenzymes involved in energy and nitrogen metabolism  <cit> . in prokaryotes, the major ni-binding enzymes include urease, ni-fe hydrogenase, carbon monoxide dehydrogenase , acetyl-coenzyme a decarbonylase/synthase , superoxide dismutase sodn, methyl-coenzyme m reductase , glyoxalase i   <cit> , a putative cis-trans isomerase in e. coli  <cit>  and several other proteins  <cit> . in eukaryotes, urease is the only characterized ni-dependent enzyme  <cit> . additional candidate ni-containing proteins or compounds have also been described in different organisms including humans  <cit> .

co is mainly found in the corrin ring of vitamin b <dig> , a group of closely related polypyrrole compounds such as cyanocobalamin, methylcobalamin and deoxyadenosyl cobalamin  <cit> . the biochemistry of b <dig> in enzymes is well characterized  <cit> . vitamin b <dig> is a complex organometallic cofactor and is mainly present in three classes of enzymes in prokaryotes : adenosylcobalamin-dependent isomerase, methylcobalamin-dependent methyltransferase, and b12-dependent reductive dehalogenase  <cit> . these classes can be further divided into subclasses based on sequence similarity and reactions they catalyze, including methylmalonyl-coa mutase , isobutyryl-coa mutase , b12-dependent mutase meaa , glutamate mutase , methyleneglutarate mutase , d-lysine  <dig> -aminomutase , b12-dependent ribonucleotide reductase , diol dehydratase , ethanolamine ammonia lyase , b12-dependent methionine synthase , a variety of b12-dependent methyltransferases  and reductive dehalogenases cpra and pcea  <cit> . whereas many prokaryotes synthesize b <dig> via aerobic or anaerobic biosynthetic pathways  <cit> , other organisms, which lack the ability to synthesize b <dig>  are dependent on vitamin uptake from the environment. in eukaryotes, only three b12-dependent enzymes, meth, mcm and rnr ii, have been identified  <cit> , and all are dependent on externally supplied vitamin b <dig>  besides, a few proteins containing non-corrin co were reported, such as methionine aminopeptidase from salmonella typhimurium, prolidase from pyrococcus furiosus and nitrile hydratase from rhodococcus rhodochrous  <cit> . however, most of these proteins are not strictly co-specific and may also use other metals  in place of co  <cit> . among them, only nitrile hydratase  was previously suggested to have different active site motifs for cobalt- and iron-binding forms  <cit> .

biosynthesis of ni and co enzymes is dependent on high-affinity uptake of metal ions from natural environments. in microorganisms, ni and co uptake is mediated by atp-binding cassette  systems and several secondary transporters  <cit> . the well-studied abc-type ni transporter system, nikabcde, belongs to a large family of abc transporters . it is composed of a periplasmic binding protein , two integral membrane proteins  and two abc proteins . the expression of nikabcde is negatively regulated by the nikr repressor  <cit> . distantly related ni abc transporters were also identified in the yersinia species . an additional system, cbi/nikmnqo, is often encoded next to the b <dig> biosynthesis or urease genes in bacterial genomes  <cit> . it was shown to mediate co and ni uptake, respectively  <cit> .

secondary ni/co transporters include:  nicot , a family of prokaryotic and fungal membrane proteins with an eight-transmembrane-segment structure  <cit> ,  ureh  <cit>  and  hupe/urej  <cit> . nicots are widespread among bacteria and found in several thermoacidophilic archaea and certain fungi including schizosaccharomyces pombe and neurospora crassa  <cit> . subtypes of various nicots have different ion preferences ranging from strict selectivity for ni to unbiased transport of both ions to strong preference for co. in many cases, the preference for a particular metal correlated with the genomic location of nicot genes, which are adjacent to genes for ni or co  enzymes  <cit> . the other two families  are putative secondary transporters, and certain members of these families have recently been shown to mediate ni transport  <cit> . homologs of ureh also occur in plants  <cit> . recently, several new types of candidate cobalt transporters were predicted, including cbtab, cbtc, cbtd, cbte, cbtf, cbtg and cbtx  <cit> . the distribution of these candidates is limited. in eukaryotes, a subfamily of cation-efflux family members  was found to account for the enhanced ability of ni hyperaccumulation in higher plants  <cit> . although no co-specific transport system was reported in eukaryotes, some suppressors of co toxicity, such as cot <dig> and grr <dig> in saccharomyces cerevisiae, were characterized, which have a role in decreasing the cytoplasmic concentration of metal ions . they were proposed to play an important role in metal homeostasis  <cit> .

vitamin b <dig> uptake is essential for b12-utilizing organisms, which lack the ability to synthesize the coenzyme de novo, and the only known transport system for b <dig> in prokaryotes is btufcd  <cit> . since this abc transport system belongs to the same family as the abc systems involved in the uptake of iron, siderophores and heme  <cit> , it is difficult to distinguish the b12-specific transporters from other homologous transporters, especially in distantly related species. in mammals, b <dig> delivery from food to tissues involves at least three successive transport proteins and their cell-surface receptors: haptocorrin in saliva, intrinsic factor in the proximal ileum and the transcobalamin ii in vascular endothelium  <cit> . transcobalamin-b <dig> is then released to the plasma and enters cells by endocytosis via certain receptors  <cit> . however, the mechanism of b <dig> uptake in other eukaryotes, such as chlamydomonas reinhardtii and nematodes, is unclear.

while a variety of metal transport systems and metalloproteomes have been characterized, the full details of utilization of ni and co/b <dig> are not clear. comprehensive analyses of both transporters and proteins that bind these metals are essential for better understanding of their homeostasis and its changes during evolution. recently, a comparative and functional genomic analysis of prokaryotic ni and co transporters in  <dig> microbial genomes showed a mosaic utilization of both metals  <cit> . a separate analysis of b <dig> metabolism and regulation provided information on b <dig> utilization in prokaryotes  <cit> .

in this report, we used comparative genomics approaches to better understand ni and co uptake in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes, and consequently utilization of these trace elements. considering that members of most non-corrin co-binding proteins may bind other metal cofactors instead of co, we only focused on the utilization of the corrin form of co , whose utilization could be predicted on the basis of b <dig> biosynthesis pathway and b12-dependent protein families. over  <dig> organisms in all three domains of life were examined. our results show a widespread utilization of both metals in prokaryotes and their limited use in eukaryotes, and reveal that utilization of ni and co may be influenced by environmental or other factors. these studies also provide insights into understanding the evolution of metal utilization traits and metalloenzymes.

RESULTS
occurrence of nickel and cobalt utilization in prokaryotes and eukaryotes
analysis of prokaryotic genomes revealed a wide distribution of genes encoding ni and co transporters as well as ni- and co-dependent proteins . table  <dig> shows the general distribution of both utilization traits in the three domains of life. this analysis was carried out by detecting known metalloproteins, metal transporters and cofactor biosynthesis pathways, and where possible, calls were based on multiple evidences. it should be noted, however, that these approaches may occasionally be insufficient to assign a function with complete confidence. for example, it cannot be excluded that some genes said to be associated with ni or co utilization may prove to have a different metal specificity or may not be functional. therefore, our analysis is consistent with the current knowledge of ni and co pathways.

*: ni transporter: ni-specific transporter;

co transporter: co-specific transporter;

unassigned transporter: close homologs of ni/co transporter families with unassigned function.

among bacteria,  <dig> ni-utilizing and  <dig> co-utilizing organisms  were identified, including  <dig> organisms  that utilized both metals. in contrast,  <dig> organisms  had neither ni/co transporters nor corresponding metalloenzymes and appeared to lack the ability to use either of the two trace elements. only half of co-utilizing organisms  possessed the b <dig> biosynthetic pathway. the other half likely acquires external b <dig> via the vitamin uptake systems. investigation of the occurrence of homologs of the btufcd transport system in these b12-uptaking organisms showed that more than 90% of them had btufcd homologs, implying that essentially all of these organisms may use a btufcd system for b <dig> uptake . the remaining 10% b12-uptaking organisms, such as nitrosomonas europaea and xanthomonas axonopodis, appeared to lack btufcd transporters, suggesting the presence of additional b <dig> transport systems in these organisms. a small number of organisms which had either ni-dependent proteins  or ni transporters  were found among bacteria . a similar situation was also observed in  <dig> b12-synthesizing species that lacked both co transporters and transporters with unassigned function. therefore, our data suggest that dual-function ni/co transporters , additional ni- and co-specific transporters, multifunctional metal transporters  and/or novel metalloproteins may be present in a small number of analyzed organisms. alternatively, metal acquisition might occur nonspecifically in some of these organisms using cation influx systems.

except for phyla represented by few sequenced organisms , ni and co utilization traits were detected in nearly all bacterial phyla . neither ni- nor co-utilizing organisms were found among the chlamydiae and alphaproteobacteria/rickettsiales. essentially all organisms in the two phyla are obligate intracellular parasites and have small genome size . in addition, most organisms in the firmicutes/mollicutes  and spirochaetes , which are extracellular parasites with small genomes, also lost the ability to use both metals. thus, it appears that parasitic lifestyle may result in the loss of utilization of both metals. co utilization appeared to be more widely distributed than that of ni. it is present in 90% ni-utilizing organisms and in some phyla, such as the spirochaetes and thermotogae, which lack ni utilization. however, the fact that ni utilization is found in all sequenced epsilonproteobacteria, which rarely use co, suggests a mostly independent relationship between the two metal utilization traits. nevertheless, significant overlap between the two traits observed in bacteria suggests that they may be related in some way, for example, common or similar transporter systems may be involved.

similar but even wider ni/co utilization was observed in sequenced archaea .  <dig> and  <dig> archaeal species were found to utilize co and ni, respectively. a total of  <dig> organisms use both metals, including all  <dig> sequenced methanogenic archaea. approximately 75% of co-utilizing archaea possessed the b <dig> biosynthetic pathway . overall, it appears that utilization of both ni and co represent ancient traits which have been and remain common to most prokaryotes.

in contrast to prokaryotes, only  <dig> ni-utilizing and  <dig> b12-utilizing organisms were identified in eukaryotes . among them,  <dig> organisms  use both trace elements . on the other hand, almost half of analyzed eukaryotic organisms appeared to lack the ability to use either ni or b <dig>  including insects , saccharomycotina and most unicellular parasites. the fact that no organism contained orphan ni transporter and that more than 96% of ni-utilizing eukaryotes possessed both known ni transporters and urease  strongly suggested excellent correspondence between the occurrence of the ni uptake system and ni-dependent proteins in eukaryotes. although the mechanism of b <dig> uptake is unclear in eukaryotes excluding mammals, we could examine b <dig> utilization by analyzing the occurrence of b12-dependent enzymes. it is interesting that most ni-utilizing eukaryotes were fungi  and plants, and that most b12-utilizing organisms were animals  which lack the ability to use ni . the data suggest that the majority of lower eukaryotes lost the co  utilization trait whereas higher eukaryotes lost the ni utilization trait. although less likely, an alternative hypothesis is that the co utilization trait was independently acquired by some ancient eukaryotes, for example, the ancestor of all animals, and then lost by certain groups such as arthropoda.

distribution of ni and co transporters in prokaryotes
we analyzed all well-characterized ni/co transport systems in prokaryotes  <cit> . members of these transporter families in sequenced genomes were identified by homology searches and the function of each protein was predicted based on genome context . orthologs of these transporters showed a mosaic distribution in bacteria. a summary of the distribution of these ni/co transporters in bacteria is shown in table  <dig>  considering that many transporters do not have clear substrate preference , our analyses focused on predicted ni- or co-specific transporters. although some transporters with unassigned function were clustered with multiple predicted ni- or co-specific transporters in phylogenetic trees, we considered them as being of unclear function.

/nikmnqo
*: n, number of organisms containing ni-specific transporter; c, number of organisms containing co-specific transporter; u, number of organisms containing transporters with unassigned function;

**: other predicted co transporters include cbtab, cbtc, cbtd, cbte, cbtf, cbtg and cbtx.

cbi/nikmnqo transporter is the most widespread transport system for ni and co uptake in bacteria, which is consistent with previous observations  <cit> . these modular transporters belong to a novel class of atp-dependent transporters  that use membrane proteins to capture substrate  <cit> . comparison of subunits of cbi/nikmnqo systems in different organisms revealed that m, q and o are universal components and are present in almost all predicted transport systems. no significant similarity was detected between nikn and cbin, although they have similar topology . it is known that two additional components, nikk and nikl, are involved in ni uptake in the absence of nikn, which form the nikkmlqo system . phylogenetic analyses of all these components are shown . in general, except for cbio/niko, all components showed separate ni- and/or co-related branches although the function of some members of these components was unclear. almost all cbin proteins contained the same domain  and had similar sequences . in contrast, more sequence diversity was observed for nikn, nikk and nikl proteins. sometimes, multiple distant homologs were present in the same organism . here, we divided nikn, nikk and nikl into different groups based on sequence similarity and phylogenetic analyses. three types of nikn , two of nikl  and three of nikk  were identified in bacteria. distribution of different types of these components is shown . approximately 90% nikl <dig> co-occurred with nikk <dig> , whereas nikl <dig> only co-occurred with nikk <dig> or nikk <dig>  interestingly, in five proteobacteria , such as rhodopseudomonas palustris and shewanella sediminis, operons for nikk1ml1qo orthologs were found to be adjacent to b <dig> biosynthesis genes or were preceded by b12-dependent riboswitch elements  <cit> , implying that they are involved in co uptake in these organisms. phylogenies of all components showed a relatively small branch for these evolutionarily distant organisms  although each component belonged to a large ni-related group. these observations suggest that the co uptake function recently evolved for nikk1ml1qo system in these organisms. however, it is not clear whether they are still involved in ni uptake. orphan nikk and/or nikl orthologs were also observed in several organisms which lack nikmqo but contain ni-dependent proteins, or even lack ni utilization  was always found encoded next to niko. orthologs of this hypothetical transmembrane protein were only detected in six sequenced organisms and most of them were predicted to be involved in ni uptake , suggesting that novel ni-related transporter component evolved in organisms lacking nikq. in addition, different nikms in nikmnqo or nikkmlqo system clustered in separate branches , indicating that the evolutionary process of nikm correlates with the usage of n or k+l components. however, no correlation was observed for nikm based on different subtypes of nikn, nikk and nikl components. similarly, phylogeny of the core transporter components q and o did not show significant similarity to that of m, n, k or l component. it should be noted that no organism that contained both nikmnqo and nikkmlqo was detected, indicating a complementary or mutually exclusive relationship between these two systems.

two other transporter families, hupe/urej and nicot, were also found to be frequently used in bacteria . the hupe/urej transporter family is widely utilized in the cyanobacteria and various proteobacterial subdivisions except for the deltaproteobacteria and epsilonproteobacteria. phylogenetic analysis of all collected members of this transporter family showed two separate branches of predicted ni- and co-specific subgroups although there were still several members with unassigned function in each branch . the nicot family was detected in diverse taxonomic groups of bacteria. compared to hupe/urej, nicot showed much more complex functional diversity and predicted ni- and co-specific transporters were scattered in various branches of the phylogenetic tree .

abc transporter systems are typically major and the most active transporters of organic compounds and metals, such as zinc, manganese, amino acids and peptides. in our study, only a fraction of organisms were predicted to possess the nikabcde system, including distant ni abc-type transporters identified in yersinia species, yntabcde  <cit> . besides genomic context, we attempted to utilize residues which may be involved in ni-binding  to distinguish nikabcde from homologous peptide import systems. multiple alignment of nika sequences and other homologs showed that most of the residues proposed to be involved in ni-nika interaction are conserved in predicted nika proteins but absent in other homologs . except for members of the nikabcde family in clostridium tetani and desulfitobacterium hafniense, which were previously predicted to be preceded by a b12-dependent riboswitch element  <cit> , all nika orthologs appeared to be ni-specific . although ynta  is evolutionarily distant from nika, and it is still unclear how ynta binds ni, gene neighborhoods could be used to identify this distant ni abc-type transporter family.

in addition, only  <dig> organisms possessed orthologs of the ureh transporter. this family was previously predicted to be ni-specific because these genes were always located adjacent to the genes for ni-dependent enzymes, such as urease, ni-fe hydrogenase and sodn  <cit> . there have been no reports that showed that ureh may also be involved in co uptake. here, we found that a member of the ureh family is adjacent to several b <dig> biosynthesis genes , in a gammaproteobacterium, moritella sp. pe <dig>  suggesting that ureh is involved in co uptake in this organism .

besides the above well-characterized ni/co transporter families, several recently predicted co transporters, including cbtab, cbtc-cbtg and cbtx  <cit> , were detected in  <dig> species, mostly in the proteobacteria and actinobacteria . essentially all of these organisms possessed the b <dig> biosynthetic pathway and many lacked known co transporters.

in e. coli, the nickel repressor gene nikr is positioned immediately next to its target, the nikabcde operon. nikr-dependent regulation was also predicted for other ni transporters, such as nikmnqo and ni-specific nicot, and ni-dependent enzymes such as ni-fe hydrogenase  <cit> . in this study, nikr was found in less than half of the organisms containing nikabcde, suggesting the presence of nikr-independent regulation of the nikabcde system ). here, the occurrence of nikr was used to supplement the searches for ni-related transporters.

only three ni/co transporter families were detected in archaea: nik/cbimnqo, nikabcde, and nicot . as in bacteria, nik/cbimnqo was the most widespread transporter system. compared to variations in the bacterial nikmnqo and nikkmlqo systems, only nikmn1qo and nikmn2qo were detected in archaea. in contrast, the distribution of the other two transporters was not very pronounced and most nicot transporters did not show clear function. in the case of other predicted co transporters, only cbtx was detected, in  <dig> archaeal species.

occurrence of ni-dependent enzymes, b <dig> biosynthetic pathway and b12-dependent enzymes in prokaryotes
among bacterial ni-dependent enzymes, urease  and ni-fe hydrogenase , ni-fe hydrogenase iii  and f420-reducing hydrogenase ) were the two most widespread families . in the analyzed dataset,  <dig> organisms  possessed urease and  <dig>  ni-fe hydrogenase. occurrence of other ni-dependent proteins was limited and mosaic . for example, codh/acs, a key enzyme in the wood-ljungdahl pathway of anaerobic co fixation  <cit> , was identified only in  <dig> organisms belonging to the firmicutes/clostridia, chloroflexi and deltaproteobacteria, whereas sodn was detected in  <dig> organisms in the actinobacteria, bacteroidetes, cyanobacteria and some gammaproteobacteria. as mentioned above ,  <dig> organisms containing ni-specific transporters  lacked known ni-dependent proteins. we examined the genes adjacent to the predicted transporter genes in these organisms, but did not find good candidates for ni-dependent proteins. it is possible that these organisms possess additional ni users which are not strictly ni-dependent such as glxi. we found that all these organisms containing orphan ni transporters also contain glxi proteins, although it is unclear which of these proteins bind ni. although incorrect functional assignment of some transporters  cannot be excluded, misassignment of function should be not significant.

*: ni-codh, carbon monoxide dehydrogenase; codh/acs, acetyl-coenzyme a decarbonylase/synthase; sodn, superoxide dismutase sodn.

in archaea, the occurrence of these enzymes was different . ni-fe hydrogenase was the most widespread protein, whereas urease was the least utilized one. sodn was not detected in archaea. in addition, the archaea-specific ni-binding enzyme, mcr, a protein that contains a noncovalently bound ni tetrapyrrolic cofactor  and catalyzes the final step in the biological synthesis of methane in methanogenic archaea  <cit> , was found in all sequenced methanogens. it has been reported that mcr homologs  in some not yet cultured methanotrophic archaea  are involved in the anaerobic oxidation of methane in marine sediments  <cit> .

*: mcr, methyl-coenzyme m reductase.

we also analyzed the b <dig> biosynthetic pathway in prokaryotes. by identifying key genes involved in b <dig> biosynthesis , half of b12-utilizing bacteria were predicted to synthesize b <dig> and all of them contained at least one known b12-dependent enzyme . the other half of b12-utilizing bacteria lacked the complete b <dig> biosynthetic pathway and, therefore, must be using external b <dig> via specific uptake systems, such as btufcd whose homologs were detected in over 90% of these organisms . it was previously reported that about one-fourth of b12-utilizing bacteria lack the ability to synthesize b <dig>  <cit> . our analysis shows that as the number of sequenced prokaryotic genomes increases, many additional organisms lacking b <dig> biosynthesis will be identified.

in order to study further the co/b <dig> utilization in prokaryotes, we examined the occurrence of all known b12-dependent enzymes as means of assessing co utilization in organisms . except for mgm, which was previously found in an unsequenced bacterium eubacterium barkeri  <cit> , all known b12-dependent proteins were detected, the most common being meth , b12-dependent rnr ii  and mcm . other proteins, including gm,  <dig> -lam, ddh, mtra and cpra, were found only in  <dig> through  <dig> organisms.

surprisingly, some b12-utilizing organisms had an extremely large number of b12-dependent proteins, e.g.,  <dig> mcm members in nocardioides sp. js <dig>   <dig> cpras and  <dig> different b12-dependent methyltransferases in d. hafniense dcb- <dig>   <dig> cpras in dehalococcoides ethenogenes and  <dig> cpras in dehalococcoides sp. cbdb <dig> . our results are consistent with previous findings which implicated these homologous enzymes in various b12-dependent metabolic processes  <cit> .

we also identified  <dig> bacteria containing co-binding nhases  based on the presence of co-binding motif . all of them are b12-utilizing organisms and most only have single copies of nhase . besides, iron-containing nhases  were predicted in four organisms that belong to the actinobacteria, betaproteobacteria/burkholderiaceae and gammaproteobacteria/others. phylogenetic analysis showed that these iron-containing nhases form a separate subbranch, suggesting that they might be newly evolved from co-binding nhases .

in archaea, three-fourths of the sequenced b12-utilizing organisms  synthesize b <dig> . however, more than half of bacterial b12-dependent protein families were absent in archaea, including meth,  <dig> -lam, ddh, eal and cpra. b12-dependent rnr ii was the most widespread b12-binding enzyme being present in  <dig> archaeal species. in addition, a variety of b12-dependent methyltransferases were found in archaea, most of which were present in methanogens. the methanosarcina species possessed an exceptionally large number of b12-dependent methyltransferases, including mtaabc, mtmabc, mtbabc, mttabc, mtsabc and mtrab . the presence of multiple b12-dependent methyltransferases involved in different pathways is clearly important for these organisms. no co-binding nhase could be detected in archaea.

*: mcm, methylmalonyl-coa mutase; icm, isobutyryl-coa mutase; meaa, a b12-dependent mutase with sequence similarity to mcm and icm. there three subfamilies are quite similar and combined as one group in this study. gm, glutamate mutase; rnr ii, b12-dependent ribonucleotide reductase; other mts, various b12-dependent methyltransferases such as mta, mtm, mtb, mtt, mts, mtv and mtr systems.

prediction of a novel b12-dependent protein family in prokaryotes
through our analysis, a novel b12-dependent protein family was predicted in prokaryotes. orthologs of this protein were detected in  <dig> sequenced bacteria belonging to four evolutionarily distant phyla . a distant homolog of the b12-binding domain  was detected in its n terminus . structure prediction using hhpred  <cit>  suggested that the n-terminus may contain a tim-barrel-like structure involved in b <dig> binding . analysis of genome context of this putative b12-dependent protein showed that it is always adjacent to nad/nadp octopine/nopaline dehydrogenase , which acts on the ch-nh substrate bond using nad or nadp as an acceptor. additional enzyme candidates included d-alanine:d-alanine ligase and asparagine synthase , which were located in the vicinity of the gene for the novel b12-dependent protein in several organisms. further experiments are needed to confirm their dependence on b <dig> 

occurrence of ni transporters, urease and b12-dependent proteins in eukaryotes
distribution of ni transporters, urease and b12-dependent enzymes in eukaryotes is shown in table  <dig>  except for two marine animals, aplysia californica  and strongylocentrotus purpuratus , which contain an orphan urease, all ni-utilizing eukaryotes contained at least one known ni transporter and urease. however, analysis of the distribution of ni transporters in different eukaryotic phyla showed high diversity of these proteins. nicot was only present in fungi , whereas ureh was detected in plants  and stramenopiles, and tgmtp <dig> was only present in land plants . all b12-utilizing eukaryotes contained meth. except for the alveolata/perkinsea and viridiplantae/chlorophyta, all organisms also possessed mcm. rnr ii was only found in dictyostelium discoideum  and three phytophthora species  and lost in fungi and animals.

*: tgmtp <dig>  ni-related subfamily of cation-efflux family; meth: b12-dependent methionine synthase.

evolutionary model of ni and co utilization
based on the results shown above, it is possible to infer a general model of ni and co utilization in the three domains of life. considering that the common property of various ni- or co-dependent proteins is to catalyze important reactions in the global carbon, hydrogen and nitrogen cycles, it is not surprising that both trace elements are essential for the majority of organisms. however, some organisms and even complete phyla/clades may have evolved alternative mechanisms for such reactions and are characterized by the loss of both transport systems and metalloenzymes.

out of the five known ni/co transport systems in prokaryotes, only nicot family spans all three domains of life. if a protein family has many representatives in all domains of life and they cluster within their domains, it is thought that the family was present in the last universal common ancestor, luca  <cit> . we speculate that nicot evolved in the common ancestor of bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes. in addition, in spite of low occurrence, the presence of ureh transporter in several phyla of both bacteria and eukaryotes indicates that this family either could have been present in the last universal common ancestor but then lost in archaea, or evolved in early bacteria and was then acquired by the ancestor of eukaryotes through evolution of mitochondria. phylogenetic analysis of ureh proteins suggested that the luca origin is more likely because the eukaryotic branch attaches near the bacterial root . the b <dig> biosynthetic pathway may have evolved only in prokaryotes or has been lost in eukaryotes. in most prokaryotic phyla, organisms retained ni and/or co utilization traits. a complete loss of both ni and co utilization was only observed in two phyla, chlamydiae and alphaproteobacteria/rickettsiales. we noticed that their sister phyla  commonly utilize both traits, suggesting that the loss of ni and co utilization happened independently in the two divisions. considering that essentially all sequenced organisms in the two phyla were obligate intracellular parasites, it is possible that both metals are not necessary for these organisms. however, the possibility that they exploit ni/co-binding proteins of the host cannot be excluded.

further analyses of the ni- or co-dependent metalloproteomes -dependent enzymes) in different phyla provided us with an opportunity to explore the evolution of these metalloproteomes . normalized occurrence of these metalloproteins is shown . there is no correlation between the number of ni- or co-dependent enzymes and the genome/proteome size . in most bacteria, the size of the ni-dependent metalloproteome was 1– <dig> . most of these proteins were ureases or ni-fe hydrogenases. however, half of sequenced deltaproteobacteria appeared to have a larger ni-dependent metalloproteome , including deltaproteobacterium mlms- <dig>  which possessed the largest ni-dependent metalloproteome . similarly, compared to most co-utilizing species which had 1– <dig> co-dependent metalloenzymes, the majority of organisms in some phyla, such as the chloroflexi , spirochaetales, actinobacteria and deltaproteobacteria, had larger co-dependent metalloproteomes . therefore, the deltaproteobacteria appear to be the only bacterial phylum which favors the use of both metals. in archaea, large ni- or co-dependent metalloproteomes were observed in methanogens . three methanosarcina species in the methanosarcinales phylum had the largest metalloproteomes for both ni and co.

a somewhat different trend was observed in eukaryotes. few organisms utilized both ni and co . ni utilization was limited to plants and lower eukaryotes, such as fungi and stramenopiles, but was absent in vertebrates. except for the bacterial-type nicot and ureh ni transporters, additional ni uptake systems have evolved from certain eukaryotic proteins . it is possible that ancient eukaryotic phyla inherited the ni utilization trait and urease from the universal ancestor of all eukaryotes, whereas certain organisms  appeared to have lost both of them. interestingly, urease orthologs were detected in two marine animals  although we could not find ni transporters in these organisms. it is unclear whether these orphan ureases still use ni as a cofactor. another interesting case was observed in fungi. all sequenced saccharomycotina lacked both ni transporter and ni-dependent urease, suggesting that this trait was lost in this fungal subgroup. co utilization was mainly observed in animals  and we could not detect any known b12-dependent proteins in most unicellular eukaryotes.

discussion
the importance of transition metals ni and co in the physiology of prokaryotes and eukaryotes is well established  <cit> . both metals are essential components of several enzymes. while much effort has previously been placed on characterizing individual ni/co-binding proteins and the corresponding biosynthetic pathways, composition of the co and ni metalloproteomes and the evolutionary dynamics of utilization of these metals are largely unknown. recently, a comparative analysis of the distribution of ni and co transport systems in approximately  <dig> microbial genomes was reported  <cit> . in the present study, we extended this analysis for both ni/co transporters and ni/co-dependent proteins to more than  <dig> bacteria, archaea and eukaryotes. our data represent the most comprehensive analysis of genes likely to be involved in ni and co utilization in sequenced species.

the widespread occurrence of ni and co utilization traits in prokaryotes supports the idea that both metals could be used by essentially all prokaryotic phyla. several organisms were identified that encoded ni-dependent proteins or b <dig> biosynthetic enzymes, but did not possess known ni or co transporters, suggesting the presence of novel, dual-function or unspecific ni/co uptake systems. for example, cora proteins are generally associated with the transport of magnesium ions but some members of the cora family can also transport other ions such as co and ni  <cit> . similarly, new ni/co-binding proteins might be present in organisms containing known transporters but not the corresponding metalloproteins.

in eukaryotes, only  <dig> species were identified that appeared to use both metals and most of them were unicellular organisms. most ni-utilizing organisms were fungi which did not utilize b <dig>  whereas most b12-utilizing organisms were animals which lost the ability to use ni. in addition, green algae utilized both metals, whereas land plants only possessed the ni utilization trait. these data show that the two utilization traits have different evolutionary histories in eukaryotes, and that the acquisition or loss of each trait occurred independently in various eukaryotic phyla.

our comparative genomic analysis showed a mosaic distribution of known ni/co transporters in prokaryotes. the ecf transporter cbi/nikmnqo was the most frequently used ni/co uptake system in both archaea and bacteria. in contrast, the abc transporter nikabcde is not a common transporter in prokaryotes even though it is well characterized in e. coli. a recent study showed that nika could also bind heme in e. coli, indicating an additional transport function independent of ni uptake  <cit> . among known ni/co transporters, nicot and ureh were the only families detected in both prokaryotes and eukaryotes. although comparative genomic approaches allow prediction of the physiological substrate for various members of these transporters, many have unassigned function. previous prediction of a variety of new co transporter candidates in various microbes suggested a complex evolutionary dynamics of co transport in prokaryotes. on the other hand, identification of different subtypes of components of nikmnqo/nikkmlqo made here also implied a complex evolutionary dynamics of ni uptake in prokaryotes.

analysis of ni-dependent enzymes, b <dig> biosynthetic pathways and b12-dependent enzymes in prokaryotes provided a straightforward approach to analyze the distribution and evolution of ni and co utilization in various organisms. it should be noted that we only analyzed a set of strictly ni- or co-dependent proteins , which may not fully account for utilization of the two transition metals in some organisms. indeed, a protein may potentially have different activities when binding different metals. for instance, it has been reported that in certain organisms, an aci-reductone dioxygenase has different activities when binding iron or ni  <cit> . in this study, urease, the most widespread ni-dependent enzyme in bacteria, was only detected in certain aerobic archaea. this observation was not unexpected because urease was mainly found in aerobic organisms, whereas most sequenced archaea were anaerobic. among other ni-dependent enzymes, superoxide dismutase sodn was essentially a bacteria-specific ni-containing protein and mcr was specific to methanogens. in the case of co, we detected all co-utilizing organisms by searching for b12-dependent enzymes and all b12-producing organisms by analyzing genes involved in b <dig> biosynthesis. in bacteria, meth was not only the most frequently used b12-dependent protein but also the only b12-binding protein in approximately 90% of organisms containing single b12-dependent proteins. moreover, more than 80% of the latter organisms lacked the ability to synthesize b <dig>  on the other hand, rnr ii was the most abundant b12-dependent protein in archaea in which no meth was observed. the observations that only half of bacterial b12-dependent enzymes were found in archaea and that a variety of b12-dependent methyltransferase families evolved in methanogens  implied somewhat different evolutionary trends in bacteria and archaea. it appears that b12-dependent methyltransferases are particularly important for metabolism of methanogenic archaea.

previously we found that habitat, environment and other factors  may influence the acquisition/loss of utilization traits of certain trace elements, e.g., selenium  and molybdenum , in prokaryotes  <cit> . to examine the possibility that ni and co utilization may also be affected by some of these factors, we adopted a strategy which was previously used to analyze the evolution of se and mo  <cit> . first, similar to mo utilization  <cit> , we found that the majority of bacteria that utilized neither ni nor co were host-associated , implying that host-associated life style may result in the loss of metal utilization, perhaps due to limited space and resources. considering differences in host-associated conditions  and the relationship between these organisms and their hosts , we further divided them into four groups: obligate intracellular symbionts , extracellular symbionts , obligate intracellular parasites  and extracellular parasites . interestingly, we found that the majority of intracellular parasites and intracellular symbionts lost the ability to utilize ni or co, whereas more than 80% of extracellular symbionts utilized both metals . most obligate intracellular parasites or symbionts had much smaller genomes than extracellular organisms . thus, it is possible that both metal utilization traits are dispensable for intracellular organisms and hence have been lost due to the pressure on genome size, although these organisms may still depend on host ni- or co-dependent proteins. in contrast, the two utilization traits mostly remained intact in essentially all extracellular symbionts, presumably because they are essential to their survival.

we also observed that the genomes of ni- and co-utilizing organisms had a significantly higher gc content . organisms with low gc content  which lack ni/co utilization were found in several phyla, most of which are intra-/extracellular parasites. intracellular pathogens and symbionts tend to be at rich and the higher energy cost and limited availability of g and c over a and t might be the basis for the understanding these differences  <cit> . we removed all host-associated organisms and reanalyzed the correlation with gc content, and found that the original trend disappeared . thus, the correlation between ni/co utilization and gc content indirectly reflected the loss of ni/co utilization in parasites.

other factors, such as gram strain, optimal temperature and ph, also appeared to have no significant effect on evolution of either trait. in addition, no statistically significant correlation could be observed between different factors and the size of ni- or co-dependent metalloproteomes. in archaea, insights into dynamics of ni and co utilization were difficult because only a small number of archaeal genomes were sequenced and nearly all of these organisms use both metals. however, the absence of both ni and co utilization traits in nanoarchaeum equitans, an obligate symbiont  <cit>  with a small genome  and low gc content , provides further support for our observations in bacteria. in brief, host-associated life style  and/or small genome with low gc content may result in the loss of ni and/or co utilization. the requirement for both metals in prokaryotes and at the same time scattered occurrence in different phyla illustrate a dynamic nature of ni/co utilization.

a similar investigation of ni and co utilization in eukaryotes provided a first glimpse on evolutionary dynamics of ni- and co-dependent metabolic pathways in these organisms. the fact that most parasites used neither ni nor co was consistent with what we found in prokaryotes, suggesting that both metals may become unnecessary for parasites because of either reduced availability of the two trace elements or dependence on the corresponding pathways of the host. ni utilization was mainly limited to fungi , land plants, green algae and stramenopiles, but it was not observed in vertebrates, nematodes, insects and yeasts which lacked both ni transporters and urease. it is known that s. cerevisiae can use urea as sole nitrogen source by degrading it in two steps  to ammonia and carbon dioxide, which are independent of urease and ni  <cit> . a recent study reported the identification of ni in crystal structure of 3-hydroxyanthranilic acid  <dig> -dioxygenase from s. cerevisiae, implying a possible presence of novel ni-binding proteins in eukaryotes  <cit> . however, a crystal structure of this protein in the bacterium ralstonia metallidurans showed that it binds iron instead of ni  <cit> , implying that this protein is not a strictly ni-dependent protein. considering that most prokaryotic ni-dependent enzymes except urease are used in anaerobic metabolism and most eukaryotes require oxygen, it is possible that the use of oxygen led to the loss of ni-dependent pathways in many eukaryotes, such that only urease was preserved and only in certain lower eukaryotes and plants. similarly, only three bacteria-type b12-dependent proteins were found in eukaryotes and 90% b12-utilizing organisms possess only single copies of meth and mcm. these b12-dependent enzymes were lost in all land plants and almost all unicellular eukaryotes including fungi, but still remain in green algae, stramenopiles and all animals with the exception of insects. however, alternative pathways, such as methionine synthesis from homocysteine by b12-independent mete, have evolved in various organisms  <cit> . it should be noted that although insects and fungi appeared to have lost all known b12-dependent enzymes, additional co-binding proteins have been characterized in some of these organisms. for example, certain insects  encode a co-binding class ii alpha-mannosidase  <cit>  and s. cerevisiae has a co-binding methionine aminopeptidase  <cit>  although both proteins are activated by other metals in other organisms  <cit> . therefore, a possibility that non-strictly specific or currently unknown ni/co-binding proteins or ni/co-containing compounds are present in organisms analyzed in this study cannot be excluded.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we report a comprehensive analysis of ni and co utilization in prokaryotes and eukaryotes by analyzing occurrence of transporters and metal-dependent enzymes. we found that occurrence of ni/co transporters mostly corresponds to that of known ni/co-dependent proteins. a new b12-dependent protein family was predicted in bacteria. most prokaryotes, including extracellular symbionts, possess the ni/co utilization trait, with the exception of other host-associated organisms . in eukaryotes, the use of the two elements is much more restricted, with regard to the organisms that use ni/co, the number of ni transporters and the number of ni/b12-dependent protein families. again, parasitic lifestyle appears to result in the loss of both utilization traits in eukaryotes.

