BACKGROUND
dolphins of the genus lagenorhynchus are distributed in temperate to cool waters in the north pacific, north atlantic, and southern oceans  <cit>  . a short rostrum, relatively small, stout bodies, and flanks with horizontal flares of various contrasting patterns characterize all members of the genus. within this group there is considerable variation in social structure and habitat, from coastal, shallow water peale's dolphin  that occurs in small groups within the strait of magellan and nearby fijords, to the meso-pelagic dusky dolphin  that aggregates in groups of thousands along the continental shelves of new zealand, south africa, and south america.

historically, color patterns, number of teeth, and the ratio of rostrum to brain case length were used as diagnostic characters to define dolphin genera, including the genus lagenorhynchus  <cit> . however, these characters are now known to vary with sex and age within species  <cit> . it is not surprising, therefore, that the classification of dolphin groups based on these characters proved particularly problematic for early taxonomists. for lagenorhynchus, the ubiquitous use of these morphological characters resulted at one time or another in specimens being assigned  to at least  <dig> different genera . recently, molecular systematic studies of mitochondrial cytochrome b  and control region  sequences were employed to address the taxonomic ambiguities within the family delphinidae. the results of these studies, based on a single representative from each species, suggested a polyphyletic lagenorhynchus, leaving many other relationships weakly supported and the overall taxonomic status of the group unresolved  <cit> . for example, the cyt b cladogram of leduc et al.  <cit>  indicated strong support for a monophyletic subfamily lissodelphininae that contained l. obliquidens, l. obscurus, l. australis, l. cruciger, and the genera cephalorhynchus and lissodelphis but excluded the north atlantic l. albirostris and l. acutus. a more recent bayesian analysis of cyt b sequences by may-collado and agnarsson  <cit>  supported the paraphyly of the genus lagenorhynchus as suggested by leduc et al.  <cit> , but increased taxonomic sampling  provided increased phylogenetic resolution within the lissodelphininae. nevertheless, as with leduc et al.  <cit> , some of the relationships among species of lagenorhynchus and cephalorhynchus within the lissodelphininae remained unresolved.

because of its rapid rate of coalescence and lack of recombination, mitochondrial dna has been the molecule of choice for detailed studies of intra- and inter-specific evolution. however, the mitochondrial genome is a single, maternally inherited locus, and thus provides a perspective based on a single gene tree of female lineages. it is possible that the lack of phylogenetic resolution in leduc et al.'s  <cit>  study was caused by limitations of a single, mitochondrial locus and/or the result of rapid divergence among taxa. however, distinguishing between alternative phylogenetic hypotheses requires the addition of more data from multiple loci and a detailed evaluation of the utility of various data partitions to resolve relationships within this group. to date, no further molecular systematic studies have attempted to address these issues.

in this paper we use four molecular markers  that vary in overall rates of evolution to diagnose relationships among species of dolphin in the genus lagenorhynchus and among genera within the subfamily lissodelphininae  <cit> . to increase taxonomic representation, we include  <dig> individuals representing  <dig> species of the lissodelphininae and north atlantic lagenorhynchus. in addition, we utilize a posteriori measures to quantify the interaction among data partitions in a simultaneous analysis, and to characterize the effects of removing sources of conflict on phylogenetic resolution under the optimality criterion of parsimony and with the bayesian method. several studies have presented methods to quantify the interaction of characters in simultaneous analyses  <cit> . these measures are either:  topological indices that measure the change in either tree length or structure   <cit> , and  measures of change in the amount of support at a particular node  <cit> . the reliability of these measures and their philosophical foundation has been questioned. in a recent review, grant and kluge  advocated that a posteriori analyses of character partitions are heuristic only when "based on the results of the total-evidence analysis," and that there is "a great potential for the development of heuristic methods of a posteriori analysis of sets of characters." in this study, we attempt to heuristically examine with statistical analyses the contributions and interactions of data partitions in the resolution of relationships within the family delphinidae. our study is the first to use both nuclear and mitochondrial loci for the diagnosis of relationships within the family delphinidae, and thus provides a unique opportunity to explore the utility of multiple process partitions in addressing the evolutionary history of this group.

RESULTS
simultaneous analysis and relationships within the delphinidae
the simultaneous analysis of two nuclear and two mitochondrial genes  produced four equally parsimonious trees that differed only in their level of intra-specific resolution . fourteen of the  <dig> species-level clades had bootstrap values >99% and high decay indices  . our results provide unambiguous support for the monophyly of the subfamily lissodelphininae  and the polyphyly of the genus lagenorhynchus , first suggested by leduc et al.  <cit>  and may-callado and agnarsson  <cit> . several relationships previously ambiguous in leduc et al.  <cit>  were well-resolved in the simultaneous analysis  and included:  monophyly of l. albirostris, l. acutus and stenella/tursiops/delphinus clades ;  increased support for the sister taxon relationship of l. obscurus and l. obliquidens ; and  the monophyly l. cruciger and l. australis . overall, the simultaneous parsimony analysis either resolved or improved resolution for  <dig> nodes . the bayesian analysis produced a topology very similar to that of the parsimony analysis but with increased support at nodes that had low bootstrap values in the simultaneous parsimony analysis . most notably, bayesian analysis supported the monophyly of the cephalorhynchus , and resolved ambiguities in previous studies  <cit>  regarding the relationship of l. australis/l. cruciger to other members of the genus lagenorhynchus. there were some topological differences between the parsimony and bayesian trees, but these were restricted to clades outside the lissodelphininae where taxonomic sampling was relatively poor .

separate analysis of data partitions produced topologies with variation in the degree of resolution . for example, the cyt b partition produced a topology most similar to those of the simultaneous analysis, with 100% consensus among all inter-specific clades. overall, the mitochondrial partitions had a greater number of phylogenetically informative characters and produced fewer most parsimonious trees than nuclear dna data. nevertheless, in all cases the simultaneous analysis cladogram provided considerably greater resolution than any of the independent analyses. in several cases, clades supported by the simultaneous analysis were also recovered in one or more of the independent analyses, with the exception of the control region – many of the relationships in this tree were not recovered in other analyses.

character dynamics: phylogenetic utility
each of the four process partitions contributed in some degree to the resolution of the simultaneous analysis tree . on a node-by-node basis, the amount of localized topological support varied by dataset and among regions of the simultaneous analysis tree. for example, partitioned bremer support values for cyt b were consistently positive at all nodes, while values for the control region were positive at the tips of the tree but negative at the base . longer branches had statistically more ci =  <dig> characters than shorter branches in the tree , and in all data partitions there was a significant, positive relationship between the frequency of ci =  <dig> characters and branch length  . the strength of this relationship varied among data partitions, with cyt b having the steepest positive relationship between branch length and ci =  <dig> characters . interestingly the dloop, although generally considered to evolve at a faster rate than cyt b, had fewer ci =  <dig> characters overall, and a slope more similar to that of actin . cyt b consistently provided the largest proportion of ci =  <dig> characters at each node . despite the greater frequency and wider distribution of highly consistent characters in cyt b, the relative proportion of support contributed by each data partition did not differ statistically among categories of branch length , although actin tended to contribute more to resolution along longer branches . put another way, each data partition consistently contributed the same relative proportion of the total number of ci =  <dig> characters among branch length categories, but the absolute number of these characters differed among partitions. our results further suggest that 3rd position transitions occurred more frequently and provided more topological support than other classes of substitution .

branches are between nodes as numbered in figure  <dig>  'ci1' is the frequency of the highly consistent characters  on a branch in the simultaneous analysis tree. a '-' represents a node not recovered in the independent analyses. 'hs' = hidden synapomorphy index  <cit>  and 'pb' = partition bremer support.

character dynamics: data interaction
spearman's correlation analysis revealed a significantly positive relationship between rag <dig> and the other data partitions  but failed to find evidence for interaction between cyt b, actin, and control region partitions. however, the distribution of positive and negative partitioned bremer support values within the simultaneous analysis topology suggested localized character conflict among data partitions . the greatest amount of dispersion in partitioned bremer support was between the control region and other data partitions at the shortest nodes in the simultaneous analysis tree , where the partitioned bremer support for the control region were consistently negative . in addition, the hidden synapomorphy values for the control region were significantly negative , with a frequent displacement of synapomorphies with the addition of data in the simultaneous analysis . the implications of these findings are two-fold:  the control region was responsible for the majority of data conflict, and  the relatively weak support for some nodes was a result of this conflict. in contrast, cyt b did not demonstrate a significant pattern of gain or loss of synapomorphies  due to simultaneous analysis. in fact, cyt b contributed an additional synapomorphy to  <dig> different nodes following simultaneous analysis . the number of synapomorphies contributed by the nuclear dna data partitions did not change between independent and simultaneous analyses , which indicated they were not a source of character conflict.

character conflict exploration
we explored further the effects of character conflict on the topology by excluding the control region and performing a parsimony and bayesian analysis with the same parameters as the simultaneous analysis. the topologies from the truncated parsimony and bayesian analyses were markedly different from each other and from the simultaneous analysis cladogram, and failed in both cases to recover the monophyly of key genera of the lissodelphininae . in particular, neither analysis produced a monophyletic cephalorhynchus, which has been well supported in other phylogenetic studies  <cit> . these results indicated that the control region data contributed to the overall resolution of the simultaneous analysis tree, particularly within the lissodelphininae, despite evidence for character conflict, and that this was true whether or not the data were analyzed with parsimony or bayeisan methods. in addition, the removal of the control region data did not produce a monophyletic lagenorhynchus, which indicated character conflict alone was not responsible for the polyphyly of this genus.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
lissodelphininae and lagenorhynchus systematics
overall, our study demonstrates that the simultaneous analysis of nuclear and mitochondrial process partitions, coupled with better taxonomic sampling, provided greater phylogenetic resolution than cyt b alone  <cit> . the simultaneous parsimony and bayesian analyses increased measures of support for  <dig> nodes, and resolved relationships among  <dig> clades that were previously ambiguous in the analysis of leduc et al.  <cit>  . furthermore, our study recovered a monophyletic cephalorhynchus, and increased posterior probabilities for  <dig> nodes  compared to the bayesian tree of may-callado and agnarsson  <cit> . these results are consistent with other studies that suggest phylogenetic analysis based on mitochondrial data alone can be misleading, and that single gene trees are not always accurate representations of species trees. even in cases where there was apparent conflict among characters, our data suggest synergistic interaction in the simultaneous analysis, and that a priori exclusion of data because of potential conflict may inhibit the recovery of robust phylogenetic hypotheses. for example, the removal of the control region, the putative source of character conflict, produced spurious results with inconsistencies among and within topologies from parsimony and bayesian analyses , and these inconsistencies were not trivial. in both the parsimony and bayesian analysis without the control region, well-supported monophyletic groups were rendered poly- or para-phyletic , and deeper-level relationships were extensively altered . the reliability of bayesian posterior probabilities as a measure of node support has been recently called into question.  <cit> . therefore the increased nodal support derived from bayesian analyses should be interpreted in light of this controversy, and although bootstrap values and posterior probabilities are not directly comparable, a conservative approach might be to consider them as lower and upper bounds of node reliability  <cit> . nevertheless, our results support previous studies that suggest data sets interact when analyzed simultaneously  <cit> , and that properties of data emerge that are not detectable when partitions are analyzed separately  <cit> .

character dynamics
several methods have been proposed to quantify congruence and conflict in simultaneous analyses  <cit> . although these measures are useful descriptors of inconsistency among analyses, many do not provide a quantitative measure with which to compare trees derived from independent data partitions. it has been argued  that an a posteriori analysis of various character partitions against a simultaneous analysis tree is part of a heuristic approach for evaluating the utility of different partitions to resolve relationships among lineages that potentially differ in evolutionary rates and/or overall level of divergence. in this study, we have attempted through a suite of statistical tests  to quantitate a posteriori the degree of interaction and phylogenetic utility of data partitions in combined analyses. in many of these tests we chose to use a subset of parsimony informative characters that lacked homoplasy  . the logic behind this approach is that in any given topology those characters with a ci of  <dig> are less likely to be displaced from a node with the addition of future data  than less consistent characters, and thus represent a conservative class of characters by which to evaluate the utility of data partitions. we acknowledge that even grossly erroneous trees can contain some characters with a ci of  <dig>  and all tree topologies are subject to change with the addition of data – this is true of any working hypothesis. however, we argue that the a posteriori evaluation of the behavior of ci =  <dig> characters provides one means to quantitatively evaluate the nature of data interaction and utility, and thus identify potential sources of character incompatibility.

ci <dig> = characters with consistency index of  <dig> ; hs = hidden synapomorphy index; pbs = partitioned bremer support.

for example, our results indicate there is a significant, positive relationship between ci =  <dig> characters and branch length for cyt b, dloop, and actin , which is not unexpected given that longer branches are generally expected to have greater numbers of character changes than shorter branches. we also expected that the dloop, all things being equal, would have greater number of ci =  <dig> characters than cyt b or actin since the dloop evolves more rapidly than other mitochondrial and nuclear dna regions in cetaceans . in contrast, we observe that both the frequency of ci =  <dig> characters and the strength of the ci =  <dig> frequency/branch length relationship is greater in cyt b than the dloop and actin partitions . one interpretation of these results is that the evolution of the dloop is so rapid that the phylogenetic information is reduced by multiple substitutions. however, if this were the case, we would expect deterioration of phylogenetic signal with increased branch length – we did not observe this pattern. instead, we suggest an alternative interpretation – that these results indicate something about the phylogenetic utility and/or the degree of conflict of the dloop with other characters in combined analysis. for example, we have evidence that the dloop is a source of character conflict, and the deviation of the expected results from the linear regression analysis may be an additional indicator of this conflict. yet, despite this conflict, the significantly positive relationships between branch lengths and ci =  <dig> characters suggest that all data partitions  contribute to tree resolution, even in the presence of character conflict. therefore, this method is a general indicator of the relative ability of each data partition to resolve relationships among otu's with varying degrees of evolutionary divergence, and provides an example of the emergent properties of characters in combined analysis.

our statistical tests suggest that the frequency and distribution of ci =  <dig> characters was not uniform for any data partition, suggesting that the rate of evolution was not constant among lineages . this is not surprising given that heterotachy and covariation are common phenomena in molecular data. however, we were interested to find that, although the frequency of ci =  <dig> characters varied along lineages, the relative proportion of ci =  <dig> characters contributed by each data partition was not statistically different . our interpretation of this finding is that the short branches at the base of the lissodelphininae were the result of an actual acceleration in rate of evolution along these lineages and not an artefact of the pattern of evolution of any given data partition. in this regard, we suggest this, or similar, statistical tests might be useful in identifying regions in a tree that represent rapid divergence, which are often difficult to resolve with phylogenetic analysis due to the relatively fewer number of informative characters along very short branches. the implications of these results are two-fold. first, the consistent lack of uniformity among data partitions in the number of highly consistent characters provides strong evidence for shifts in the rate of evolution of delphinid lineages since they shared a common ancestor with the phocoenidae approximately  <dig> million years ago. second, the rapid reduction in the number of highly consistent characters in the middle of the simultaneous analysis tree, and the corresponding short branch lengths and large number of lineages indicates that a shift in diversification rate occurred most recently at the base of the subfamily lissodelphininae . given that  <dig> of the  <dig> species in this monophyletic subfamily are found only in the southern hemisphere, this may represent a rapid anti-tropical divergence of lineages south of the equator following equatorial transgression from the north.

taxonomic implications
our results support the monophyly of the lissodelphininae , and therefore concur with le duc et al.  <cit>  and may-callado and agnarsson  <cit>  that the genus lagenorhynchus is polyphyletic. le duc et al.  <cit>  proposed that the generic name lagenorhynchus remain with l. albirostris, the type specimen of the genus  <cit> , and that the genus leucopleurus  <cit>  should be resurrected for l. acutus according to taxonomic precedence. in contrast to le duc et al.  <cit> , the parsimony and bayesian analyses in this study recovered the monophyly of l. acutus and l. albirostris , and supports a close relationship of these species with the delphinus/stenella/tursiops clade, although the bayesian and parsimony analysis did not agree on the relationships among these clades . we therefore propose that both l. acutus and l. albirostris retain their current generic designation until further analyses are performed with better taxonomic sampling outside of the lissodelphininae.

second, the addition of nuclear and mitochondrial process partitions provided strong support for the paraphyly of lagenorhynchus within the subfamily lissodelphininae . in addition, both parsimony and bayesian analyses support the sister-group relationship of l. obliquidens and l. obscurus and the monophyly of the cepharlorhynchus, which has been proposed by other molecular phylogenetic studies  <cit> . this study provides improved phylogenetic resolution for other groups including the monophyly l. cruciger and l. australis, and the placement of this clade within the lissodelphininae . our evidence concurs with the results of le duc et al.  <cit>  that l. cruciger/l. australis are monophyletic and should be placed into a separate genus, sagmatius, first described from sagmatius amblodon  <cit>  and later synonymized with l. australis  <cit> . the monophyletic l. obliquidens and l. obscurus are more problematic and will require the description of a new genus.

molecular data have helped to resolve some of the problems associated with dolphin taxonomy, but it is apparent that issues related to variation in the rate of evolution within the family continue to make the resolution of some relationships problematic. the next step in this study would be to combine morphology and dna sequence characters in a simultaneous analysis. for example, fraser and purves  <cit>  found distinct differences among genera of dolphins based on a suite of characters in the sinuses related to the structure and function hearing. a re-evaluation of these characters and additional molecular loci for all members of the delphinidae might provide resolution of evolutionary relationships for problematic taxa.

