BACKGROUND
trypanosoma cruzi is the causative agent of chagas’ disease a serious ailment that affects millions of people in latin america, against which there is no prevention, vaccine or effective chemotherapeutic agent  <cit> .

t. cruzi has a complex life cycle characterized by several developmental forms present in vertebrate and invertebrate hosts. replicative epimastigote and amastigote forms in arthropod and mammal hosts, respectively, alternate with the infective and non-proliferative metacyclic trypomastigotes in the insect vector and bloodstream trypomastigotes in the infected mammal  <cit> . the interchange between functionally and morphologically distinct forms implies tight control of gene expression during the life cycle of the parasite  <cit> . understanding this comprehensive gene reprogramming, as well as their associated regulatory mechanisms, could contribute greatly to the control of chagas’ disease.

trypanosomatids probably belong to the earliest diverging branches of the eukaryotic lineage  <cit>  and are characterized by their unique set of molecular characteristics. in t. cruzi, most genes are transcribed by rna polymerase ii which generates polycistronic transcripts in a run-through fashion. although transcription starts at defined locations, no sequence signals defining a classical eukaryotic promoter have been found at those sites  <cit> . in contrast to what occurs in bacterial operons, genes present in the same cistron are not functionally related and mature mrna is obtained by trans-splicing and polyadenylation  <cit> . there is little evidence of transcriptional regulation for protein coding genes  <cit> , however individual genes belonging to a common polycistronic unit show different expression patterns. in t. cruzi this was confirmed using microarrays  <cit> . therefore, the control of gene expression has been thought to occur predominantly by posttranscriptional mechanisms  <cit> . in addition to regulation of mrna turnover and protein degradation, early studies have recognized translation as an important regulatory step  <cit> . single gene analyses have further confirmed this hypothesis  <cit> , thus genome-wide translation studies are needed.

next-generation sequencing  technologies have permitted not only the accurate determination of mrna steady state levels but also the genome-wide analysis of processes such as transcription initiation, mrna maturation, degradation and more recently translation. specifically, deep sequencing of ribosome protected mrna fragments, ribosome profiling, has provided a highly accurate measurement of the translation process in vivo  <cit> , for a review see ingolia  <dig>  <cit> . although ngs derived data for the related trypanosomatid parasite trypanosoma brucei are accumulating  <cit> , key differences in the biology and pathogenesis with t. cruzi clearly drive forward carrying out genome-wide approaches in this parasite. as reviewed in kramer  <dig>  <cit> , remarkable differences include different life cycles , vector transmission , targeted host tissues , and immune evasion system , and even molecular processes .

in an effort to contribute to understand gene expression regulation processes occurring during the differentiation from the non-infective epimastigote  to the infective metacyclic trypomastigote forms  we comprehensively monitored the steady state transcript abundances and translation profiles using rna-seq and ribosome profiling. our results strongly support previous indications of genome-wide constitutive transcription and uncover general pre mrna maturation. in addition we reveal translation control as a key mechanism generating the gene expression changes that occur in t. cruzi differentiation.

RESULTS
mrna steady state levels support constitutive transcription and posttranscriptional regulation both in t. cruzi epimastigotes and metacyclic trypomastigotes
ribosome profiling approaches require transcriptome determination in order to specifically estimate translational regulation. so, using rna-seq we measured the steady state transcriptomes for both the epimastigote and metacyclic trypomastigote life cycle stages of trypanosoma cruzi. the general procedure is shown in the additional file  <dig>  in brief, we sequenced biological triplicates of polyadenylated rna from t. cruzi epimastigotes and in vitro differentiated metacyclic trypomastigotes by standard protocols in the solid platform. in parallel, ribosome footprints, obtained in triplicates by digestion of polysomal fractions that were previously separated through sucrose cushions, were sequenced in the same platform for both stages. after quality filtering, reads from both were mapped to the t. cruzi reference genome and read counts per gene were calculated. normalization was performed to account for sequencing depth and transcript length, resulting in an expression estimate for each gene .

most of the  <dig> annotated transcripts are detected in the mrna fractions for the e  and mt  stages , including a high number of them  common to both transcriptomes . these findings are in agreement with the hypothesis of constitutive transcription  <cit> . in addition, considering that the sequenced rna sample is polyadenylated, these results also suggest constitutive rna maturation. nonetheless, one quarter  of the transcripts detected showed at least a two-fold change in expression levels  between the two developmental stages , supporting that posttranscriptional regulation is a determining factor to achieve the differential mrna steady state levels.figure  <dig> mrna levels are regulated both in epimastigote  and metacyclic trypomastiogote  life cycle stages.  venn diagram indicating, at each stage, the number of detected genes . the intersection is colored.  scatter plot of the estimated expression levels as nrpk for both stages. differentially expressed genes are shown in red .  heat map showing the variation of expression for the genes showing differences at the mrna level at each stage.



metacyclic trypomastigotes translate fewer proteins than epimastigotes
to proceed to perform translation studies, genome-wide distribution of ribosome footprints  mapping was assessed. in contrast to transcriptome derived reads, rfps aligned mainly to annotated cds segments while marginally to inter cds regions . in addition, only a few genes lacking detectable transcripts were detected in the rfp fraction . furthermore, as ribosome translocation during translation should generate reads which are separated by three nucleotides, a periodicity of the mapping coordinate was expected for rfps  <cit> . although periodicity was marginal in mt translatome, e rfps mapped more frequently to the first codon position with the second codon position being the less represented  <cit>  . as expected, this three-nucleotide periodicity was not observed for the transcriptome data. similar results for these quality control approaches were obtained by different authors  <cit> . altogether, these observations support that rfps reads are originated from the translating mrna population.

a broad picture of translation behavior at e and mt life cycle stages is shown in figure  <dig>  although near 95% of the transcripts are common to e and mt , only 67% of translated transcripts are common to both stages according to the same detection criteria used for the transcriptome data . remarkably, this difference is explained by the absence of  <dig> genes in mt translatomes , with 80% of them having a repression fold change higher than  <dig> . this finding reveals translation repression as a major regulatory mechanism in the infective form that could explain, at least partially, the proteome reduction previously reported for this stage  <cit> . approximately a thousand genes belonging to the later category meet the criteria of fc <  <dig>  and p-value <  <dig> . this indicates that 10% of the annotated genes are significantly downregulated to levels that fall below our detection threshold at the translational level. in addition, the differentially translated genes between e and mt show a wider dispersion of the nrpk values than the one observed for the transcriptome , reinforcing the relevance of translation control on gene expression regulation. it’s worth noting that the e to mt fold changes are higher in the translatome than in the transcriptome, resulting in a wider range of protein expression control . interestingly, transcripts from gene families coding major metacyclic surface markers and proteins involved in the infection process account for almost half of the  <dig> genes detected only in the polysomes of the infective form . additional file  <dig> summarizes percentage changes corresponding to mrna abundance and translation regulation. table  <dig> shows the most up and downregulated protein coding genes  in the translatome fraction and additional file  <dig> shows all the differentially regulated genes at the transcriptome and translatome levels.figure  <dig> translation is regulated in epimastigotes  and metacyclic trypomastigotes .  venn diagram indicating, at each stage, the number of detected genes . the intersection is colored.  scatter plot of the estimated translated levels as nrpk for both stages. differentially expressed genes are shown in red .  heat map showing the variation of expression for the genes showing differences at the translation level at each stage.
top  <dig> regulated protein coding genes in the rfp fraction



upregulated

annotation
feature id
log2fc
fdr

downregulated

annotation
feature id
log2fc
fdr
na: genes with zero counts in the mt stage.



in summary, the regulation of translation greatly contributes to the expression differences between the metacyclic trypomastigote and epimastigote.

translatome expression values are a better proxy of protein levels than the transcriptome ones
though in both e and mt life cycle stages the transcriptome and the translatome are well correlated , we considered that translatome data, which represent the levels of translating rnas, should be a better approximation of protein levels than transcriptomic data. therefore, we decided to compare our translatome derived expression estimates to the available ones for quantitative proteomics in t. cruzi  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the correlation of the proteome to the transcriptome and the translatome for the e and mt stages. it can be clearly observed that translatome data are better correlated to protein expression than transcriptome levels. this is especially true for the epimastigote stage where the correlation coefficient between translatome and proteome goes up from a correlation coefficient of  <dig>  for the transcriptome to  <dig>  for the translatome. while an increase of the correlation for the latter is also observed in metacyclic trypomastigotes, it is not as significant . no bias in the correlations was observed for the subset of the genes with proteome available data when comparing their transcriptome and translatome values .figure  <dig> translatome is better correlated with the proteome than the transcriptome. inter sample correlations.  pearson correlation coefficients for the different samples are shown. upper values correspond to the ones observed in the e stage experiments. lower values are as before for the mt stage.  log-log scatter plots of the expression estimates in the e and mt stages. upper panel: left: correlation of the proteome to the transcriptome in the e stage. right: correlation of the proteome to the translatome in the e stage. au: arbitrary units. lower panel: same as above for the mt stage.



in summary, for the two life cycle stages analyzed, the translatome data are better correlated to proteomic data, reflecting the relevance of translational gene regulation and its contribution to the control of gene expression regulation during trypanosome development.

translation efficiency varies among the different genes and upon life cycle stages
in an effort to determine the contribution of the steady state transcript levels and the extent of their translation upon differentiation, we calculated the mt relative to e expression levels for each gene both in the transcriptome and the translatome. we found that a high number of cds exhibit non proportional changes when a fc >  <dig>  p-value <  <dig>  is considered . translation efficiency  is defined as the number of footprints per transcript and it gives an idea of the ribosome occupancy per messenger molecule. as previously reported for other organisms including t. brucei  <cit> , t. cruzi te is highly variable for the different mrnas in both life stages , ranging from values close to  <dig> to values of  <dig>  we found that numerous genes change their te upon differentiation. using a two-fold change as a determination of differential expression,  <dig> genes are regulated exclusively at the level of translation upon differentiation . these results further support the importance of translation in the regulation of stage-specific gene expression.figure  <dig> translation efficiency  varies between the epimastigote  and metacyclic trypomastigote  t. cruzi stages. upper panel:
 scatter plot of the fold change  in the translatome vs the transcriptome.  scatter plot of the te  in the mt vs the e stage for genes detected in all samples. genes exhibiting non proportional changes  are colored. lower panel:  te histograms for epimastigotes  and metacyclic trypomastigotes . median efficiency values are  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively.



in the mt stage, genes coding for members of the trans-sialidase  superfamily are the most overrepresented among the ones with an efficiency fc  higher than  <dig> . actually, when the genes with the 1% highest te in this stage  were analyzed for overrepresentation of gene ontology terms , only this family showed statistically significant values . they are also the second most significant among the ones that increase their translation  in the mt stage . indeed, the te of this family in the mt stage is significantly higher than in the e stage . as can be observed in figure 6b, the fold change is also positive for the mrnas of many ts family members. furthermore, while the translation levels of the ts family is significantly lower in the e stage when compared to the rest of the genes, in the mt stage the behavior is reversed explaining the high difference in te between the stages . the other group of genes that is overrepresented among the ones which only increase their translation levels encode for proteases . manual inspection of the involved genes reveals that they mainly encode isoforms of the gp <dig> surface metalloproteases that have been recognized as important for host-cell infection by trypomastigotes  <cit> . go analysis of the genes that have both an increased translation and mrna steady state level in the mt stage, again show enrichment in ts family members . several specific members of this superfamily have been shown to have key functions during host invasion. one of these well studied proteins is the adhesion molecule gp <dig>  <cit> . our data show that members of this family increases an average of  <dig> fold its translational efficiency after differentiation to the mt stage  in accordance with previous reports uncovering polysomal mobilization as a control step of its expression  <cit> . other members shown to be relevant for parasite survival upon infection , are also overexpressed in mt  <cit> . interestingly, other genes coding for proteins related to specific cellular processes that have been previously recognized as upregulated during transition to the mt stage at the proteomic level   <cit>  are upregulated in the translatome according to our go term enrichment analysis . this further supports the reliability of our approach and the close relationship observed between the translatome and the proteome.figure  <dig> trans-sialidase  family genes increase their te upon differentiation. expression profiles for the ts genes in t. cruzi epimastigotes  and metacyclic trypomastigotes  are shown.  box plots of the ts family translational efficiency in e and mt. statistically significant differences among populations are indicated by asterisks .  scatter plot of the fold change  in the translatome vs the transcriptome. ts genes are shown in red.



on the other hand, in the mt stage, the genes coding for ribosomal proteins  are the most overrepresented among the ones with an efficiency fc  lower than  <dig>   in accordance with previous proteomic observations  <cit> . our data show that this downregulation is mainly derived from the low translation levels of the rp genes in the mt compared to the e stage, since similar levels of steady state mrna are found in both stages . furthermore, in the mt stage the te of this group of genes is significantly lower than the te for all the genes .we also found that the gene encoding for rna polymerase i is downregulated in the mt stage where no rfps where detected , suggesting a possible reduction of ribosomal rna synthesis consistent with the downregulation of ribosomal protein production. accordingly, go analysis on the downregulated genes in the mt translatome, shows that gene families related to protein synthesis are significantly enriched . interestingly, genes coding for enzymes involved in the synthesis of hypusine are also downregulated in mt translatome . this amino acid, which is found in all eukaryotes, is essential for the function of the eif5a translation factor where it is post translationally synthesized from a lysine residue  <cit> . the eif5a factor has been characterized in other models and, nowadays, it is recognized as a regulator of translation elongation involved in cell cycle progression  <cit> . indeed, previous work in t. cruzi suggested that the expression levels and post translational modifications of this translation factor controls the cell proliferation rates and protein synthesis  <cit> . overexpression of the factor in epimastigotes increases proliferation while in the mt stage the protein levels show a decrease  <cit> . the eif5a genes are significantly downregulated in the the mt stage translatome  which correlates with the observed downregulation of the hypusine addition in the non-replicative stage . another cell cycle related protein downregulated in the mt translatome stage is the cyclin cyc <dig>  . all these findings are in agreement with the quiescent characteristic of this stage and the downregulation of the translated proteins . further inspection of the identity of the stage specific regulated genes may yield more insights on the biology of the studied process. for example, we noticed the downregulation in the mt of the t. cruzi homolog of the anti-silencing function protein  . this protein acts as a nucleosome assembly factor and as such would not be necessary in the non replicative infective stage  <cit> .figure  <dig> ribosomal proteins  genes decrease their te upon differentiation. expression profiles for the rp genes are shown in t. cruzi epimastigotes  and metacyclic trypomastigotes . upper panel:  bar plot of the e stage transcriptome and translatome levels for the rp and for all t. cruzi genes. each bar marks the population median while the whiskers represent the interquartile range.  bar plot of the translation efficiency  for the rp and for all t. cruzi genes. statistically significant differences among populations are indicated by asterisks . lower panel:  and  are the same type of bar plots as a and b respectively, but for the mt stage. note the decrease in translation efficiency of rp  as a result of a major decrease in rp translation . y-axis scales in figures a and c are different.



overall, these results highlight the relevance of translation efficiency allowing the rapid changes in gene expression necessary for differentiation.

CONCLUSIONS
trypanosoma cruzi has enigmatic gene expression control mechanisms that new in-masse approaches are beginning to unravel  <cit> . where and how the final protein content is regulated is a matter of intense research. it is generally accepted that in the kinetoplastids, regulation is mainly posttranscriptional  <cit> , being stability of mrna and its translatability key steps and target of largely unknown regulation pathways. in the present manuscript, we aimed to characterize at a genome-wide level the steady state transcript levels and the extent of protein translation regulation using rna-seq and ribosome footprinting in two t. cruzi life cycle stages, i.e. epimastigotes and metacyclic trypomastigotes. these two forms occur in the insect vector and correspond to the replicative, thus proliferating form, and the non-replicative and infective form, respectively.

although a microarray based relative transcriptome is available for the comparative analysis of expression among the four t. cruzi life cycle stages  <cit> , no rna-seq data from t. cruzi have been reported so far. we found that both the e and mt stages transcribe most of the genes encoded in the t. cruzi genome , being almost all common to both stages  . our results not only support the accepted view of constitutive transcription but also show the existence of global mrna maturation as implied by the detection of almost all the transcripts as poly+ mrna. however, 30% of the genes show significant differences in the mrna steady state levels that, in the context of absence of transcriptional initiation control, can only be accounted by differential mrna stability. the extensive transcript detection implies that mrna decay may not be sufficient to achieve precise protein levels pointing out the need of additional regulatory mechanisms.

to investigate the degree of protein synthesis regulation in this parasite we performed ribosome profiling , an approach pioneered by the group of weissman, that has been used very recently to improve the estimation of genome-wide protein synthesis in several eukaryotes . in our hands, this technique allowed to determine protein synthesis levels in a proportion of genes that is three times greater than any other proteomic effort published in t.cruzi  <cit> . interestingly, much more genes encoded in the t. cruzi genome are translated in the epimastigote  than in the metacyclic trypomastigote  stage . the translatome difference between the two life cycle stages is more pronounced than the one observed for the steady state levels of transcripts . the small translatome observed in the mt stage can be mainly explained by specific inhibition of translation of a significant percentage of mrnas but reduction of assembled ribosomes could also be a contributing factor.

recent quantitative proteomics in t. brucei has shown that the transcriptome and the proteome positively correlate  <cit> . our data are in good accordance with this assertion, but protein translation rates derived from ribosome footprints correlate much better with the parasite proteome than transcriptome . when fold change analysis  is studied, a wider spectrum of values for the translatome than the transcriptome is observed . this suggests that the translation process has broader capabilities for regulation than modification of mrna steady state levels in this parasite. although additional posttranslational regulatory steps are certainly operating both in e and mt stages, the low correlation of translatome vs proteome observed in mts , suggests that such processes may be particularly active in this life cycle stage. for instance, regulation of the protein stabilization/degradation or ribosomal stalling during translation , could explain the lower correlation observed. these issues should be specifically addressed in further studies. the broader regulation that can be achieved with the observed translational regulation may be especially appropriate to generate rapid responses to the changing environment, from the vector’s gut to the mammalian host, affecting the infective mt stage.

in agreement with the recently described data for the closely related parasite t. brucei  <cit> , in the present study we have observed large differences in translation efficiency among transcripts in the same life cycle stage and between the same transcript in the two life cycle stages . thus, the regulation of translation efficiency constitutes a means to rapidly adjust the yield of specific protein products from the available mrna steady state levels. we have focused on the conspicuous changes of translation efficiency of members of the trans-sialidases family . this large gene family of virulence factors, responsible for transferring sialyl residues from the host, are membrane proteins with an active role in infectivity and therefore, a high number of the family members are expressed in the mt stage  <cit> . on the other hand, the genes coding for ribosomal proteins also caught our attention because of the striking low te exhibited in the mt stage . this family of proteins has been comprehensively studied in t. cruzi using data mining and mass spectrometry of purified epimastigote ribosomes  <cit> . this finding is consistent with the reduction in ribosome protein content previously reported for this non-replicative life cycle stage  <cit> . thus, these gene families which encode principal actors defining major distinctive characteristics of the mt  undergo prominent changes of te in the transition from e to mt. these results further support translational efficiency control as a key mean to achieve stage-specific gene expression regulation.

interestingly, pseudogenes are detected in the transcriptome and the translatome of both t. cruzi stages. this is unlikely to be caused by misplacement of the reads coming from the parental gene, as the observation also holds when only single match reads are considered. not only these sequences are detected but some of them are differentially purified both in the poly+ mrna and the rfp fractions of both stages . pseudogene transcription is nowadays widely accepted  <cit> , and it has been demonstrated that these transcripts can be functional, in many cases controlling the expression of their parental gene  <cit> . more intriguingly, our data also shows evidence of pseudogene transcripts in the polysomal fractions. the potential of pseudogene derived transcripts to be translated has been poorly studied in the literature so far. there are some reports in other organisms showing that the short peptides resulting from this process exist and can produce phenotypic outcomes  <cit> . the existence of pseudogene expression in trypanosomes is an interesting finding, placing the analysis of their functional role as an issue that should be addressed in further studies.

in conclusion, the data here presented, generated from the non infective epimastigote and infective metacyclic trypomastigote t. cruzi life cycle stages, provide a comprehensive picture of the mrna steady state level and their translation capability at both life cycle stages. our results not only show that the mechanisms establishing mrna steady state and translation levels are likely acting synergistically, but also point out to translation efficiency as an important intra- and inter-stage posttranscriptional regulatory program, remarkably active in the control of virulence factor expression in the insect infective forms.

