BACKGROUND
thermophilic bacteria possess diverse adaptations in order to thrive under high temperatures  <cit> . therefore, these organisms are sources of potentially useful thermostable proteins, which is promising because of the increasing biotechnological interest in highly thermostable enzymes  <cit> . besides, the genomic study of these organisms can provide insights on interesting metabolic features characteristic of these bacteria, like the ability to generate hydrogen gas as metabolic product, a promising renewable fuel. with the advent of high throughput technologies of dna sequencing, many genomes of thermophilic bacteria are being unraveled  able to grow on carbohydrate substrates with acetate l-alanine, h <dig>  and co <dig> as the main products that have been isolated from a variety of hot environments . c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus  is known to grow on co hydrogenogenically  <cit> ; c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis–formerly thermoanaerobacter tengcongensis–and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis  have been reported to oxidize co  <cit> ; however there is no mention if they produce hydrogen from co. in  <dig>  the genome of c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis was sequenced. a codh gene coos was found in the genome and ascribed to the acetogenic wood-ljungdahl pathway  <cit> . however, after this report it was noted that the genome lacks the acetyl-coa synthase gene, indispensable for this pathway, and the codh gene is clustered with ech genes, suggesting that c. subteraneus subsp. tencongensis has the capacity for hydrogenogenic carboxydotrophy  <cit> . recently, the genome of c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis has also been published  <cit> , which can contribute to the understanding of the evolution of the metabolic features in this species relative to its sibling strains. moreover, these genomes constitute helpful resources for cloning and expression of novel enzymes of biotechnological importance .

in this study, the genome of c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus was sequenced. this bacterium grows from  <dig> to 80 °c, and was isolated from a submarine thermal vent in japan, unlike the other subspecies . c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus is known to be able to grow chemolithotrophically on co, producing h <dig> and co <dig> during growth  <cit> .

the main objective of this study was to explore the differences among the three genomes by comparative analysis. the analyses were focused on inferring the physiological and evolutionary aspects of these organisms. the role of horizontal gene transfer  in shaping these three genomes was also evaluated and key metabolic genes and proteins with potential biotechnological application, such as carbon monoxide dehydrogenase, hydrogenases, proteases, glycosidases and esterases were identified.

RESULTS
phylogeny of the species
a phylogenetic tree was constructed using 16s rrna gene sequences. thermoanaerobacterales and other bacterial species were included to demonstrate the evolutionary context of c. subterraneus subspecies, and to use them as reference for comparative purposes against other gene dendrograms. the tree included available copies of 16s rrna genes of caldanaerobacter species and subspecies . the resulting 16s rrna tree is in agreement with previous information: sokolova et al.  <cit>  and subbotina et al.  <cit>  have also shown that the species later reassigned to the genus caldanaerobacter  <cit>  are very close to each other and form a clade adjacent to but distinct from the clade of thermoanaerobacter species.fig.  <dig> evolutive history of caldanaerobacter subterraneus subspecies. the 16s rrna tree was constructed using the maximum-likelihood method. alrt values greater than 70 % are shown next to the branches. the tree is drawn to scale, with branch lengths in the same units as those of the evolutionary distances used to infer the phylogenetic tree. caldanaerobacter subterraneus subspecies are in bold. other clostridiales species are in green, bacillales species in blue. r. rubrum was used as outgroup 



c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis is known to exhibit an exceptionally high level of sequence divergence among its intragenomic 16s rrna gene copies   <cit> . as demonstrated in fig.  <dig>  the c. subterraneus subspecies with available genomes exhibit multiple 16s rrna gene copies that are separated in two main clades . this clade separation most probably represents the most ancient gene duplication that occurred before the diversification of subspecies. considering clade b, c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus is closer to c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis than to c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis. this pattern is not evident in clade a due to the presence of intra-subspecies multiple 16s rrna genes that interfere with interpretation of the true phylogenetic relationships among these subspecies.

genomes overview and horizontal gene transfer detection
as expected, the average nucleotide identity  and in silico prediction of in vitro dna-dna hybridization  values for the genomes of c. subterraneus subspecies confirmed the conclusion of fardeau et al.  <cit>  about the affiliation of the c. subterraneus subspecies within the same species and once more showed the closest proximity of c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus to c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis  than to c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis .

the genomes of c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis present a similar pattern of high colinearity with the c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis genome . these data are reinforced by the results of homology score  distribution of the cdss, which shows a high number of common cdss between c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis and the other two subspecies .fig.  <dig> comparison of c. subterraneus genomes. a synteny plots demonstrating the high collinearity of the c. subterraneus genomes. c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus vs. c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis , c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis vs. c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis , and c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus vs. c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis . b histograms of h-values  for all predicted proteins of c. subterraneus subspecies. c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus vs. c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis , c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis vs. c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis , and c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus vs. c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis 



table  <dig> shows a comparison of the general features of the three c. subterraneus genomes. although these genomes all present low overall gc content , their rrnas and trnas have higher gc content , which corroborates the recognized positive correlation between the gc content of the rrna and trna and optimal growth temperatures of prokaryotes  <cit> .table  <dig> overview of c. subterraneus genomes

c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus
c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis
c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis
hypothetical proteinsa
number of horizontally transferred cdssb

apercentage of hypothetical proteins of all genome proteins is in parentheses


bdetected by gohtam. in parentheses is the percentage of horizontally transferred cdss of all cdss present in the genome



genes that putatively could have been acquired via horizontal transfer were identified in all three genomes. in c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis, most of the putative horizontally transferred genes correspond to hypothetical proteins,  <dig> of  <dig> , and  <dig> of  <dig> , respectively. c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis presents a lower proportion of hypothetical genes that could have been horizontally transferred,  <dig> of  <dig> cdss . also, some of the xenologous cdss are transposases .

codh dehydrogenase and hyf/hyc hydrogenase
carbon monoxide dehydrogenases  are enzymes that catalyze the interconversion of co and co <dig>  and they vary in their functional roles in the cell  <cit> . all three c. subterraneus subspecies examined in this study possess a coos gene encoding a codh that is upstream of a hydrogenase gene cluster, with an invariant gene order identical to that found in geobacillus thermoglucosidans strains  <cit> .

in fig.  <dig>  the coos genetic contexts of c. subterraneus subspecies and g. thermoglucosidans strains are contrasted to those from model organisms for studying carboxydotrophy, such as carboxydothermus hydrogenoformans, moorella thermoacetica, rhodospirillum rubrum , and thermococcus onnurineus . the species c. hydrogenoformans, for example, possesses five coos paralogs distributed along the genome, and their genetic contexts provide clues on the physiological roles of the codhs in this organism  <cit> . as in c. subterraneus, in r. rubrum and c. hydrogenoformans, hydrogenase genes are also clustered with a coos gene, and are identified by the prefix coo. in these organisms, it was suggested that the codh and the coo hydrogenase gene cluster includes genes encoding proteins required for proton translocation, fundamental for energy conservation  <cit> . although the hydrogenase genes of c. subterraneus have homologous counterparts in the r. rubrum and c. hydrogenoformans coo hydrogenase genes, the former ones are more similar to the hyf/hyc genes from escherichia coli, encoding the hydrogenase module of formate hydrogen lyase complexes  <cit> . a homologous hyf/hyc operon with identical genetic organization to that from c. subterraneus subspecies is also present in m. thermoacetica , where it also includes formate dehydrogenase genes and it is thought to encode a formate hydrogen lyase complex  <cit> . in the archaeon t. onnurineus, the coos gene is associated to hyf-hyc homologs , which are fundamental for carboxydotrophic hydrogenogenesis  <cit> . interestingly, the organization of these hydrogenase genes is identical to that found in the hyc operon of e. coli  <cit>  where the hyfdef homologs are absent . the hyc and hyf operons encode for paralogous energy-converting ni-fe hydrogenases hyd- <dig> and hyd- <dig> of e. coli, which have significant similarity to the components of nadh:quinone oxidoreductase , suggesting their implication in energy metabolism  <cit> . therefore, although distinct from the coo hydrogenase, it is likely that in c. subterraneus the hyc/hyf proteins and codh form a complex responsible to extract energy by co oxidation. this metabolism is often stated to be ancient, r. hedderich  <cit> , for example, suggested that energy-converting hydrogenases may have been originally associated with codh.fig.  <dig> comparison of the codh-hydrogenase gene cluster organization between c. subterraneus and other species. arrows represent genes and their respective direction of transcription. asterisks indicate significant prediction of hgt in c. subterraneus and geobacillus thermoglucosidans strains



although bao et al.  <cit>  suggested that the codh could also be utilized to fix carbon throughout the wood-ljungdahl pathway in c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis, it is improbable, because the genome of this strain does not present a gene putatively encoding for the key enzyme acetyl coenzyme a synthase   <cit> . as well, this gene was not found in the other two subspecies of c. subterraneus suggesting that the same argument can be applied to all these three subspecies, which indicates a limitation for the use of carbon monoxide or carbon dioxide as a carbon source. this contrasts to the capabilities of other thermophilic, co-utilizing, hydrogenogenic or acetogenic firmicutes  .

as demonstrated in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  the codhs of all three c. subterraneus subspecies contain the conserved amino acid residues important for the activity of this enzyme when compared to the archetypical codhs deposited in pdb database. however, the codh of c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus has important distinctive characteristics in relation to those of the other two subspecies of c. subterraneus, as the absence of the regions 450– <dig> and 537– <dig> . in fact, this codh has 66 % identity with its counterpart from methanosarcina acetivorans , while in relation to those from c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis has  <dig> and 49 % identity, respectively. this observation, blast searches and their alignments indicate that these proteins are not true orthologs but rather pseudoorthologs . to investigate this finding, the phylogeny of these codhs was analyzed. the resulting phylogenetic tree suggests a recent inter-phylum transfer of codh gene from c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis to thermodesulfobacterium thermophilum and possible more ancient codh gene transference between bacteria and archaea . the tree also confirmed that the codhs of caldanaerobacter subspecies can be classified in different lineages .fig.  <dig> evolutive history of codh  from c. subterraneus subspecies. details are as shown in fig.  <dig>  unless specified otherwise. thermodesulfobacterium is in orange, and archaea are in red. accession number or locus tag are adjacent the species name. this tree is mid-point rooted. classification of clades as in techtmann et al.  <cit> 



considering the species 16s rrna tree as reference , this result was unexpected. the codh of c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus clusters with the homologous counterpart of thermoanaerobacter sp. ys <dig> , and both are relatively distant from the codhs from the other c. subterraneus subspecies. following the classification described in techtmann et al.  <cit> , the codh of c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus belongs to “clade e”. on the other hand, the codhs from c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis are immersed in “clade f”  and are rather closely related to the homologous proteins from geobacillus thermoglucosidans strains , which are relatively distant from caldanaerobacter  . however, despite their affiliation with the same clade, the codhs of c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis are distant enough from each other to exclude their vertical inheritance from the lca  of these subspecies. while most of c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis proteins have h-values higher than  <dig>  in relation to the c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis proteins , the codh  has a h-value of  <dig>  . these results suggest that the codh evolutionary history of c. subterraneus includes several recent hgt events.

taking these observations into account, all genes of the codh-hydrogenase gene cluster were investigated for hgt by means of detection of phylogenetic discrepancies and parametric methods. becq et al.  <cit>  showed tetranucleotide composition and codon usage analyses had mean specificity of  <dig>  and  <dig>  %, and mean sensitivity of  <dig>  and  <dig>  %, respectively, when these methods were tested with artificial genomes. these values vary depending on intrinsic genome characteristics of the recipient organism, and on the origin of the hgt . the greatest advantage of parametric methods is they do not rely on sequence data banks as phylogenetic approaches do  <cit> . however, phylogenetic reconstruction is necessary to infer historical events from sequences  <cit> .

parametric analysis of nucleotide composition revealed that some codh-hydrogenase genes from g. thermoglucosidans and prominently those from c. subterraneus subspecies have differential sequence patterns in relation to the “standard” gene sequence pattern of each genome , which suggests that these genes could have been acquired by horizontal transfer. the presence of a transposase gene downstream the codh-hydrogenase gene cluster in c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus represents an additional evidence supporting this hypothesis .

the close relationship of the hyf/hyc hydrogenase gene cluster between c. subterraneus and g. thermoglucosidans strains was confirmed by phylogenetic analyses. apparently, these hyc and hyf genes shared common evolutionary histories and were acquired together as a cluster, not individually . considering the phylogenetic distance between geobacillus and c. subterraneus, the high identity levels between their codh-hydrogenase proteins  can hardly be interpreted as a result of vertical inheritance from the lca but are rather a result of acquisition of the cluster by the c. subterraneus lineage via hgt or its acquisition by both c. subterraneus and g. thermoglucosidans lineages from the same source or sources related to each other.

in general, in most of the phylogenetic trees of the codh-hydrogenase gene cluster, the three subspecies of c. subterraneus form monophyletic clades with thermoanaerobacter sp. ys <dig> , with the exception of coof and coos genes . in fact, the hyc and hyf genes of thermoanaerobacter sp. ys <dig> have identity values higher than 96 % at the nucleotide level when compared to the c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis orthologous genes. these observations and the presence of genes implicated with transposition within its codh-hydrogenase gene cluster  support the idea that this strain inherited the codh-hydrogenase gene cluster from c. subterraneus. since c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus is closer to c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis than any other organism in most phylogenetic reconstructions  and gene comparisons , it is likely that the gene transfer event occurred before the diversification of these subspecies. this observation implies that most probably their lca harbored a “clade e” codh . in spite of our contention that the hyf/hyc hydrogenase gene cluster was acquired as a cluster, not as individual genes, there is evidence that the coof and coos genes from c. subterraneus have distinct evolutionary histories with respect to the other genes of the cluster. an important point is that the gc contents of coof and coos genes from c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis  and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis  are much higher than the mean gene gc content of these genomes  . together with the above-mentioned considerable differences in the amino acid and nucleotide sequence patterns, the gc content data suggests that the codhs of c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis were acquired recently via independent hgt events from prokaryotes having a higher genomic gc content after the diversification of the subspecies.

an important point to consider regarding the codh tree is that its composition is very diverse taxonomically and does not reflect properly species relationships, indicating that hgt played an important role in the current distribution of carboxydotrophy among prokaryotes. independent studies already pointed out that hgt of the coos gene likely took place in several thermophilic species  <cit> . despite the fact that the donor and acceptor organisms in these instances may be phylogenetically remote, they are usually able to grow in anaerobic environments at similar ranges of temperature and ph  <cit> . the acquisition of new physiological characteristics would putatively allow the recipient organisms to be recruited to new thermophilic consortia, and consequently, the horizontal transference of important genes for adaptation to specialized niches would be facilitated.

our analysis revealed at least four recent independent hgt events in the evolutionary history of the codh-hydrogenase gene cluster:  coos and coof replacement in c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis;  coos and coof replacement in and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis;  transfer of the cluster as whole to a recent ancestor of thermoanaerobacter sp. ys <dig> from a common ancestor of c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus and c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis;  coos. coof, and cooc transfer from c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis to thermodesulfobacterium thermophilum.

other hydrogenases
besides the codh-associated hydrogenase, c. subterraneus sbsp. tengcongensis harbors additional hydrogenases, a nife hydrogenase  and a nadh-dependent fe-only hydrogenase , which putatively catalyze the production of h <dig> from excess of reducing equivalents formed during the fermentation of saccharides at low p  <cit> . the genes encoding these enzymes have been identified in c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus  and c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis. as pointed out by calteau et al.  <cit>  and soboh et al.  <cit> , both hydrogenase genes were wrongly assigned as nadh:ubiquinone oxidoreductase genes in c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis genome because of automatic annotation process. this error was also introduced to the c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis genome, and in the previous version of the genome of c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus. however, in the latest annotation of the genome of c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus, the proper description of these genes has been included.

homologs of e. coli hyp genes are located upstream the ech genes in c. subterraneus. in e. coli, hyp genes are essential for the maturation of the hydrogenases  <cit> . the synteny of hyp genes adjacent to ech genes could indicate their role in the maturation of ech hydrogenase. however, it is noteworthy that possibly hyp proteins could act on this as well as other hydrogenases, notably the codh associated hydrogenase, which resembles the e. coli hyc hydrogenase , target of hypa and hypc proteins  <cit> . in m. thermoacetica, the hypabfcde operon, and in the geobacillus thermoglucosidans strains investigated in this study, the hypab genes are located downstream the hyf/hyc operon, which represents additional evidence supporting the probable interaction of their gene products.

calteau et al.  <cit>  had suggested that ech genes from an archaeon related to methanosarcina were transferred horizontally to a c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis ancestor, however our analyses throughout parametric methods did not detect divergent sequence patterns in these genes . on the other hand, our phylogenetic analyses for most ech genes  demonstrated that c. subterraneus are immersed in the thermoanaerobacter clade . consequently, the c. subterraneus subspecies last common ancestor would not have acquired the ech genes directly from an archaeon, but more likely indirectly through a thermoanaerobacter species. therefore, the alternative hypothesis by calteau et al.  <cit>  would be in agreement with our observations suggesting an initial transfer of these genes from an archaeon to a bacterial lineage followed by a second bacterium to bacterium transference. the hyp and hyd genes showed characteristics expected for this species in accordance to sequence composition  and phylogeny .

e. coli has multiple hydrogenases that act differently depending on carbon source availability and on ph  <cit> . similarly, hydrogenases from c. subterraneus are expected to be active under different environmental conditions which would increase fitness in a variety of extreme environmental situations and carbon sources that c. subterraneus subspecies encounter in their natural niches  <cit> .

the mbx ferredoxin:nadp oxidoreductase
from all c. subterraneus subspecies investigated in this study, c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis uniquely encodes an mbx gene cluster . its products are highly similar to pyrococcus furiosus mbx proteins , which were automatically misannotated as nadh-ubiquinone oxidoreductase subunits and were initially described as encoding a putative fourth hydrogenase in p. furiosus  <cit> . however, according to the currently prevailing views, substantiated by the adams lab  <cit> , mbx is not a hydrogenase but a ferredoxin:nadp oxidoreductase, one of the differentiating features being the lack of the two cxxc ni-binding motifs characteristic of -hydrogenases in the mbxl  subunit . the genes o163_ <dig> and o163_ <dig> that flank the mbx operon in c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis were also found in the other c. subterraneus genomes . the gene o163_ <dig> encodes a putative g-d-s-l family lipolytic protein , therefore it does not seem to be functionally related to mbx hydrogenase, and the gene o163_ <dig> encodes for a putative cation transporter. preliminary blast searches using the nucleotide region spanning from the gene o163_ <dig> to the gene o163_ <dig> revealed 97 % identity to a genomic region from thermoanaerobacter wiegelii. although these organisms are rather closely related , the high identity between these genome fragments is unexpected  and represents a strong indication of hgt. in fact, as demonstrated in fig.  <dig> and additional file 2: table s <dig>  some of the mbx genes show differential tetranucleotide composition in c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis. phylogenetic analyses of each deduced mbx protein corroborated the hypothesis that most mbx genes in c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis grouped with thermoanaerobacter species . furthermore, in the phylogenetic reconstruction of the gene o163_ <dig>  c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis is closer to thermoanaerobacter than to other c. subterraneus subspecies, and in the phylogeny of the gene o163_ <dig>  homologs from all c. subterraneus subspecies are immersed in a thermoanaerobacter species clade .fig.  <dig> comparison of the mbx gene cluster organization across different species. arrows represent genes and their respective direction of transcription. asterisks indicate significant prediction of hgt in c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis. 1–putative g-d-s-l family lipolytic protein gene; 2–putative cation transporter gene



evidence suggests that the mbx operon could have been transferred from a thermoanaerobacter species to c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis. calteau et al.  <cit>  suggested that the mbx genes could have been originally transferred from archaea to bacteria. as the case of ech genes, this evolutionary event would have preceded the bacteria-to-bacteria hgts.

glycosidases
glycosidases from thermophiles have many industrial and biotechnological applications  <cit> , thus the wealth of glycosidases in these species motivates detailed study. c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis presents  <dig> glycosidases distributed in  <dig> families, while c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis harbors  <dig> glycosidases from  <dig> families, and most of which have homologous counterparts in c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis. c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus have  <dig> glycosidases from  <dig> families, and two of them are specific to this subspecies .

at this time three glycoside hydrolases deduced from c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis genome have been biochemically characterized. two of them are starch-hydrolyzing enzymes, a glucoamylase   <cit>  and an alphaglucosidase   <cit> , and both have homologs in the other two c. subterrraneus subspecies . exoglucohydrolases similar to these ones are extensively utilized for the hydrolysis of starch to glucose in industrial processes for food and ethanol production  <cit> . additional alphaglucosidases from the gh <dig> family remaining to be investigated were found in the genomes of c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis  and c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus  . these orthologs have 32 % identity with the protein mala of the archaeon sulfolobus solfataricus, which has a substrate preference for maltose and maltooligosaccharides  <cit> . their neighbor genes are sugar permease genes in both c. subterraneus genomes, and they present different tetranucleotide composition, suggesting a likely horizontal inheritance for these genes .

the third type of identified glycosidase is a cellulase    <cit> , which was also found in c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis . this enzyme is able to break the internal bonds of cellulose, generating glucans of different lengths that are substrate for other enzymes to glucose production. one of these enzymes is the betaglucosidase, which hydrolyzes cellobiose disaccharides to glucose. putative betaglucosidases from families gh <dig> and gh <dig> were found in the genomes of c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis and c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus, but the genome of c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis only hosts one belonging to the gh <dig> family . currently, intensive studies of such enzymes are being carried out, due to their implication in the saccharification of lignocellulosic materials such as sugarcane bagasse for production of biofuel  <cit> . also, it is worth noting that four putative enzymes originally annotated as hypothetical in c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis genome belong by similarity to the gh <dig> family of glycosidases, and they were found in the other two c. subterraneus genomes . this family is known by containing chitinases, enzymes that hydrolyze chitin, one of the most common biopolymers in nature  <cit> . bacterial chitinases can be utilized as biological control of fungi and insects, but are also suitable for protoplast generation and the treatment of shellfish waste  <cit> .

esterases
esterases are widely utilized in industry for production of pharmaceuticals, detergents, biodiesel and other compounds  <cit> . at least five esterases of c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis have been biochemically characterized . these enzymes share high thermal stability at temperatures above 60 °c, and they use different substrates, as mentioned in additional file 8: table s <dig>  besides these esterases, levisson et al.  <cit>  detected through in silico approaches four additional esterases in c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis genome . in our study, it was verified that c. subterraneus subsp. yonseiensis possesses homologs of each one of the esterases referenced above. two of them were not located in c. subterraneus subsp. pacificus genome, however using the lipabase proteins as reference, a specific lipase was found . it matched a lipase from acinetobacter baumannii , but because the coverage was 36 % and identity 31 %, more detailed studies are necessary to evaluate its catalytic properties.

proteases
proteases are ubiquitous to all life forms, with in vivo functions ranging from protein turnover to growth substrate hydrolysis and amino acid acquisition. they have a highly diverse range of applications, such as tenderization of meat, composing detergent formulations, leather processing, molecular biology applications and peptide synthesis  <cit> .

around  <dig> proteases from  <dig> distinct subfamilies were found in each c. subterraneus genome . among these proteins, metallo- and serineproteases were the most common. we note that the m <dig> subfamily proteases were originally annotated as cellulase-like proteins in c. subterraneus subsp. tengcongensis , but it is likely another case of misannotation. dutoit et al.  <cit>  verified experimentally that two proteins annotated as cellulases in the thermotoga maritima and clostridium thermocellum genomes were actually m <dig> aminopeptidases.

although c. subterraneus possesses many proteases, only one peptidase has been already characterized, a serine protease named as tengconlysin   <cit> . therefore the potential of c. subterraneus as a source for proteases is underexploited.

CONCLUSIONS
the study of c. subterraneus genomes is important to understand the adaptations allowing them to thrive in extreme habitats, as well as to analyze enzymes with biotechnological potential showing functionality under high temperatures. h <dig> is an important compound to the chemical industry, and a future clean biofuel  <cit> . genomic data indicate that c. subterraneus is able to produce h <dig> throughout different hydrogenase systems, markedly one associated with a codh that permits obtaining energy from carbon monoxide, widely available in syngas and other industrial fuel gases. horizontal gene transfer seems to be an important evolutionary driving force in carboxydotrophy and hydrogenogenesis in this species, abilities that permitted it to survive in niches where multiple inorganic and organic substrates may be available at low concentrations. in this sense, it is also worth noting that these bacteria encode a wide repertoire of hydrolase genes, such as glycosidases, esterases and proteases that act on a wide variety of substrates to provide them with carbon and energy. therefore, the metabolic versatility of this species makes it a good source to target for novel enzymes with biotechnological potential.

