BACKGROUND
retrotransposons are a class of mobile genetic elements, which use reverse transcription in their transposition. five orders of retrotransposons are recognized: those having long terminal repeats  ; those lacking ltrs ; dirs retrotransposons; penelope-like retrotransposable elements; and short interspersed nuclear elements . according to the modern classification, ltr retrotransposons are divided into several superfamilies: copia , gypsy , bel-pao, retrovirus , and erv  <cit> .

chromodomain-containing ltr retrotransposons or chromoviruses are the most widespread lineage of gypsy ltr retrotransposons and are present in genomes of fungi as well as in plants and vertebrates  <cit> . the characteristic feature of chromoviruses is the presence of an additional domain - the chromodomain . chds are present in various eukaryotic proteins involved in chromatin remodeling and regulation of gene expression during development  <cit> . chds perform a wide range of diverse functions including chromatin targeting and proteindna/rna interactions  <cit> . recently, it has been shown that the chds target integration of new ltr retrotransposon copies into heterochromatin by recognizing histone modifications  <cit> .

our previous comprehensive survey of chromoviruses from mosses  suggested that the diversity of chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons in plant genomes is underestimated  <cit> . there are four wellknown chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposon clades widely distributed among gymnosperms and angiosperms: tekay, crm, galadriel and reina  <cit> . four novel clades were found to be present in mosses. moreover, we showed that representatives from one of the moss-specific clades are more closely related to retrotransposons from fungi than to retrotransposons from plants. although we proposed that the retrotransposons from this clade could have been 'retained' from the last common ancestor of fungi/metazoa lineage and plants, the origin of this clade remains unclear.

the questions addressed in current investigation are as follows:  what kind of gypsy ltr retrotransposons from fungi are closely related to the ltr retrotransposons detected in mosses;  how widely those clades which were previously identified in mosses are distributed among other non-seed plants including lycophytes, ferns and horsetails; and  what is the origin of the clade which is common for non-seed plants and fungi. the in silico analysis of gypsy ltr retrotransposons in  <dig> species of fungi, genomes of which available in public databases, along with survey of related ltr retrotransposons from whole genome sequences  and expressed sequence tags  of diverse plants including spikemoss selaginella moellendorffii  and pcr-based screening of ferns, horsetails and lycophytes showed that a common clade of chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons can be found in mosses, lycophytes from genus selaginella, and basidiomycetes. according to the classification of chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons proposed by gorinsek et al.   <cit>  this clade has name tcn <dig>  it seems that tcn <dig> is a unique clade of chromoviruses which has a wide inter-kingdom distribution. tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons from fungi and non-seed plants demonstrated higher similarity to each other in comparison with ltr retrotransposons from other clades. this can be explained by strong selective constraints and the 'retained' genes theory or by horizontal transmission.

RESULTS
gypsy ltr retrotransposons survey from fungal genomes
the gypsy ltr retrotransposons mining from fungal genomes was initiated in an attempt to identify retrotransposons closely related to those which were found in mosses   <cit> . the survey was performed using genome sequence data for the  <dig> fungal species listed in table  <dig>  the hemiascomycetous yeasts were not included in the present investigation since a comprehensive survey of ltr retrotransposons from this group of ascomycetes was recently published  <cit> . first, reverse transcriptase  and integrase  coding regions of gypsy ltr retrotransposons were detected in genomic sequences using algorithm based on hidden markov model implemented in ugene software http://ugene.unipro.ru/. the transposable elements thus identified were then classified into families based on rt and int domains sequence similarity. members of the same family shared high amino acid identity  but had very little similarity to elements from other families. our survey has identified more than  <dig> novel gypsy ltr retrotransposon families which have not been described previously .

a total copy number of detected gypsy ltr retrotransposons

the newly identified gypsy ltr retrotransposons fall into two major, distinct lineages according to phylogenetic analysis based on rt and partial int domains: chromoviruses  and ylt1-like ltr retrotransposons. two retrotransposons  formed their own lineage closely related to ylt1-like ltr retrotransposons. this lineage cannot be attributed to ylt <dig> because of low bootstrap support  and was named sn_ <dig>  ylt1-like ltr retrotransposons were found in a number of fungal species . previously, ylt1-like ltr retrotransposons were reported for yarrowia lipolytica   <cit> , candida albicans   <cit> , and basidiomycete cryptococcus neoformans  <cit> . in the present study, ltr retrotransposons belonging to the ylt <dig> lineage have been found in both ascomycete and basidiomycete fungi. they fall into several clearly separated groups: the branch formed by transposable elements from basidiomycota, the group of retrotransposons from ascomycetes, and the branch of the original ylt <dig> ltr retrotransposon .

twenty monophyletic clades can be recognized in the phylogenetic tree of fungal chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons, nine of which have been previously reported  <cit> . thirteen clades are specific for ascomycetes , six have been found only in genomes of basidiomycetes  and one clade  is present in both basidiomycetes and chytridiomycetes  .

for each of the newly identified retrotransposon families, we attempted to isolate a full-length representative or to reconstruct it using overlaps between partial sequences. the lengths of the elements thus identified varied greatly from approximately  <dig>  kb to more than  <dig> kb. the structural features for each family are listed in additional table s <dig> . the majority of full-length ltr retrotransposons had either a single open reading frame  encoding a fused gag-pol polyprotein or two orfs encoding separate proteins . the gag protein sequences differed greatly between families. nevertheless, cysteine motifs characterized by the amino acid sequence c-x2-c-x4-h-x4-c  were found in gag for some of the identified gypsy ltr retrotransposons . the pol polyproteins sequences were more conserved than gag, especially with the rt and int domains. rt, int, pr  and chromodomains  were detected. characteristic motifs were found throughout the gag and pol sequences of all of the putative intact element copies.

in addition to the abovelisted enzymatic domains, a deoxyuridine triphosphatase domain  has been found in several ltr retrotransposons from the basidiomycete postia placenta mad- <dig>  the location of this domain varied among diverse families of posplaty <dig> elements. it can be found either at amino-terminus  and carboxyl-terminus of pol  or between pr and rt domains  . the presence of dutpase in ltr retrotransposon sequences has been described earlier for the elements from a basidiomycete phanerochaete chrysosporium and an ascomycete tuber melanosporum  <cit> . the role and origin of this domain remained unclear. moreover, it seems that the described ltr retrotransposons acquire this domain independently from different sources   <cit> . it was assumed that the presence of dutpase allows viruses that contain this domain to replicate in non-dividing cells, in which cellular dutpase activity is absent because replication of dna does not occur  <cit> .

tnc <dig> clade is found in non-seed plants
further phylogenetic analysis revealed that previously described chd-containing ltr retrotransposons from mosses including ppatensltr retrotransposons isolated from genomic sequence of moss physcomitrella patens formed a common branch with tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons from fungi   <cit> . in an attempt to determine the distribution of the tcn1clade among plants, we used public databases for further survey of ltr retrotransposons including genomic databases for red and green algae, spikemoss selaginella moellendorffii, and seed plants . a tcn1-like ltr retrotransposon search was implemented with blast . amino acid sequences of rt and int domains of known tcn1-like  and newly identified retrotransposons  were used as the queries. the tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons were identified only in the whole genomic sequence of selaginella moellendorffii ; none of the tested algae or seed plant genomes contained ltr retrotransposons from this clade. it seems that the tcn <dig> clade can be found in basidiomycetes and chytridiomycetes fungi as well as non-seed plants .

the whole sequence of sm-tcn <dig> ltr retrotransposon was obtained from wgs. sm-tcn <dig> is  <dig> bp in length and carries two putative orfs. orf <dig> or gag  encodes a  <dig> amino acid  protein with strong similarity to retroviral gag proteins . orf <dig> or pol  encodes a  <dig> aa polyprotein, with characteristic retroviral aspartyl protease , rt, int, and chd domains . sm-tcn <dig> possesses  <dig> bp ltrs with conserved features, including the dinucleotide end sequences . target site duplication  was also detected for the described copy of sm-tcn <dig>  the ltrs contained tata and caat boxes. no putative primer-binding site  was found. the pbs is necessary for initiation of reverse transcription and synthesis of the first strand complementary 5'ltr sequence  <cit> . typical pbs is located near the 5'ltr and complementary to the 3' terminal nucleotides of the primer trna used for initiation. other known mechanism for initiation of the first strand synthesis is self-priming, in this case a sequence derived from ltr is located just downstream of the 5'ltr  <cit> . however, evidences were found neither for trna priming nor for self-priming of sm-tcn <dig> ltr retrotransposon. the sequence presented between 5' ltr and gag is conservative and thymine-rich . the possible mechanism for initiation of reverse transcription of sm-tcn <dig> remained unclear. a polypurine tract  was detected immediately upstream of the 3'ltr. the ppt sequence is involved in second-strand dna synthesis. the blast search  of full-length sm-tcn <dig> retrotransposon indicated the presence of more than  <dig> hits in the s. moellendorffii genome. the close examination of identified copies showed that they have in average  <dig> % nucleotide identity with the original sm-tcn <dig> sequence. a blast search  using sm-tcn <dig> putative pol protein as a query yielded more than  <dig> hits. the size of s. moellendorffii genome is only ~ <dig> mbp  <cit> , thus sm-tcn <dig> retrotransposons comprise ca.  <dig> % of genomic sequence.

gypsy ltr retrotransposons from non-seed vascular plants
the bioinformatic survey of chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons, which allowed us to identify tcn1-like retrotransposons in a few basidiomycetes, p. patens and s. moellendorffii, did not provide a satisfactory answer to the question concerning distribution of this clade among non-seed vascular plants. therefore, we used pcr with degenerate primers to investigate the distribution of chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons in  <dig> ferns and horsetails  belonging to three classes: psilotopsida, polypodiopsida and equisetopsida, and in  <dig> lycophytes from two classes: isoetopsida and lycopodiopsida .

a number of unique sequences for chd-containing ltr retrotransposons  and athila-like ltr retrotransposons obtained in present study

the estimated diversity of monilophytes  is about  <dig> species and includes horsetails, whisk ferns, and all eusporangiate and leptosporangiate ferns  <cit> . most of the species examined in the present study were leptosporangiate ferns from the order polypodiales, class polypodiopsida. this order covers more than 80% of current known diversity of ferns  <cit> . additionally, one representative of heterosporous ferns, salvinia natans , two ophioglossoid ferns  and three horsetails  were included  <cit> . lycophytes are much less diverse in comparison with monilophytes and comprise less than 1% of extant land plants . three major lineages are distinguished among lycophytes: clubmosses and firmosses , spikemosses , and quillworts   <cit> . among lycophytes included in the present study are isoetes and huperzia species  as well as two selaginella species , which belong to the class isoetopsida, and seven diverse species from lycopodiaceae .

the presence of chd-containing gypsy ltr retroelements among the listed plants was tested by amplifying genomic dna with previously developed degenerate oligonucleotide primers  <cit> . consistent with the spacing of reverse transcriptase  domains, the amplified pcr products were approximately  <dig> bp in length. in total,  <dig> clones with sequence similarity to known rt sequences were isolated, of which  <dig> were from monilophytes and  <dig> from lycophytes. the preliminary blastp search revealed that  <dig> clones were not from chdcontaining ltr retrotransposons but were from athila-like gypsy elements . many representatives of this clade possess not only classical gag and pol sequences, but also an additional open reading frame that might encode an env-like protein  <cit> .

the phylogenetic relationships among obtained clones and known chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons, extracted from databases, were reconstructed using neighbor-joining  analysis based on the multiple alignment of nucleotide sequences of rt fragment . the gypsy ltr retrotransposons from drosophila melanogaster were used as an outgroup. the newlyidentified ltr retrotransposon grouped into four large clusters on the phylogenetic tree. the group of clones from diverse monilophytes and one ltr retrotransposon from lycophytes lycopodium alpinum  form a common group with previously described retroelements from mosses tetraphis pellucida and vesicularia dubyana  <cit> . although the bootstrap support is below 50% , this new clade  seems to be a sister group to the galadriel clade. galahad appears to be one of the oldest widely distributed clades of chd-containing ltr retrotransposons from plants. since galahad clade was found in all non-seed plants including mosses, the probable age of this clade would be in the range of 400- <dig> myr, which is estimated time divergence of liverworts and mosses from vascular plants  <cit> .

the second group is formed by ltr retrotransposons from both monilophytes and lycophytes. the phylogenetic analysis did not provide support for a monophyletic origin of this cluster. moreover, the relationships inside the cluster remained unclear, with the exception of several lineages. one of the lineages , contained members from lycophytes in the family lycopodiaceae: lycopodium clavatum , l. japonicum , and diphasiastrum complanatum . another lineage seems to have had a long-term association with fern genomes, since it appears to be widely distributed among leptosporangiate ferns and can be found in dennstaedtiaceae , pteridaceae , aspleniaceae , woodsiaceae , and dryopteridaceae  . additionally, five satellite lineages, represented mostly by single clones can be found on the phylogenetic tree.

the largest group is represented by  <dig> ltr retrotransposons. three clearly separated clusters can be found inside this group . one of these clusters is formed by ltr retrotransposons from ophioglossaceae , aspleniaceae  and dryopteridaceae . the second cluster has a bootstrap support of 77% and is represented by clones isolated from lycopodium annotinum  and woodsia polystichoides . the last monophyletic cluster, clade mordred, is the largest, well-supported clade which is widely distributed among representatives of all investigated classes except isoetopsida. it was found to be present in fern genomes from families ophioglossaceae , pteridaceae , woodsiaceae , onocleaceae , and dryopteridaceae ; in horsetails equisetum hiemale and e. fluviatile ; and lycophyte lycopodium magellanicum .

the tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons were detected only in selaginella species, s. kraussiana  and s. pulvinata  in addition to the previously described ltr retrotransposons from mosses and sm-tcn <dig> ltr retrotransposon from selaginella moellendorffii   <cit> . the absence of tcn1-like clones isolated from other lycophytes, ferns, and horsetails can be explained by failed pcr amplification due to the high divergence of tcn1-like elements in genomes of these species or, more likely, by lack of these elements from their genomes.

tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons: 'retained' or horizontally transmitted?
as a rule chromoviruses clades are specific for a particular group of eukaryotic organisms such as ascomycota fungi , basidiomycota fungi , or plants   <cit> . in the light of such specificity, it was unexpected to find a clade containing elements from basidiomycetes and non-seed plants. nevertheless, it seems that tcn <dig> clade has an interkingdom distribution and can be found in a number of fungi, diverse mosses  as well as in lycophytes . such a wide distribution makes the tcn <dig> clade unique among the chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons. the interkingdom distribution of tcn <dig> clade could be the result of horizontal transmission  of ltr retrotransposons among fungi and plants; otherwise, tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons could have been 'retained' by mosses and lycophytes from the most recent common ancestor of plants and fungi/metazoa lineage of eukaryotes  <cit> .

the hypothesis of 'retained' genes is based on the observation that est data of physcomitrella contained a fraction of transcripts derived from putative genes , which are not present in seed plants but can be found in other kingdoms including fungi. it was proposed that such retained genes along with physcomitrella-specific  genes encode functions that make mosses unique in terms of physiology and metabolism  <cit> . we used these data and compared the levels of similarity for rt-int fragments from tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons and two putatively retained genes from physcomitrella, which showed a high similarity with functional genes from fungi: uric acid-xanthine permease  and inorganic phosphate transporter .

the pairwise comparisons between hypothetical pho <dig> proteins from basidiomycetes coprinus cinereus okayama7# <dig>  phanerochaete chrysosporium and cryptococcus neoformans revealed  <dig> % to  <dig> % similarity whereas only  <dig> % identical amino acid residues was found on average in pairwise comparisons between fungal proteins and putative pho <dig> from physcomitrella . the most closely related homolog for putative pho <dig> from p. patens was found in schizosaccharomyces pombe . the similarity between uapa from physcomitrella and cryptococcus  was almost the same as between proteins from cryptococcus and coprinus  or cryptococcus and phanerochaete . more then 67% of amino acid residues are identical in permeases from coprinus and phanerochaete. predicted uapa from ashbya gossypii and physcomitrella share  <dig> % of amino acid residues.

a the corresponding accession numbers in genbank are provided in the brackets;

b nd - not determined: information concerning time divergence between species groups is unavailable; ht - putative horizontal transmission

it seems to be that the hypothesis of 'retained' genes cannot be implemented as explanation for tcn <dig> clade distribution since investigated rt-int fragments of tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons from fungi and plants have higher similarity to each other than functional proteins which were proposed to be 'retained'  <cit> . rt-int fragments from tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons have average similarity 49%. moreover, evolutionary rates estimated for tcn <dig> ltr retrotransposons appeared to be less than evolutionary rates for 'retained' genes or other ltr retrotransposons .

discussion
despite a number of whole genome sequence studies, the distribution and diversity of chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons is still poorly understood. current knowledge of distribution and evolution of this group of mobile elements has been mainly obtained from diverse model organisms  <cit> . the quickly generated massive data sets  provide a great opportunity to perform detailed analysis for non-model organisms. experimental data accumulation also should not be neglected. in the absence of information about genomic sequences from monilophytes, pcr screening seems to be very useful for isolation and characterization of new ltr retrotransposons from this group of non-seed vascular plants. two new well-supported clades, galahad and mordred, as well as several other previously unknown lineages of chd-containing gypsy ltr retrotransposons were described based on the results of pcr-mediated survey of rt fragments from ferns, horsetails and lycophytes.

one of the clades originally described for fungal genomes, tcn <dig>  appeared to be present in genomes of mosses  and lycophytes  . such an interkingdom distribution is not typical for chd-containing ltr retrotransposons clades which are usually very specific for a particular taxonomic group . data suggested that horizontal transmission took place between fungi and non-seed plants . horizontal transmissions or horizontal transfers  of mobile elements are usually recognized by the presence of very closely related mobile elements in distant host taxa  <cit> . ht is well known for gypsy ltr retrotransposons in drosophila  <cit>  and has been suggested to have occurred in plants  <cit> . recently, the evidence was provided for ht of rire <dig> ltr retrotransposon between representatives of genus oryza  <cit>  and route <dig> ltr retrotransposon between representatives of panicoideae  and several species of the genus oryza  <cit> .

several criteria can be used for ht event recognition. the first criterion is inconsistencies between the phylogenies of transposable elements  and host species  <cit> . there are potential problems with application of this criterion for ht detection. multiple transposable element lineages can be present within genomes. moreover, transposable elements are multicopy components of genomes. comparisons of paralogous copies instead of orthologs along with varying rates of their sequence evolution are the main sources for incongruence in phylogenetic analysis, this could be misidentified as ht. the second criterion, which seems to offer the strongest evidence, is a higher degree of observed sequence similarity for transposable elements than for functional genes, so called 'slowdown effect on evolutionary rates'. once inserted, a new copy of transposable element is presumed to evolve without functional constrains. thus, all types of mutations should have an equal chance to be fixed  <cit> . the lower than expected sequence divergence of tes in comparison with non-mobile nuclear genes of the host species can be explained either by strong selective constraints in te sequence coupled with a strict vertical transmission, or by horizontal transfer  <cit> . the third criterion of inferring ht is the discontinuous distribution of tes among closely related taxa, i.e., presence of a te in one lineage and its absence in a sister lineage. such discontinuous distribution could be due to random loss of tes, ancestral polymorphism, or independent sorting of copies into descendant species. by itself, this kind of evidence provides only weak support for ht since te can be lost through population dynamics or ecological forces that are difficult to reconstruct  <cit> .

all three criteria are satisfied in case of tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons. they demonstrated patchy distribution among fungi and plants . they were found in all investigated mosses, but only in a few lycophytes and they absent in basal lineages of green plants such as green and red algae as well as in all seed plants investigated so far. the hypothesis of 'retained' genes in moss physcomitrella represented an attractive alternative to horizontal transmission as an explanation of the phylogenetic inconsistencies as well as the existence of a number of functional genes in physcomitrella genome, which seem to have non-plant origin and can be found in bacteria, fungi and protozoa but not in higher plants  <cit> . nevertheless, the most important feature of tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons in the context of ht is their lower evolutionary rates in comparison with other groups of chd-containing ltr retrotransposons. the close examination and comparison of evolutionary rates for ltr retrotransposons including representatives of tcn <dig>  pyggy and pyret clades, and evolutionary rates estimated for putatively 'retained' genes suggests that a horizontal transmission of tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons took place among fungi and the last common ancestor  of mosses and lycophytes   <cit> . alternatively, it is possible, but highly unlikely, that two independent acts of ht occurred. first ht event could happen among fungi and lca of mosses since all investigated mosses contain tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons  <cit> . the second ht could occur among fungi and lca of selaginella since only representatives of this genus carry this group of retrotransposons among all investigated lycophytes . it is necessary to note that despite ht seeming to be a preferable explanation for the observed distribution. the evidence is not strong enough to discard other explanations; such as selective pressure coupled with vertical transmission of retrotransposons in genomes of non-seed plants and loss of these elements by other plants.

another putative case of ht based on the results of present survey of ltr retrotransposons from fungal species was found for pyrtrity3- <dig> ltr retrotransposon from pyrenophora tritici-repentis pt-1c-bfp . pyrtrity3- <dig> belongs to pyggy clade and appeared to be more closely related to ltr retrotransposons from sordariomycetes  than to the elements from other dothideomycetes such as altbraty3- <dig> from alternaria brassicicola atcc  <dig>  real from alternaria alternata   <cit> , and pyggy from pyrenophora graminea   <cit>  . the pairwise comparisons of rt-int fragments and investigation of evolutionary rates for retrotransposons from pyggy and pyret clades revealed the unexpectedly high similarity between pyrtrity3- <dig> and nechaemty3- <dig> , much higher than between any other retrotransposons from pyggy or pyret clades, and at least two times lower evolutionary rate in the couple pyrtrity3-2/nechaemty3- <dig> than in comparisons of other ltr retrotransposons .

the high similarity, phylogenetic inconsistencies, as well as lower evolutionary rates could be explained by very strict evolutionary constraints or a ht event. however, taking into consideration that the high selective pressure could be implemented only in the case of functional importance of the pyrtrity3- <dig> or nechaemty3- <dig>  ht looks more preferable for the explanation of the described case. it is known that transposable elements can alter gene expression since they carry their own regulatory sequences and insertions can be selectively advantageous. however, only those transposable elements, which were involved in regulation, evolve under strict selective pressure  <cit> .

while extremely rare, horizontal transfer seems to be quite common and recurrent in eukaryotes. an incomplete list of putative ht events includes: ht as a key event in the evolution of several fungal genes  <cit> ; ht from fungi to rice weevil sitophilus oryzae proposed for pectinase gene  <cit> ; numerous ht events described for eukaryotic transposable elements  <cit> ; as well as hts of mitochondrial genes, for example, multiple angiosperm-angiosperm hts of homing group i intron in the mitochondrial cox <dig> gene ; and a ht of the intron ii and two adjacent exons of the mitochondrial nad <dig> gene from the flowering plants  to gnetum   <cit> .

the actual mechanisms of horizontal transfer for eukaryotic genes and transposable elements are still unknown since it is not possible to show experimentally how ht can occur. parasites, symbionts, bacteria, or viruses all could be suggested as potential vectors for horizontal transfer. moreover, based on an example of massive ht from a land plant donor to the basal angiosperm amborella trichopoda, it has been demonstrated that direct plant-to-plant transfer can take a place  <cit> . the associations between biotrophic fungi and their plant hosts are ubiquitous in nature and range from mutually beneficial to potentially fatal pathogenic interactions. mycorrhiza refers to an association or symbiosis between plants and fungi that colonize the cortical tissue of plant roots. ectomycorrhizal fungi are mostly basidiomycetes that grow between root cortical cells of many tree species whereas arbuscular mycorrhizal  fungi belong to the order glomales  and form highly branched structures called arbuscules, within root cortical cells of wide range of land plant species  <cit> . both types of mycorrhiza represent intimate association and could provide suitable conditions for ht of transposable elements. am-like mycorrhiza is widely distributed among mosses, ferns and lycophytes .

CONCLUSIONS
tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons were found in basidiomycota fungi and non-seed plants, including all investigated mosses and lycophytes from genus selaginella. such interkingdom distribution is not typical for chromodomain-containing ltr retrotransposons clades which are usually very specific for a particular taxonomic group and can be explained by strong selective constraints and the 'retained' genes theory or by horizontal transmission. the close examination and comparison of evolutionary rates for ltr retrotransposons including representatives of tcn <dig> and two other clades of ltr retrotransposons, and evolutionary rates estimated for putatively 'retained' genes from mosses and fungi suggests that a horizontal transmission of tcn1-like ltr retrotransposons took place among fungi and mosses/lycophytes. however the evidence is not strong enough to discard other explanations; such as selective pressure coupled with vertical transmission of retrotransposons in genomes of non-seed plants and loss of these elements by other plants.

