BACKGROUND
the discovery of rna interference  and its use as an experimental tool has heralded a new era in functional genomics  <cit> . the ability of short interfering rna  to perturb expression of any gene target highlights the enormous potential of this technique. however, sirna delivery into primary cells, cell lines that are difficult to transfect and delivery to specific cell types in vivo remains a key technical issue.

a variety of vector-based approaches, which express sirnas as short hairpin rnas, have been developed to permit delivery through viral vectors  <cit> . designing such shrna in the context of a naturally occurring rna polymerase  ii-driven microrna transcript  increases the flexibility of this approach allowing for conditional and cell type-specific expression  <cit> . the observation that some endogenous micrornas  are processed from single transcripts containing multiple primary mirna sequences  <cit>  adds to the potential experimental utility of this approach to rnai. in using rnai as an experimental tool, the ability to effectively deplete multiple gene targets is vital to address the issue of isoform redundancy, especially in mammalian cell systems. thus, a flexible vector platform that allows for effective multi-gene knockdown in essentially any cell system would be of great value.

we report the development of a versatile system which permits the knockdown of multiple target genes from a single transcript, and we show efficient depletion of endogenous pairs of signaling genes in the raw <dig>  murine macrophage-like cell line. importantly, we demonstrate the absolute requirement for multi-gene depletion to observe phenotypes in processes dependent on proteins with redundant isoforms.

RESULTS
to determine if multi-mir-shrna transcripts could promote efficient and specific knockdown in mammalian cells, we first created plasmids expressing potent mir-shrnas against the murine orthologs of three genes involved in g-protein signaling: arrestin  <dig> , g-protein coupled receptor kinase  <dig>  and g-protein beta  <dig>  . co-transfection of each of these mir-shrna-expressing plasmids with yfp-tagged cdnas of all three target genes in hek <dig> cells resulted in potent and specific knockdown of the intended target protein . using the premise that multiple mir-shrnas targeting different genes could be linked in a single transcript , we designed our mir-shrna-expressing plasmids to allow simple concatenation through directional subcloning . using this strategy, we created dual mir-shrna constructs targeting arr2+gβ <dig>  grk2+arr <dig> and grk2+gβ <dig>  co-transfection with yfp-tagged cdnas of the target genes in hek <dig> cells resulted in specific knockdown of each target gene pair, with no apparent loss of shrna potency . similarly, a construct expressing all three mir-shrnas led to efficient triple target knockdown . to determine if plasmids with multiple mir-shrnas remain stable in e.coli, we performed serial passaging of the triple mir-shrna construct used in fig. 1f. sequencing of clones isolated from up to five rounds of serial passaging found no re-arrangement of mir-shrna sequences . the data in figure  <dig> validate the principle of depleting multiple gene targets with a single transcript containing multiple mir-shrna cassettes, however, such transient expression in a readily transfectable cell line offers little practical utility over the use of multiple sirnas.

to determine if this shrna expression approach could be applied to less tractable cells, we created a comprehensive range of viral vectors to which mir-shrna cassettes could be transferred by gateway® recombination . using a retroviral vector which bicistronically expresses the mir-shrna with a neomycin resistance gene , we created stable lines of raw <dig>  murine macrophage  cells expressing single and dual mir-shrnas against three different pairs of signaling genes; arr <dig> and  <dig>  grk <dig> and  <dig> and the camp-dependent protein kinase  catalytic subunits cα and cβ. we observed efficient single and dual knockdown of the endogenous target genes in raw cells using this approach . these data demonstrate the flexibility of the multi-mir-shrna approach in effectively targeting three different pairs of signaling genes in a cell line which is intractable to efficient sirna transfection. moreover, the ability to deplete multiple genes with redundant functions is an important technical advance in the effort to dissect signaling pathways in cells such as raw macrophages  <cit> .

mammalian cells express two pka catalytic subunits, cα and cβ. mice are viable after knockout of either gene, suggesting that either isoform can perform the required physiological functions of this kinase  <cit> . to determine the functional consequences of depleting both of the pka c subunits in raw cells, we assessed the camp-induced phosphorylation of the vasodilator stimulated phosphoproteins , a known substrate of pka  <cit> . in response to camp analogs, we observed a significant increase in phospho-vasp, which was unaffected in cells depleted of either pka cα or pka cβ . however, in cells with both cα and cβ knocked down, there was almost complete attenuation of vasp phosphorylation in response to camp . it is well established that pka mediates many transcriptional effects, primarily through phosphorylation and activation of camp response element  binding protein  and camp response element modulator   <cit> . based on a recent microarray study in raw cells  <cit> , we identified several camp-dependent mrnas and selected four targets for assessment in our pka knockdown cell lines; nr4a <dig>  nr4a <dig>  ctla2α and ctla2β. nr4a1/nur <dig> and nr4a2/nurr <dig>  members of the nr4a subfamily of orphan nuclear receptors, are potential transcriptional mediators in many cell types and have been shown to be regulated by camp  <cit> . regulation of the transcription of ctla2α and ctla2β, cysteine protease inhibitors originally identified in cytotoxic t lymphocytes  <cit> , has not been reported previously. none of these camp-dependent transcripts show any significant alteration of 8pcpt-camp induced increase in cells depleted for either pka catalytic subunit, whereas depletion of both pka cα and cβ leads to a marked decrease in transcript induction . these data provide the first evidence that ctla <dig> transcription is pka-dependent. more importantly, our data demonstrate the value of an rnai platform which permits the depletion of multiple endogenous gene targets from a single viral infection of an intractable cell line. the system allows the demonstration of downstream biological consequences of the loss of a function redundantly performed by related proteins. only upon effective depletion of both pka c subunits is a phenotype observed . there are numerous examples, especially in g-protein mediated signaling pathways, where mammalian cells express multiple proteins with redundant function, presumably to build robustness into the system. it is therefore noteworthy that the cells maintain a small degree of response in the recorded readouts in the dual knockdown cells . although this result could argue that an alternative camp effector, such as epac, could contribute, it seems more likely that the residual pka catalytic subunit  is capable of mediating the residual response. this observation supports the inherent robustness of this signaling pathway, and is consistent with the finding that the pka cα knockout mice remain viable despite certain cell types showing <10% of the wild type level of total pka activity  <cit> .

using our multi-mir-shrna expression platform, we demonstrate potent knockdown of up to three genes in transient expression studies  and three different pairs of endogenous genes after viral infection of a murine macrophage cell line . this approach has great potential for experimental strategies or clinical applications requiring depletion of multiple gene targets in cells with low transduction efficiency. it should be noted however, that the presence of increasing numbers of mir-shrna cassettes in a viral transcript leads to a gradual reduction in viral titer , likely due to drosha cleavage of the viral transcript during packaging. despite this titer reduction, we were able to achieve viral titers of > <dig> ×  <dig> pfu/ml from unconcentrated supernatants of lentivirus expressing three mir-shrnas, well within the practical range for infection of most intractable cells.

we engineered the vectors to be extremely versatile with a high degree of flexibility for downstream applications . we created the initial shrna cloning/testing entry vector with a choice of up to five interchangeable promoters , which can be combined with six different selection markers upon recombination to a selection of lentiviral vectors . this allows selection of the optimal promoter for a given cell system; for example, comparison of mscv ltr and β-actin promoters driving the arr <dig> mir-shrna in raw cells shows the former promotes more potent knockdown . alternatively, the entry vector promoter can be removed after shrna validation for recombination to a variety of expression platforms with existing promoters. these include 5'ltr-driven retroviral vectors or cmv/ef1-driven mammalian expression vectors which can then be used for creation of stable cell lines. these latter vectors also contain a broad selection of co-expressed fluorescent and/or drug selection markers . furthermore, the gateway compatibility of these vectors allows the mir-shrna cassettes to be recombined to any appropriately configured gateway-ready expression system.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed an flexible cloning platform for generation of plasmid vectors and viruses expressing mir-shrnas against multiple target genes. the ability to express multiple engineered mir-shrna cassettes from a single transcript has been previously reported  <cit> , and recent reports have shown that it can also be used to improve knockdown efficiency by expressing multiple mir-shrna against the same target gene  <cit>  and to promote multi-gene knockdown  <cit> . however, refs. <dig> and  <dig> used intron-based expression of mir-shrna cassettes from plasmids introduced into easily transfected cell lines, which is not compatible with the viral based approaches required with less tractable cell systems. to our knowledge, our data are the first to demonstrate functional consequences of depleting multiple endogenous target genes in mammalian cells using mir-shrna where multi-gene knockdown is necessary to observe a phenotype . we believe that the versatility of the vectors we describe here make them a valuable resource to the research community. although we clone shrnas into our entry vectors using bfuai compatible linkers, we include xho i and eco ri cloning sites in the flanking mir <dig> sequence to allow subcloning of mir-shrnas from popular whole genome libraries  <cit>  into our plasmids . any shrna subcloned by either of these methods is then compatible for concatenation in a multi-mir-shrna transcript .

availability and requirements
in accordance with the policy of the alliance for cellular signaling , all the vectors described in this study will be readily available through the american type culture collection. details will be provided at .

