BACKGROUND
helicobacter pylori colonizes the stomach of more than half of the world's population and is associated with development of complications such as peptic ulcer disease, gastric cancer, and gastric mucosa-associated lymphoid tissue lymphoma  <cit> . the factors that lead few individuals to develop the associated diseases, while the majority of infected people remain asymptomatic, are unknown, but they have been subject of intense research. among the host factors, cytokine gene polymorphisms were shown to increase the risk of gastric cancer, specifically il1b- <dig>  il1rn, and tnfa- <dig> single nucleotide polymorphisms in european populations, and il1rn in a brazilian population  <cit> . pathogen strain-specific factors have been strongly investigated. among them, the caga protein is accepted as a risk factor for both peptic ulcer disease and gastric cancer  <cit> . in a study of our group, infection by h. pylori caga-positive strains had an odds ratio  of  <dig>  for gastric cancer, after adjusting for host polymorphisms and other variables, whereas the strongest host factor was il1rn  <dig> allele, with an or of  <dig>   <cit> .

caga belongs to a cag pai  that codes a type iv secretion system  associated with increased secretion of il- <dig>  a very strong proinflammatory chemokine that participates in the gastritis induced by h. pylori infection. the t4ss is also responsible for the entrance of caga protein into the gastric epithelial cells where caga is phosphorylated on the tyrosine residue within the phosphorylation motifs in the carboxi-terminal variable region of the protein. these motifs are defined as epiya  a, b, c and d according to different flanking aminoacids. caga protein nearly always possesses epiya a and b segments that are followed by none, one, two or three c segments, in strains circulating in the western countries, or a d segment, in east asian countries. the epiya c and d are the main sites for phosphorylation of caga. phosphorylated caga forms a physical complex with shp- <dig> phosphatase and triggers abnormal cellular signals leading to deregulation of cell growth, cell to cell contact and cell migration, elongation of epithelial cells and increase of epithelial cell turnover, which enhance the risk of damaged cells to acquire precancerous genetic changes. carrying the type d epiya or multiple c repeats is associated with increased shp- <dig> phosphatase activity induced by caga  <cit> , which raises the possibility that infection by caga strains possessing higher number epiya c segments predisposes to precancerous lesions and gastric cancer.

in fact, this hypothesis has been tested in eastern countries, but the study results are discordant. azuma et al.  <cit>  found increased proportion of epiya d strains among patients with atrophic gastritis and gastric cancer, but other authors have been unable to reproduce these results  <cit> . similarly, in western populations, significant association between gastric cancer and increased number of epiya c motifs could be demonstrated in two studies  <cit> , maybe either by the small number of included patients in the other studies  <cit> , or by regional/ethnics differences as already demonstrated for other h. pylori virulence markers  <cit> . furthermore, discrepancies have been also demonstrated in studies evaluating the number of epiya c motifs and duodenal ulcer  <cit> , which deserves in deep investigations because duodenal ulcer and gastric cancer are mutually exclusive h. pylori-associated diseases.

therefore we evaluated whether increased number of caga epiya c phosphorylation motifs is associated with gastric cancer and/or duodenal ulcer including a large series of patients to avoid bias and to allow adjustment for age and gender in a western population from brazil. since duodenal ulcer and gastric carcinoma are mutually exclusive diseases, and caga is a risk factor for both conditions, we also evaluated whether the number of epiya c segments of the strains isolated from patients with duodenal ulcer differed from that of the strains isolated from gastric cancer patients. because gastric atrophic and metaplastic changes - precancerous lesions - lead to impairment of the production of pepsinogen i  by chief and mucous neck cells in the corpus and fundic glands, we evaluated whether the higher number of epiya c motifs was associated with the serum pepsinogen levels.

RESULTS
the characteristics of the patients are shown in the table  <dig>  the presence of h. pylori-specific urea and 16s rrna was successfully confirmed by pcr in all studied strains and the caga pcrs were positive, by at least one of the method used, in all strains.

sd, standard deviation

determination of the caga epiya pattern
pcr amplified products from all caga-positive strains showed distinct patterns in the 3' variable region of caga. an electrophoresis gel representing the different caga epiya types is shown in the figure  <dig>  the pcr results were confirmed by sequencing in seventy five randomly selected pcr products from patients of each group.

no epiya d was found in the h. pylori strains studied. the distribution of the epiya genotypes is shown in the table  <dig> 

association between the numbers of epiya c segments and gastric cancer and duodenal ulcer
colonization by h. pylori caga-positive strains possessing two or three epiya c motifs was more frequently observed  in the gastric cancer  than in the gastritis  patients. the association remained strongly significant even after adjusting for age and gender by means of logistic regression . the hosmer-lemeshow test showed good fitness of the model . otherwise, the number of epiya c segments did not associate with duodenal ulcer .

the hosmer-lemeshow test showed good fitness of the model of gastric cancer  and duodenal ulcer .

because it might be speculated that the number of epiya c motifs increases with increasing age, we also constructed a model with the number of epiya c being the dependent variable and the age, sex and h. pylori-associated diseases as independent covariables. increased epiya c segments did not associate with age , sex  and duodenal ulcer  but remained associated with gastric cancer .

association between mixed strain colonization and diseases
mixed strain infection was observed in  <dig>  patients and it was significantly more frequent in patients with gastric cancer  than in those with gastritis  with an or for gastric carcinoma of  <dig>  . otherwise, mixed infection was less frequently observed in duodenal ulcer patients  with a trend to a negative association .

association between the numbers of epiya c segments and serum pgi levels
the pepsinogen i serum levels were significantly higher  in duodenal ulcer  than in gastritis .

the patients infected by caga strains possessing two or three epiya c segments showed decreased levels of pgi when compared with those with infection by caga strains possessing ≤  <dig> epiya c segment .

association between the numbers of epiya c repeats and gastric histological alterations and tumour classification
increased number of epiya c segments was associated with the presence of precancerous lesions, either atrophy  or intestinal metaplasia , but not with the other histological parameters. also, the infection by strains carrying increased epiya c motifs did not associate with intestinal or diffuse tumour type .

discussion
in this study, by evaluating a large series of patient, we demonstrated that those infected by caga-positive h. pylori strains possessing more than one epiya c motif are at thrice-fold increased risk for developing gastric cancer. the strengths of our study include adequate sample size, identification of strains by means of pcr with confirmation by sequencing and adjustment for confounding factors by logistic regression analysis.

caga is considered to be an important bacterial virulence factor associated with both gastric adenocarcinoma and duodenal ulcer disease  <cit> . the number and pattern of phosphorylation motifs seem to further stratify the risk associated with individual strains  <cit> .

it has been demonstrated that h. pylori caga epiya patterns have a significant geographic variability and closely follow patterns of historical human migrations. epiya d is a characteristic asian epiya pattern that virtually does not occur in the western h. pylori strains  <cit> . the brazilians form an unique western population because, despite the multiple origins and the consequent wide diversity of phenotypic appearance, there has been a substantial degree of inter-ethnic breeding and thus most individuals cannot be ascribed to any of the founding groups on the basis of genetic background, rather they carry about 33% of genes from each of the major races that historically composed the country   <cit> . with this background, it would be expected to find some caga epiya d in our h. pylori strains, as it has been detected among amerindians , but we did not detect any epiya d in our population.

unfortunately, there are few studies in respect to the association between epiya c number and h. pylori associated diseases in western populations with discordant results among them. basso et al.  <cit>  showed that higher number of epiya c segments was associated with gastric carcinoma in a caucasian population from italy, similarly to the results of yamaoka et al.  <cit>  evaluating american patients from texas. otherwise, no association was observed when colombian patients were evaluated in the yamaoka's study  <cit>  in accordance with the results obtained by acosta et al.  <cit> , whereas sicinschi et al.  <cit>  observed associations between increased epiya c segments and precancerous lesions. also, non-conclusive results published by argent et al.  <cit>  evaluating  <dig> strains from african patients the authors showed tendency of association between caga with two or more epiya c segments and gastric cancer.

these differences may be explained by different study designs, sample size, populations and geographical diversity of h. pylori markers of pathogenicity, in respect to the caga epiya pattern, highlighting the need of studying different geographical regions.

the results of this study showed that higher number of epiya c segments is associated with gastric cancer and with pre-malignant lesions, atrophy and intestinal metaplasia of the corpus mucosa in the group of patients with gastritis. in agreement with these findings, we also demonstrated that serum concentration of pgi was twice decreased in the patients infected by caga-positive strains with two or three epiya c motifs. because pgi is secreted by chief cells and mucous neck cells in the corpus and fundic glands, serum pgi levels reflect the functional and morphologic status of the oxyntic gastric mucosa; thus, gastric atrophic/metaplastic changes lead to decreased pgi serum levels  <cit> . although the corpus mucosa of patients with h. pylori associated duodenal ulcer is either mildly or not inflamed, the pgi serum levels were also decreased in duodenal ulcer patients infected by strains containing higher number of epiya c segments.

the results of the present study strengthen the potential role of caga polymorphism in the development of gastric cancer in agreement with the results of the previous studies  <cit> . however, we can not exclude the possibility that the genetic constitution of the host, more than the bacterium strain, might predispose to atrophic gastritis and the h. pylori strains carrying increasing numbers of epiya c repeats would have an advantage over other strains in colonizing the new gastric environment or alternatively a more complex interplay of both mechanisms.

in respect to duodenal ulcer, also the results of the studies are discordant  <cit> . our results are in agreement with those reported by basso et al.  <cit>  who also did not find association between the disease and the number of epiya c segments in an italian population. notably, none patient with duodenal ulcer of our cohort was colonized by caga possessing three epiya c segments. as suggested by yamaoka et al.  <cit> , it is possible that strains with higher number of epiya c segments may be less resistant to the acid  <cit> .

we also evaluated whether colonization by different strains  could be associated with disease outcomes. we found that gastric cancer patients were significantly more often colonized by mixed strains, whereas patients with duodenal ulcer had a trend toward less mixed strain colonization. one possibility is that patients with gastric cancer would have areas of gastric mucosa showing cancer transformation, alternating with areas of atrophy, intestinal metaplasia, dysplasia, and normal mucosa, each of them representing microenvironments that would be selectively advantageous to mixed infections  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, we found that infection by h. pylori caga-positive strains harbouring multiple epiya c repeats is associated with gastric precancerous lesions and gastric cancer, but not with duodenal ulcer in an ethnically diverse, admixed, western population.

although infection by h. pylori caga-positive strains is a risk factor for the mutually exclusive diseases, gastric cancer and duodenal ulcer, caga strains possessing higher number of epiya c segments were associated with gastric cancer, but not with duodenal ulcer.

higher number of epiya c segments was also associated with gastric precancerous lesions as demonstrated by histological gastric atrophic and metaplastic changes and decreased serum levels of pepsinogen i.

