BACKGROUND
red clover  is a versatile forage crop legume, which can tolerate a variety of soils and is suitable for silage production for winter feed and for grazing. the benefits of red clover to farming include nitrogen fixation, soil improvement and high nutritive value in terms of protein-rich feed for livestock. like other legumes, nitrogen fixation is facilitated by nodulation via symbiosis with the soil microbe rhizobium leguminarosum <cit> . the nutritional benefits are attributable to easy digestibility, high voluntary intake by livestock and high protein content during ensiling  <cit> . red clover can be grown alone or in a sward mixed with grasses and other legumes, where it has been shown to be more productive than monocultures  <cit> . red clover is a short lived perennial that usually persists for two to three years, although more persistent varieties are available. improving its longevity is a major breeding target  <cit> . persistency is a complex trait, and both biotic and abiotic stresses are known to have a major effect on longevity in the field  <cit> . red clover has a tap root system in the first year, but in subsequent years a more fibrous root system develops at the expense of the tap root, which senesce  <cit> . this is believed to increase susceptibility to diseases of the crown, such as crown rot  <cit> . abiotic stresses are other factors considered to be of major importance for persistency  <cit> . cold and drought stresses are important components of abiotic stress . even temperate forage crops are exposed to periods of drought that have adverse effects on yield and persistency  <cit> . however, little is known about its genetic basis in red clover. two studies have identified quantitative trait loci  for traits related to persistence in red clover. using full sib mapping families  <cit>  found a major qtl for all persistency indices measured on linkage group  <dig>  with heritabilites varying between  <dig>  and  <dig> . klimenko et al.  <cit>  found qtls related to disease resistence and winter hardiness particularly on linkage groups  <dig> and  <dig>  these studies are useful for future marker assisted selection. rna-seq approaches have potential to provide further valuable information about the molecular mechanisms underlying plant responses to abiotic stresses.

effects of drought on gene expression have been studied using microarrays in rice  <cit> , wheat  <cit>  and arabidopsis thaliana <cit> . these and other studies have provided information about the signalling pathways involved in the response to water stresses . a typical response to water stress is to prevent water loss by closing the stomata, and producing abscisic acid . aba initiates a signalling cascade which modifies the transcriptome and up-regulates genes encoding a number of proteins and enzymes involved in drought response  <cit> . these can be divided into signalling and response proteins. signalling proteins include transcription factors, protein kinases and ubiquitin ligases. drought response proteins include dehydrins, heat shock proteins, aquaporins and scavengers of reactive oxygen species  . additionally, metabolic pathways can be modified to compensate for reduced water and co <dig> uptake  <cit> . osmolytes such as proline and pinitol are often produced to lower the osmotic potential in order to maintain water uptake and protect against build-up of toxic ion levels  <cit> .

next generation sequencing  can provide a depth of sequencing that is sufficient to cover the transcriptome of an organism many fold and allow quantification of the detected transcripts. the illumina platform has been used for transcriptome analysis in several plant species . an illumina hiseq <dig> instrument can produce hundreds of millions of paired end reads per flow cell . gene expression is quantified by counting the number of reads per kilobase of transcript per million mapped reads , enabling quantitative comparisons to be made  <cit> . a complication arises with short reads if there is no reference sequence to map the reads onto. in the case of model organisms extensive genomic and transcript sequence data are available, but for non-model organisms the amount of expressed sequence tags  and other transcript sequence data available to use as a reference can vary dramatically. paucity of data in the reference transcriptome can potentially undermine the unbiased potential of ngs transcriptome analysis. fortunately, software specifically designed for de novo reconstruction of the transcriptome from short reads, is available. a variety of methods using short read assemblers have been described in a number of plant species including eucalyptus <cit> , sonneratia alba <cit> , chickpea  <cit> , sweet potato  <cit> , alfalfa  <cit>  and lupin  <cit> .

the primary aim of this work was to use ngs technology to study changes in transcriptome patterns in pooled samples of red clover genotypes, contrasting in their phenotypic response to drought. previous examples of transcriptome analysis have often described effects on seedlings  <cit>  or other shorter term drought treatment. in this work we used mature plants in an experimental set-up designed to mimic field conditions as closely as possible. the plants were f <dig> progeny of a full sib mapping family. based on growth rates and relative water content  we identified two bulks of genotypes contrasting in their response to drought stress. the illumina platform was used to sequence four pools of rna samples, two from the drought tolerant bulk before and after drought stress, and two from the sensitive bulk. it enabled us to assemble de novo a transcriptome library of red clover from paired end reads. as this study was made on genotypes from a mapping population, it also provided an opportunity to mine the pooled samples for putative snp and ssr polymorphisms. finally, information about differentially expressed genes informs our understanding of the fundamental aspects of drought response and identifies potential targets for improved abiotic stress tolerance. as part of this study we have also measured the concentration of a few key metabolites, known from other studies to undergo major changes in concentration in response to water stress.

RESULTS
the mapping family described in methods was used to select a subset of genotypes that contrasted phenotypically in their response to drought stress. leaf material from the two contrasting pools were used as a source for rna-seq data to generate a comprehensive library of transcript tags, and to explore how the two pools responded to drought stress in terms of differences in transcript expression patterns.

selection of drought tolerant and sensitive genotypes
classification of drought tolerant and sensitive genotypes was based on growth rate  day-1) and rwc at the end of a two month drought treatment . drought tolerant genotypes were selected by identifying plants which exhibited the highest rwc and growth rate at dw <dig>  sensitive genotypes were chosen from plants with the lowest rwc and growth rate. the relationship between the two phenotypic parameters among  <dig> genotypes from the mapping family is shown in figure  <dig>  and the ten plants selected from each group are highlighted. statistical analysis of the phenotypic data from all genotypes measured under control conditions  revealed no significant differences between the two groups . the growth rate was significantly higher in the tolerant pool at the mid drought point , and at the end of the drought treatment . the reason for the increased growth rate at mid drought  in both pools is partly that the soil water content was still 42% compared to 52% at the start of the experiment , so the plants did not yet suffer appreciably from drought stress. the other reason is the increasing number of daylight hours and increase in average temperature, during the period of the experiment. the continued increase in growth rate of the tolerant plants even at the later stages of the experiment shows their resilience to this stress. this is also illustrated in the difference in rwc and osmotic potential  between the two sets of genotypes at dw <dig> .figure  <dig> 
scatter plot of plant dry weight against relative water content  after drought stress. the ten drought tolerant genotypes are shown as blue squares and the ten sensitive genotypes as green triangles. the remaining genotypes from the mapping family are shown as red circles.


data for plant growth rate, key metabolites, relative water content and osmotic potential


p

b

source of variation
df
ms
p

c

trait
sensitive
tolerant
a: plant growth rate and 95% confidence intervals   in the sensitive and tolerant pool. dw <dig> is growth rate at the onset of the drought stress treatment, dw <dig> is after 16 days, dw <dig> is at the end of the drought period , and dw <dig> is growth rate 29 days after the end of the drought stress treatment . b: anova table for the growth rate data . the analysis was performed as a repeated measures design with the dw <dig>  as a co-variate. the p value next to the dw <dig> data indicates the significance value for the co-variate only. c: mean values and 95% ci for relative water content  , osmotic potential , and  <dig> metabolites mg -1; nd – below detection limit.

red clover transcriptome assembly
the total rna from both the drought and control treatments for individual plants of the two selected groups was extracted and quality checked. out of the  <dig> rna samples, two failed rna quality check, one from the sensitive control pool and one from the sensitive drought treatment pool. the rna samples which passed quality check were then combined in equal amounts in their respective pools and sent to eurofins ltd genomic service for sequencing. over 100 m of 100 bp paired end reads were generated after quality checking by eurofins. de novo transcriptome reconstruction of the data was made using rna-seq reads and publically available red clover est sequences. given the mixed sequencing data, i.e. the short reads produced in this work and the publically available red clover est sequences , this constitutes a hybrid assembly. this approach generated  <dig> contigs  constituting  <dig> mbp. this transcriptome shotgun assembly project has been deposited at ddbj/embl/genbank under the accession number gaou <dig>  the version described in this paper is the first one, gaou <dig>  the full list of all transcript tags with their annotation and assignment to go terms is available in additional file  <dig>  other relevant statistics include an average transcript tag length of 933 bp, n <dig> of 622 bp,  <dig> × coverage  and longest sequence of 13855 bp. to further evaluate the quality of the assembly, all of the reads were mapped back to the assembled transcriptome using clc genomics workbench v <dig> . <dig>  using a paired end distance of up to 1000 bp 69% of the reads mapped back. a total of  <dig> transcript tags  were assigned a functional name by blast against medicago, arabidopsis or uniprot, and  <dig> transcript tags  were assigned at least one go term.

exploration of gene expression
in total,  <dig> transcript tags were differentially expressed  between treatments and pools. the number of transcript tags with increased expression after drought stress were  <dig> and  <dig>  while the number with decreased expression  were  <dig> and  <dig>  in the sensitive and tolerant pool, respectively . the full list of differentially expressed transcript tags can be seen in additional file  <dig> 

the results are also summarised in figure  <dig>  which shows a heatmap . the overall variation in levels of expression was estimated by recording the coefficient of variation  of each identical transcript tag from the sensitive and tolerant samples. the average of the cv for all the pairs of transcript tags was  <dig> % before drought  and  <dig> % after drought  after filtering out tags with <  <dig> rpkm.table  <dig> 
differentially expressed transcript tags in drought stressed red clover leaves compared with control conditions


results were partitioned between over and under-expressed and the magnitude of difference  in the sensitive and tolerant pools relative to the control.
clustering analysis of differentially expressed transcript tags. heat map of pearsons correlation across  <dig> differentially expressed transcript tags. a dendrogram of correlation between transcript tags is shown to the left of the heatmap.



analysis of enriched gene ontology terms derived from differentially expressed transcript tags after drought stress revealed go terms that were common between the drought tolerant and sensitive pools, and go terms that were unique to each pool. figure  <dig> illustrates the go terms of transcript tags with differential expression. the number of enriched go terms in common between sensitive and tolerant genotypes was  <dig>  while  <dig> and  <dig> unique go terms were different from the expectation for the tolerant and sensitive pools, respectively. figure  <dig> shows the number of transcript tags which were over- and under-represented in various go terms. the sensitive pool has a larger number of differentially expressed transcript tags in almost all go term compared to the tolerant pool. cellular homeostasis  indicates changes in the steady state physiology of the plants. a total of  <dig> transcript tags were over-expressed in the sensitive pool compared to  <dig> in the tolerant pool, and  <dig> and  <dig> were under-expressed in the sensitive and tolerant pools, respectively. in the photosynthesis related categories, the following go terms are highlighted in figure 3: photosynthesis , pigment metabolic process  and plastid organization . a significant number of transcript tags was down-regulated in all these go terms. in the metabolism category the highlighted terms represent regulation of metabolic process , glucose metabolic process , carotenoid and terpenoid biosynthetic process  and proline biosynthesis process . additionally, the following transporter go terms were found: myo-inositol, lipid and ion transport . a number of stress-related go terms were found in all pools including response to high light intensity  and cell death . however, we found that programmed cell death-related terms were specifically enriched relative to expectation in the tolerant pool after drought stress . differential expression in response to drought was identified specifically in the tolerant pool for transcript tags relating to go terms for coenzyme catabolic process, secondary metabolic processes, glycosinolate metabolic processes . in the sensitive pool differentially expressed transcript tags related to unique go terms included proton transport , starch biosynthesis process  and leaf development , as well as a number of abiotic stress go terms including response to water stimulus  and response to heat . specifically, a transcript tag encoding the key aba biosynthesis enzyme 9-cis-epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase   was over-expressed in response to drought stress in both pools. another notable result is that most leucine rich repeat receptor kinases were under-expressed in both pools in response to drought . these proteins are known to be involved in signal transduction pathways for a range of developmental and defence-related processes, including hormone perception and wound response  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
map of enriched go after drought treatment in sensitive and tolerant phenotype pools. the map shows parent/child connections between go terms. go terms are coloured based on significance in two enrichment tests for tolerant and sensitive pools. green: enriched in both pools, pink: enriched only in sensitive pools and blue: enriched only in tolerant pool. the go map is annotated with black circles which are linked to summary go terms, see text for discussion and go terms.
number of differentially expressed transcript tags after drought stress. the data show the number of transcript tags that are over and under-expressed in the tolerant and sensitive pools. the graph shows the go term on the y-axis and number of differentially expressed transcript tags at the end of each bar, for each go term.



while the effect of drought on gene expression was the main focus, we also looked at differences in gene expression between tolerant and sensitive pools under control conditions. the results are shown in additional file  <dig> in the ‘control’ tab. the tolerant pool over-expressed  <dig>  transcript tags compared to the sensitive, which in turn had  <dig> up-regulated transcript tags. we inspected the data manually for gene functions or pathways and in the tolerant pool we found no consistent patterns in the data and interpret this as natural variation due to transcriptome plasticity. in the sensitive pool we identified eight senescence related proteins , which were up-regulated compared to the tolerant genotypes prior to drought stress.

qrt-pcr
to confirm a few of the results from the rna-seq work four transcript tags were selected for qrt-pcr analysis. these included three transcript tags, which were differentially expressed , rc. <dig> , and rc. <dig> ) and one transcript tag which was expressed constitutively ). the results are shown in figure  <dig>  for two transcript tags  the results from the qrt-pcr closely matched the results from the rna-seq. in the case of rc. <dig> the results show a similar trend towards up-regulation, but the fold change in expression is a magnitude higher in the qrt-pcr analysis. the expression level of rc. <dig> did not change between treatments in the rna-seq experiment, while the qrt-pcr showed a down-regulation as a result of the drought treatment.figure  <dig> 
expression changes determined by rna-seq and qrt-pcr in four transcript tags. the graph shows fold change in expression of four transcript tags  in the sensitive and tolerant pools  as a result of drought stress. pink refers to qrt-pcr, and blue to rna-seq.



snp and ssr mining
snp analysis identified  <dig> bi-allelic snp in  <dig> transcript tags. this represents on average a snp per  <dig>  kb of transcriptome. the mean distance between snps in the  <dig> transcript tags containing snps was 240 bp. the distribution of snps is shown in figure  <dig>  a total of  <dig> transcript tags had more than  <dig> snps within them and they accounted for 28% of the total number of snps identified. the  <dig> snp-richest transcript tags totalled 17429 bp, and contained  <dig> snps, which is about one snp per 34 bp. the high number of snps thus is not due to increased length of the transcript tags. we cannot exclude the possibility that some of them represent paralogous genes, which have been erroneously merged in the assembly process. transcripts containing single, double or triple snps amounted to  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> respectively, accounting for  <dig> % of the total number of snps. details of the putative snps are shown in additional file  <dig>  it should be noted that stringent criteria were used to identify these snps . this means that snps were detected in transcript tags with high expression levels. this stringency means that the number of snps reported here is likely to be an underestimation of the total number of snps in the transcriptome. on the other hand the confidence level in the snps listed in additional file  <dig> is high. the snps will still need to be validated, but their annotation indicate potential polymorphisms in drought and cold regulated transcript tags, as well as aba responsive elements, and numerous other potential abiotic stress candidate genes . the fact that the polymorphisms have been identified in genotypes from a full sib family makes genetic mapping of them easier.figure  <dig> 
number of bi-alleleic snps per transcript tag. those with more than  <dig> snps are aggregated.



the transcript library assembled here also represents a rich source of material for potential transcript-anchored ssr markers. the misa perl script  was used to search for such sequences in the assembly. the results are summarised in table  <dig>  in total,  <dig> ssrs with 2- <dig> repeat units were identified in  <dig>  mb of transcript sequence data, which amounts to one ssr per  <dig>  kb. the number of ssr containing transcripts represented approximately 6% of the total. the largest proportion of ssrs  consisted of tri-nucleotide repeats, with about half as many di-nucleotide repeats. the higher complexity nucleotide repeat ssrs were present in progressively smaller, but still significant, numbers . additional file  <dig> provides a list of the transcript tags containing ssr motifs, and additional file  <dig> is a list of primer pairs designed for amplification of  <dig> of the  <dig> transcript tags containing ssrs.table  <dig> 
breakdown of ssr repeats present in the red clover transcriptome assembly



distribution of ssr repeat types


metabolite analysis
the metabolite analysis data summarised in table 1c show that pinitol, proline and malate all increased in concentration following exposure to drought, while glucose, fructose and myo-inositol remained unchanged. particularly pinitol concentration rose dramatically from a little over  <dig> % of dry matter to over 10% during the course of drought exposure. while proline concentration also rose significantly, it was from a very low base , and the overall concentration of this metabolite was much lower than pinitol. malate concentration was also measured. it can be formed by combining co <dig> with phosphoenol pyruvate under conditions of limiting co <dig> availability, such as stomatal closure  <cit> . in c <dig> plants malate is shuttled between mesophyll and bundle sheath cells, where it is decarboxylated, and recycled. given that water stress leads to stomatal closure and decreased co <dig> availability, it seemed reasonable to look for changes in malate concentration in response to drought stress. while the concentration of malate increased , we did not observe convincing evidence for significant changes in expression of transcript tags encoding any of the key enzymes in co <dig> metabolism which would be necessary for a malate shuttle. this includes phosphoenolpyruvate carboxylase, nadp-dependent malic enzyme, malate dehydrogenase and pyruvate-orthophosphate dikinase.

discussion
this work has generated a large amount of sequence data with ngs technology in a non-model crop species. although red clover previously had a number of resources available, such as an est database  <cit>  the work described here, has greatly increased the number of transcript sequences available. the high number of sequenced reads resulted in significant coverage of the transcriptome in leaves, allowing gene discovery, quantification of transcripts in four pools and the identification of putative snps and ssrs.

in this experiment we used mature plants in a long term  experiment to simulate the effects of drought as realistically as possible in a greenhouse environment. many drought experiments described in the literature involving transcriptomics have used seedlings and/or short term drought treatment which minimises variation due to environmental factors . while long term experiments are likely to introduce more variation between genotypes and replicate plants, it may also provide potentially novel information on how the plant responds to prolonged periods of water deficiency. a large number of transcript tags were differentially expressed in response to the drought stress in both the sensitive and tolerant plants , but variation in expression levels  was slightly larger before than after drought. we used a pooling strategy to reduce within and between pool differences. this approach has been widely used in rna-seq experiments to study for example cell wall composition in alfalfa  <cit> , berry development in vitis viniferia <cit> , tissue specific expression in eucalyptus <cit>  and floral sex determination in cucumber  <cit> . barcoding of the four pools enabled multiplexing libraries on a single lane of the flow-cell. this reduced possible confounding effects arising from between-flow-cell differences  <cit> . it is also interesting to note that expression levels before drought were similar in both pools for 99% of the transcript tags. this suggests that the differences in gene expression which we observed in the two sets of genotypes at the end of the drought stress period are likely to represent a response to the drought stress rather than a difference between the two pools per se.

in the qrt-pcr experiment three out of four of the transcript tags tested showed similar changes in expression as was observed in the rna-seq experiment. the reasons for the discrepancy between the two methods for rc. <dig> are not clear to us. while our data represent a small sample, the results are however of a similar nature to those reported in  <cit> . they found that  <dig> out of  <dig> genes matched the expected rpkm values when quantified using qrt-pcr.

the results reported here represent a platform for further examination of candidate genes with a potential role in plant response to drought stress. the total size of the transcriptome assembled was 42 mb. this constitutes around 10% of the predicted genome size   <cit> . approximately 46 k transcript tags were generated in the transcriptome reconstruction. this is similar to those found in medicago truncatula   <cit> , soybean   <cit>  and arabidopsis   <cit> . the number and total size of transcripts naturally vary for de novo assemblies of other species, such as in chickpea  transcripts   <cit> , sonneratia alba, 30 k transcripts   <cit>  and eucalyptus, 18 k transcripts   <cit> . an  <dig> fold coverage filter on contigs was used in eucalyptus, and a 2× minimum coverage in s. alba. this would explain the smaller numbers found in those transcriptomes. using the same filters for rpkm a similar number of transcript tags would be realised in the present experiment. due to the heterozygous and allogamous nature of red clover it is likely, that there is some redundancy in our transcriptome assembly. the transcriptome size may thus be over-estimated. on the other hand, erroneously merged assemblies would lead to underestimation of the transcript numbers. the snp detection process showed that  <dig> transcript tags had greater than  <dig> snps , which may suggest that the assembly process in those cases merged paralogues or that the reads could be miss-aligned. the allogamous nature of red clover and the pooling strategy used in the experiment makes it challenging to distinguish with certainty between allelic variants and paralogous genes. therefore it is reasonable to assume there are a few inconsistencies in the assembled transcriptome. nevertheless, the majority of the transcript tags do have high coverage and have high similarity to known transcripts.

in this experiment the level of water stress as measured by soil water content was identical across bins at the time of sampling during the drought treatment . nevertheless, the sensitive and tolerant plants showed contrasting responses to the same level of soil moisture. the sensitive genotypes had a rwc of approximately 43% . in contrast, the tolerant genotypes had a rwc of 78%, which is only slightly below what is found in non-droughted plants  . this difference manifested itself by the observation that more than twice the number of transcript tags was differentially expressed in the sensitive pool compared to its control, than was the case in the tolerant pool compared to its control. it would be difficult to infer which differentially expressed transcript tags qualify as genes directly involved in response to the drought stress, and as candidates for targeting in genetic improvement programmes. nevertheless, the results do provide a comprehensive overview of gene expression changes after drought stress. the number of differentially expressed transcript tags which were detected as a result of the drought treatment  are similar to those reported in other species such as rice   <cit> , wheat   <cit>  and arabidopsis   <cit> , albeit for shorter term drought stress.

there was a large degree of overlap between go terms of differentially expressed transcript tags between the sensitive and tolerant pools in their response to drought. the main difference is that a larger number of transcript tags from the sensitive pool with the same go terms were either up-regulated or down-regulated in response to the drought, compared to the tolerant pool . the reason for this is not clear, but could simply be a consequence of the degree of severity of the stress experienced by the plants in the two pools. down-regulation of the photosynthetic apparatus also involves more genes in the sensitive pool than the tolerant, possibly also caused by the difference in sensitivity to the stress . the results contrast with those of  <cit> , who found that more genes were up-regulated in tolerant barley genotypes than in sensitive. comparisons with short term drought experiments are however, difficult to make. the gradual onset of drought conditions in the present experiment may elicit the differential expression of more genes to counteract the severity of the stress. nevertheless, even the relatively modest reduction of ~10% in rwc observed in the tolerant pool, elicited a significant transcriptome response albeit after prolonged water limitation.

another finding is the high number of senescence-related transcript tags that were up-regulated in the sensitive pool in non-droughted plants. perhaps the sensitive plants have a predisposition for reduced growth and less stress tolerance  <cit> . chaves et al. <cit>  suggested that plants not predisposed to early senescence may be of value for breeding purposes. identification of molecular markers or other biomarkers associated with these differences could potentially assist in the removal of such sensitive plants from the gene-pool in a population-based breeding programme. in two of those transcripts  snps were identified .

the transcript tags which were differentially expressed are similar to those from other drought studies where large transcriptome profiling was used . they can be divided into three main groups: functional, regulatory and photosynthesis related genes. functional drought response genes include protection enzymes , osmolyte biosynthesis , transporters . regulatory proteins include transcription factors , and those involved in post-transcriptional modification  and post-translational modification,  and epigenetic factors  . when plants are unable to use or dissipate absorbed light energy, the excess energy leads to production of ros which can cause oxidative damage to the photosynthetic machinery  <cit> . under prolonged drought stress, the photosynthetic machinery is down-regulated  <cit> . this is also the case in this study, where particularly transcript tags encoding rubisco and polypeptides involved in psii and psi were down-regulated . the rate of recovery of the plant after drought is tightly linked to photosynthetic recovery  <cit> . therefore plants which maintain larger portions of their photosynthesising apparatus would have an advantage over those with a lower portion once the stress is alleviated.

three metabolites known to accumulate in plants in response to drought were measured in this work. pinitol accumulation was most dramatic and statistically significant . we therefore tried to identify a candidate gene likely to represent the o-methyl transferase activity required for the key step in the biosynthesis of pinitol from myo-inositol  <cit> . the greatest homology with the orthologue in the ice-plant  was rc. <dig>  but when we did a blast search with that as the query, most of the best hits were to genes annotated as caffeic acid-o-methyl transferase. furthermore, expression of rc. <dig> did not increase in response to drought. one explanation could be that the accumulation of pinitol took place early in the drought stress period, and expression of the gene had declined by the end of the drought period. that seems unlikely, since transcript tags annotated as two of the key enzymes in proline biosynthesis were over-expressed in both the sensitive and the tolerant pool in response to drought , and rc.35692: Δ1-pyrroline-5-carboxylate synthetase  . however, the similarity between most o-methyl transferases makes accurate annotation more challenging. it is surprising to us though, that this gene does not appear to have been identified in any legume despite the high concentration of pinitol and other polyols in this family .

CONCLUSIONS
this work makes available the first transcriptome library of red clover using next generation sequencing technology. the library was constructed using two pairs of pools of ten genotypes from an f <dig> mapping family. rna from the two pairs of pools  was extracted before and at the end of a 60 day period of drought. the rna-seq analysis provided a total of  <dig> transcripts longer than 200 bp. a large number of transcript tags involved in the photosynthetic apparatus were down-regulated in both the sensitive and tolerant pools, but particularly in the former. a great many transcription factors, genes involved in protein modification and degradation were up-regulated in both pools after drought, but again, particularly in the sensitive pool. as expected, a number of genes involved in aba biosynthesis and abiotic stress signal transduction were also up-regulated. the general trend was that a larger number of genes were up-regulated in the sensitive pool than in the tolerant. despite the highly significant increase in the concentration of the compatible solute pinitol, we were unable to definitively identify the gene encoding the o-methyl transferase responsible for the key step in pinitol biosynthesis from myo-inositol. we recognise the limitations of the quantitative aspects of this work, and that further validation of the assembly is needed, but the results presented here provide a valuable resource for future work in terms of snp identification, and annotation of genome sequence assembly currently in progress.

