BACKGROUND
the majority of microorganisms present in natural ecosystems cannot be cultured in the laboratory and hence remain unexplored. to exploit the potential of this unexplored diversity, the new field, called metagenomics, has been initiated in the recent years.

the first step in a typical metagenomics project involves estimating the microbial diversity present in the environmental sample under study. obtaining accurate estimates of this diversity is an important step and forms the first objective of any metagenomics project. analyzing 16s ribosomal rna  gene  sequences is the most commonly used method for rapidly estimating microbial diversity  <cit> . this method is based on the following premise. major portions of the 16s rdna sequence are highly conserved across all bacterial and archaeal species  <cit> . using primers that can hybridize with these conserved portions, 16s rdna sequences of most of the microbes  in a given environmental sample are directly amplified, cloned and sequenced. subsequently, the taxonomic affiliation of the obtained 16s rdna sequences is identified using 16s rdna sequence analysis platforms such as greengenes  <cit> , rdp classifier  <cit> , etc. enumerating the number of 16s rdna sequences assigned to various taxonomic clades helps in quantifying the relative abundance of various organisms/taxa present in the given environmental sample.

in the second step of any metagenomics project, the entire genomic content of the environmental sample under study is extracted and sequenced. millions of dna sequences originating from the genomes of various microbes in the sample are thus obtained. using computational techniques, the genes harbored in these dna sequences are identified and functionally characterized.

since the first step, i.e the 16s rdna profiling, is expected to provide a near comprehensive snapshot of microbial diversity, almost all metagenomic projects spend considerable amount of time, money and manpower for completing the various experimental procedures involved in this step. for instance, in a metagenomics study performed by manichanh et al. , the process of 16s rdna extraction and amplification  took approximately  <dig> months and required three persons and the cost incurred was more than $ <dig>  of materials and equipments  <cit> .

since the sequences obtained from the complete dna content of an environmental sample  contains rdna fragments, it is possible  to computationally identify these rdna fragments directly from the sequenced environmental dna. considering the availability of faster and cheaper sequencing technologies, such as  <dig>  <cit> , the applicability of an alternative in silico approach to identify 16s rdna fragments directly from the completely sequenced metagenomes will be immense, since it would not only save huge amount of time, efforts and money , but would also circumvent various experimental limitations associated with 16s rdna profiling  <cit> . the recently published 'meta-rna' program  <cit>  represents a fairly successful attempt in developing such an alternative in silico approach. as a pre-processing step, this program uses the hmmer program  <cit>  for first building a set of hmms  that reflect/represent the sequence conservation found within rdna sequences in archaeal and bacterial clades. during run time, the program aligns sequences in a given metagenomic data set against these precomputed hmms, and sequences showing significant alignment scores  to these models are identified by the meta-rna program as 16s rdna fragments.

in spite of having significantly high detection sensitivity , enormous compute time is needed by the meta-rna program for analyzing huge metagenomic data sets. our experiments  with simulated data sets indicated that the meta-rna program takes approximately  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> milliseconds for analyzing a query sequence of length  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> base pairs , respectively. at this rate, approximately  <dig> hours  would be needed for analyzing the  <dig> , <dig> sequences  constituting the global ocean sampling expedition microbial metagenomic data sets  <cit> . even for a relatively smaller data set, such as the mouse gut metagenome, consisting of  <dig> , <dig> sequences with average length around  <dig> bp  <cit> , the total analysis time needed by the meta-rna program would exceed  <dig> hours.

a careful examination of the analysis procedure reveals that the meta-rna program needs to analyze every individual sequence in a given metagenomic data set to identify rdna fragments. besides being time consuming, analyzing every sequence is also not an ideal procedure  given the following observation. several recent studies on metagenomic data sets obtained from diverse environments such as sargasso sea  <cit> , soil  <cit>  and sludge  <cit>  have indicated that the percentage of metagenomic sequences that harbor portions of the rdna gene is generally less than  <dig> %. in this paper, we propose an approach termed as i-rdna  that can rapidly identify a small subset of metagenomic sequences  that, in high probability, harbor portions of the rdna gene. sequences belonging to only this  subset can further be analyzed using the meta-rna program. we demonstrate that adopting the i-rdna program as a precursor step to the meta-rna program reduces the overall detection time by several fold. importantly, this significant reduction in analysis time does not affect the overall detection sensitivity.

RESULTS
i-rdna algorithm
the i-rdna algorithm is based on the following premise. major portions of the 16s rdna gene sequence are highly conserved across all bacterial and archaeal species. consequently, 16s rdna sequences are expected to have an oligonucleotide composition distinct as compared to the oligonucleotide composition of dna sequences originating from other portions of the genome. therefore if genome fragments obtained from all known bacterial and archaeal genomes are clustered based on oligonucleotide usage patterns, fragments harboring portions of the 16s rdna gene sequence  will get spatially localized to a 'few' clusters in feature vector space with high frequency. in the pre-processing step, the method presented in this paper identifies these 'few' clusters  and tags them as 'probable' rdna clusters. while performing the actual analysis , the i-rdna algorithm first identifies a set of clusters  whose sequences have an oligonucleotide composition similar to that of the query sequence being analyzed. subsequently, i-rdna algorithm classifies a given query sequence as a 'probable 16s rdna fragment' if the overlap between the set of clusters  and the set of clusters pre-tagged as 'probable 16s rdna clusters' exceeds a pre-determined threshold percentage. given that the run time steps of the i-rdna algorithm only involves finding the closest clusters  for a given query sequence, and subsequently checking if the overlap percentage  exceeds a pre-determined threshold, the i-rdna algorithm is able to rapidly analyze huge metagenomic data sets within a short span of time and identify  probable rdna fragments from amongst millions of sequences constituting the complete metagenomic data set. the meta-rna algorithm can then be employed for analyzing this small set of candidate 16s rdna query fragments.

validation
twelve simulated metagenomic data sets were used for evaluating the performance of the i-rdna algorithm. three of these data sets  were downloaded from http://fames.jgi-psf.org/. these simulated data sets of varying taxonomic complexity  were constructed by combining real time sequencing reads from  <dig> organisms listed in additional file  <dig>  these simulated 'gold-standard' data sets  <cit>  are generally used for evaluating the performance of algorithms used in metagenomic analysis. using the same coverage values used while creating these  <dig> simulated data sets , we applied the program metasim  <cit>  on the same  <dig> organisms for generating  <dig> more data sets. these additional data sets can be divided into three groups having sequences of average lengths  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> base pairs respectively. sequences in these data sets thus simulated the typical sequence lengths obtained from existing sequencing technologies, namely 454-titanium , 454-standard , and roche-gs <dig> .

these  <dig> simulated data sets were first given as input to the meta-rna algorithm. the number of rdna fragments identified in each data set by the meta-rna algorithm was noted down. the same data sets were then given as input to the i-rdna algorithm. sequences identified by the i-rdna algorithm as 'probable' 16s rdna fragments  were consequently given as input to the meta-rna algorithm. the number of rdna fragments identified in this two step procedure  and the overall analysis time taken for this alternative approach was noted down. results of these experiments are given in table  <dig> 

* x = the total number of sequences in a given data set; y = total number of sequences predicted by the i-rdna program as 'probable rdna sequences' in that data set

** a = the total number of 16s rdna sequences predicted by meta-rna program in the entire data set;

b = number of 16s rdna sequences within the subset of 'probable r-dna sequences' predicted by i-rdna

the overall pattern of results indicates that the two-step procedure  is able to detect around 85-94% of 16s rdna fragments in a given data set. around 9-17% of sequences in the data sets are observed to be predicted by the i-rdna algorithm as 'probable 16s rdna sequences'. as expected, providing this relatively small subset of 'probable' sequences as input to the meta-rna algorithm  results in 6- <dig> fold reduction in the overall processing time. it is significant to note that negligible time is required by the i-rdna algorithm for identifying the initial 16s rdna candidate set. the i-rdna algorithm is able to process approximately  <dig>  sequences/minute. for example, i-rdna algorithm processed  <dig> , <dig> mouse gut metagenome sequences  <cit>  in  <dig> minutes, and in the process it identified  <dig>  'probable' 16s rdna sequences. another  <dig> minutes were needed by the meta-rna algorithm for analyzing this subset of probable candidates identified by i-rdna. the overall processing time for this data set was thus reduced from  <dig> minutes  taken by meta-rna to  <dig> minutes  by i-rdna followed by meta-rna. a similar estimate on the  <dig> , <dig> sequences in the global ocean sampling expedition microbial metagenomic data sets  <cit>  indicates a significant reduction in total analysis time from approximately  <dig> hours  to  <dig> hours .

given that the final objective of 'computationally' identifying 16s rdna fragments is to obtain a taxonomic profile of any given metagenomic data set, any loss in detection sensitivity by the i-rdna approach will be 'acceptable', only if the 'reduced detection sensitivity' does not significantly alter the taxonomic profile of a given metagenomic data set. using a recently published metagenomic data set, the following experiment was performed to verify if 'similar' taxonomic profiles are obtained by providing input sequences to  i-rdna or  directly to the meta-rna program. approximately  <dig>  million sequences constituting the metagenomic data set sampled from a malnourished child  <cit>  were provided as input to  i-rdna and  directly to the meta-rna program. providing the entire data set directly to the meta-rna program identified  <dig> 16s rdna sequences. on the other hand, the i-rdna program  identified  <dig> 16s rdna sequences . the rdp classifier  <cit>  was subsequently used for obtaining the taxonomic profile of sequences identified as 16s rdna fragments by either methods. the taxonomic profiles obtained were then compared at various taxonomic levels.

results of the above experiments  indicate that the taxonomic profiles  obtained using 16s sequences predicted by either methods are very similar. consequently, the marginal loss in detection sensitivity of the i-rdna program does not seem to impact the obtained taxonomic profile. moreover, the time taken by the i-rdna approach for analysing this metagenome was observed to be approximately  <dig> times lesser  as compared to that of the meta-rna program . the above results reaffirm the suitability/applicability of the i-rdna program for analysing real metagenomic data sets.

* the taxonomic affiliations were obtained by providing the sequences as input to the rdp classifier :5261- <dig> 

# gupta ss, mohammed mh, ghosh ts, kanungo s, nair gb, mande ss. metagenome of the gut of a malnourished child. gut pathog.  <dig> may 20;3: <dig> 

to further demonstrate the applicability of the i-rdna algorithm for typical metagenomic data sets , it is important to test the present algorithm's ability in detecting the rdna fragments originating from organisms belonging to new  taxonomic clades. for this purpose, the following 'leave one clade out' testing strategy was adopted. in an iterative manner, 16s rdna sequences belonging to a species or genus or family or order or class or phylum were not considered while pre- computing the 'probable 16s rdna clusters' . these six different simulated scenarios were referred to as 'new species', 'new genus', 'new family', 'new order', 'new class' and 'new phylum', respectively. subsequently, these left out sequences  were tested against the respective modified set of 'probable 16s rdna clusters'. these tests were also carried out using four sequence lengths  that mimicked sequences obtained using the four commonly used sequencing technologies mentioned above.

discussion
a typical metagenomic analysis comprises of two major phases of experimentation. the first phase involves isolation, amplification and sequencing of the rdna content of the environmental sample to obtain estimates of taxonomic diversity. in the second phase, the entire genomic content of the environmental sample is sequenced and analyzed. both phases therefore involve costs with respect to time, money and manpower for carrying out experimentation and analysis. given the ability of the approach  to accurately and rapidly identify rdna fragments directly from the sequenced genomic content , the in silico approach suggested in this paper has the potential to completely bypass the first phase of experimentation, thereby eliminating the costs associated with this phase.

it should be noted that conservation of oligonucleotide usage patterns within rdna genes forms the premise of the i-rdna algorithm. consequently, the subset of sequences predicted by the i-rdna algorithm as probable rdna fragments is a mix of true 16s rdna fragments and other genomic fragments  sharing an oligonucleotide composition similar to the rdna genes. however, the size of the predicted subset  as a proportion of the total data set is observed to be around 10-15%. this indicates that the oligonucleotide composition of approximately 10-15% of genomic regions in prokaryotic organisms resembles that of the 16s rdna gene. this region is probably well conserved and would be interesting for further analysis. however it should be noted that the subsequent use of the meta-rna program of this predicted subset helps in identifying the true set of rdna fragments in the given data set. as demonstrated in this paper, using the meta-rna program on the subset of the sequences , rather than the whole data set results in significant saving of time with minimal loss in detection sensitivity.

furthermore, given the premise of the i-rdna algorithm is based on conservation of oligonucleotide usage patterns, the i-rdna approach can, in principle, be applied for the identification of any phylogenetic marker gene exhibiting universal sequence conservation at nucleotide level. the current study involving 16s rdna sequences  can be taken as a proof of concept for the above assertion. however, the following aspects need to be considered before extending the i-rdna approach to other phylogenetic marker genes. first, the marker gene should be conserved across all phylogenetic clades. second, sequences belonging to the marker gene should also be available in sufficient numbers. this is important given that the training process  involves identification of a set of ‘probable marker gene clusters’. the higher the number of marker gene sequences available, the more robust is the training process.

the initial step in the i-rdna approach involves  pre-clustering of genomics fragments generated from completely sequenced microbial genomes. in the present study, the time taken for performing this initial step was only about  <dig> hours on a simple desktop . this includes the time taken for  generating all the vectors  the actual clustering step, as well as, for  obtaining the vectors corresponding to the final cluster centroids. however, it should be noted that the initial clustering step  is a 'one-time' process. the actual run-time steps of the i-rdna approach do not involve a repetition of the initial clustering steps.

the final detection of 16s rdna fragments within the i-rdna approach is dependent on the detection sensitivity of the downstream meta-rna program. results in the original published paper  <cit>  of the meta-rna program indicate high detection sensitivity. even in our experiments, the percentage of 16s sequences missed by the meta-rna program was observed to be negligible. for instance, the meta-rna program failed to detect only  <dig> out of  <dig>  high quality 16s rdna sequences downloaded from the rdp database. we performed an evaluation of such sequences  in the following manner. using clustalw  <cit> , we generated a multiple sequence alignment and the corresponding trees indicating the relative distances between 16s rdna sequences  and representative sequences of the corresponding genera. it was observed that 16s rdna sequences missed by meta-rna are relatively distant from other representative sequences belonging to the same genera. for instance, the 16s rdna sequence  belonging to mycobacterium sp.  <dig>  was observed to be highly distinct as compared to 16s rdna sequences of other species belonging to genus mycobacterium. the resulting tree  for these sequences is shown in figure  <dig>  in this figure, sequence s <dig>  is observed to be placed at a relatively higher distance from the other 16s rdna sequences belonging to genus mycobacterium. given that the meta-rna program uses universal hmm models  for predicting 16s rdna fragments, it is expected that the meta-rna program will miss such 16s rdna sequences having deviant sequence architectures.

CONCLUSIONS
the paper presents an algorithmic approach that can rapidly identify probable 16s rdna sequences from metagenomic sequence data sets typically constituted of millions of sequences. the detection sensitivity of this algorithmic approach has been validated using simulated sequence data sets generated using four different sequencing technologies . validation results, even using simulated metagenomic data sets , indicate high detection sensitivity by the approach discussed in this paper. furthermore, the i-rdna algorithm is able to process a million metagenomic sequences in less than an hour.

in addition to the speed of execution and the high detection sensitivity, the utility of the approach discussed in this paper would be immense since it would bypass the entire experimental step of primer-based rdna amplification, cloning and sequencing. this would result in drastically reducing the cost, time and human efforts invested in all metagenomic projects.

