BACKGROUND
the ecological and evolutionary forces that maintain genetic polymorphisms are of interest to the evolution of alternative phenotypes. when polymorphisms are restricted to one sex this is usually explained in the context of sexual selection. polymorphisms restricted to females, namely female-limited polymorphisms, occur in a variety of taxa including insects, fish and mammals  <cit>  and are frequently observed in odonata   <cit> . in damselflies, female-limited colour polymorphisms are common. generally, one female morph  resembles conspecific males in body colouration  <cit>  and behaviour  <cit> , whereas the other female morph  are unlike males  in these traits  <cit> .

the maintenance of female-limited colour polymorphisms in damselflies has been explained by sexual conflict over mating rates e.g.  <cit> . in promiscuous species, such as damselflies, reproductive success of males often increases with the number of matings, whereas reproductive success of females follows a law of diminishing returns, leading to a lower optimal mating frequency for females  <cit> . although accurate quantifications of mating costs in wild damselfly populations are difficult to obtain, it seems likely that females suffer fitness costs from excessive male mating harassment, since sexual interactions and copulations reduce foraging time and/or increase the risks of injuries and predation  <cit> . if copulations, or mating behaviour more generally, are costly to females  <cit>  and if one or few matings suffice for the lifetime fertilization of eggs  <cit> , then females are expected to limit their mating frequency. nevertheless, female damselflies usually mate several times during their reproductive lifespan, and sometimes even several times before each oviposition  <cit> .

investigations to understand the mechanisms governing the maintenance and evolution of the colour polymorphism in damselflies have focussed on two adaptive hypotheses; the male mimicry and the learned mate recognition hypotheses  <cit> . both have in common that they assume that female polymorphism is maintained by negative frequency-dependent selection, with the primary selective force being costly male sexual harassment. they differ, however, regarding their predictions of mating harassment in response to the androchrome frequency at a population. according to the male mimicry hypothesis, androchrome females are predicted to receive less male harassment due to their resemblance to males, unless androchrome females become the majority morph in the population, at which point the mimetic protection breaks down and males should become indiscriminate between female morphs  <cit> . the learned mate recognition hypothesis assumes that male mating preference for a female morph increases with the encounter frequency of that female morph in the population  <cit> . the majority of studies to date have used field or laboratory estimates of mating rates at different morph frequencies to investigate the maintenance of female-limited polymorphisms in damselflies  <cit> . a general finding of these aforementioned studies was that androchrome females have typically lower mating rates.

previous studies investigating morph and morph specific mating frequencies in the damselfly ischnura elegans suggest that male mating harassment may promote the maintenance of this sexual mating polymorphism in females through density- and frequency-dependent processes  <cit> . in this context, male mating preferences for female morphs are of great importance and have been investigated thoroughly in mature males  <cit> . because morph frequencies can change rapidly in populations, and female morphs not just differ in colour but also in morphology  <cit> , fecundity and resistance to male mating attempts  <cit> , it may be adaptive for males to adjust their mating preferences over time and depending on the ecological context. in addition, although there is suggestive evidence that male preference for a certain female morph depends on the previous experience with that female morph e.g.  <cit> , the role of innate male mating preferences and ontogenetic changes in male preference have until now received little attention  <cit> .

here, we study mating frequencies in the wild and experimentally assess innate male preferences and learning of male preferences in i. elegans to investigate the extent of ontogenetic changes in male mate preferences during development. in particular, we performed male mating preference experiments using naïve and experienced mature males to investigate if innate preferences for female morphs exist and to evaluate associative learning of mate preferences. with these experiments, we can test whether male mate preferences start out as being plastic or whether males show an innate preference for a female morph type. the experiments will also allow us to evaluate the role of mate learning in this system, which has been shown to affect mating decisions in other damselfly species  <cit> . in addition, we use for the first time molecular markers to estimate differences in the degree of polyandry between female morphs in the wild, to get accurate measurements of mating rates of mature individuals under natural conditions that can be compared to the estimates obtained using the experimental setups. our results indicate that i. elegans males lose their innate preference for androchrome females and, once they gather experience with females, either show a preference for gynochrome females or no preference for morph type. additionally all different estimates of female mating frequencies showed that androchrome females mate less than gynochrome females.

RESULTS
proportions of first time matings of morphs
a total of  <dig> females  were caught in copula and dissected. of these,  <dig> % had no sperm in the spermatheca, and hence were classified as females mating for the first time. controlling for variation in mating frequencies across populations , the proportion of androchrome females mating for the first time  was higher compared to gynochrome females  .

female mating estimates from molecular markers
twenty-eight androchrome and  <dig> gynochrome females from louro and koudekerke were dissected. of these, four androchrome and one gynochrome females had empty spermathecae. of the  <dig> females with sperm,  <dig> androchrome and nine gynochrome females could be successfully genotyped for at least four microsatellites. the remaining  <dig> sperm samples could not be genotyped due to the difficulty of extracting dna from the sperm, dissecting sperm from the spermatheca or amplifying the small amount of dna of each sample.

the average number of alleles detected in the sperm, per female across two morphs and five microsatellite loci, was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . sperm collected from androchrome females contained significantly fewer alleles  compared to gynochrome females . in addition, androchrome females showed both a significantly lower maximum number of alleles per locus  and a lower minimum number of alleles . the mean number of alleles across loci and the maximum number of alleles per locus did not differ between populations , but the minimum number of alleles detected was higher at koudekerke . generally, these patterns indicate that the degree of polyandry is higher in gynochrome females.

males from louro  were genotyped for the five microsatellite loci to estimate the number of male specific allele frequencies at this population. the observed heterozygosity was  <dig>  and the expected heterozygosity was  <dig>  while the total number of alleles was  <dig> and the allelic richness across loci  <dig> . based on male allele frequencies in louro, the maximum likelihood number of mating partners, which was estimated among 1– <dig> mating partners, for both morphs combined was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  sd . despite the small sample size, the estimated number of mating partners was consistent with the estimated number of alleles: gynochrome females had over twice as many mating partners  than androchrome females . this difference between androchrome and gynochrome females was significant .

male sexual preferences: mature and naïve males
the sexual preference of mature males to female morphs differed between populations as models  containing interactions between population and female morph, and between population and presentation order, were more supported than models without these interaction terms . the models containing one or both of these interactions  had a combined aic weight of  <dig> , whereas models without these interactions had virtually no support. therefore we analysed sexual preferences of mature males for each population separately. in louro and laxe, there were no preferences for either morph type , and there was no effect of presentation order . in doniños, males preferred to mate with gynochrome females  and the sexual preference was higher towards the female morph that was presented first .

unlike mature males, naïve, inexperienced males showed a higher sexual preference towards androchrome females . interestingly, habituating naïve males to one of the two morphs did not affect male preferences as indicated by an absence of an effect of treatment type, and the absence of an interaction between treatment type and female morph . males from both treatments showed similar preferences to unhabituated males . although a model with an interaction between female morph and presentation was the model with the lowest aic value in our dataset , this model was not much better than a model containing only female morph as predictor .

discussion
the processes governing the maintenance and evolution of heritable polymorphisms are of great interest. this is because genetic polymorphisms can be drivers of adaptive diversification through the generation of genetic and phenotypic diversity and have been implicated in the early stages of speciation  <cit> .

our field data showed that although morph frequencies varied widely over space and time , morph mating frequencies were in all populations  lower for the androchrome females than for the gynochrome females . lower mating frequencies of androchrome females have previously been reported in other closely related species such as i. ramburi <cit> , i. fluviatilis <cit> , i. graellsii <cit>  and also in previous studies of i. elegans <cit> , although exceptions exists  <cit> . the higher mating rates in gynochrome females were consistent with field estimates of first time matings . we found that androchrome females were significantly more often in copula for the first time than gynochrome females, i.e. the degree of polyandry was higher in gynochrome females . our field estimates of the lower mating frequencies in androchrome females were corroborated by our molecular analyses of sperm in females that were caught while copulating. both estimates of polyandry , were consistent with a smaller number of mating partners in androchrome females  <cit>  figure  <dig>  although the estimate for maximum likelihood number of mating partners per morph type should be interpreted with caution since it is based on a small sample size of  <dig> individuals.

observed and expected mating frequencies were compared with a χ2-test. a denotes androchrome and g gynochrome females. morph percentages are given before and morph numbers  within brackets.

though the field and molecular data on mating frequencies were consistent, we noted that the molecular data yielded more sensitive measures on mating frequencies, allowing the detection of smaller differences in mating numbers than classical field observations. for example, it was not possible to find significant differences between the observed and expected mating frequencies in the androchrome females from louro  when we only based our analyses on morph and mating frequencies . however, when we estimated the female mating frequencies using sperm genotyping, we found that the androchrome females from louro mated less than expected based on the morph frequencies. this observation might be important when one wants to investigate the effects of small mating differences between populations, and in such a case, we suggest that molecular methods should be employed. it should also be noted, however, that molecular methods have limitations. first, females have to be collected and often killed to estimate their copulation histories, and this means that we can only study part of their life. second, if males that have mated with the same female share one or more alleles, then it is not possible to detect all possible partners, and the evaluation of the minimum number of matings will be underestimated . third, the dissection of genitalia and the application of molecular methods also contain some methodological difficulties  and these methods imply additional costs .

we tested male sexual preferences for female morphs in populations with contrasting androchrome frequencies . using sequential presentation trials, we detected either preference for gynochrome females  or no preference  in experienced males . the lack of a clear morph preference of experienced i. elegans males in our experiments, in combination with the lower mating frequencies of androchrome females in natural populations suggests that male–female mating interactions, significantly affect the outcome of male mating attempts. moreover, this outcome is morph-specific and irrespective of the population morph frequency. we will discuss the two most likely factors affecting the outcome of male mating attempts below.

in damselflies, sperm from one mating is typically sufficient to fertilize all eggs of a single female. however, most damselfly females are involved in multiple matings. this is partly explained by the benefits a female may receive by mating more than once, for example, by obtaining compatible or superior sperm from multiple matings, which results in an increase in the fitness of their offspring  <cit> . however, if female morphs differ in the amount of reproductive reserves, such as in ischnura denticollis and enallagma novahispaniae see  <cit> , then the costs of multiple matings would be higher in the morph with the lower resources. previous work has shown that androchrome females are less fecund than infuscans females  <cit>  and this suggest that androchrome females would gain less from accepting multiple matings and consequently might be less willing to engage in additional mating interactions after they have mated once. support for this comes from behavioural studies showing that when androchrome females are approached by a male, they respond more aggressively towards mating attempts than gynochrome females  <cit>  and are more reluctant to engage in multiple matings  <cit> . lower mating rates of androchrome females may also be caused by androchrome behaviour that, in addition to colour and morphology, mimics males thereby making it difficult for males to distinguish between males and androchrome females , or because they show aggressive behaviour towards approaching males. this idea is supported by studies showing that androchrome females perch at similar heights as males, spend less time than gynochrome females hidden in the vegetation and fly less than gynochrome females  <cit> . this strongly suggests that in addition to colour and morphology imitation, behaviour imitation plays a crucial role in the maintenance of this colour polymorphism as has been previously suggested  <cit> .

in this sense, the preference for gynochrome females  or the lack of a morph preference  in mature males together with the androchrome specific characteristics most likely explains the lower androchrome mating rates in the wild. in addition to our field and molecular data on mature male–female mating interactions, we used, for the first time in i. elegans, experiments on naïve males to assess innate male sexual preferences for female morphs. in contrast to mature male preferences, we found that naïve males showed a clear preference for androchrome females and this result was independent of treatment type , suggesting no role for associative learning, but rather an innate preference for androchrome females. an innate preference for a particular female morph may indicate that this preference is ancestral, which is supported by molecular phylogenetic work on ischnura and enallagma species indicating that female polymorphism has evolved multiple times, and that there is weak evidence that male mimics and/or blue coloration are ancestral in these groups  <cit> .

our study shows that males undergo an ontogenetic shift in their preference for female morphs. males start out by showing an innate preference for androchrome morphs and over time loose this preference, i.e. mature males either show a lack of a preference or a preference for gynochrome females . our results add to the emerging view that learning of mate preferences is widespread in nature, occurring in most animal taxa  <cit> . studies on learning in damselflies are just emerging, but they show that damselflies have the ability to learn rapidly and quickly, and that this can be highly dependent on the ecological context as shown in calopteryx spp. e.g.  <cit> . in another recent study by takahashi and watanabe  <cit> , males of i. senegalensis were shown to change their mating preference for female colour depending on previous copulation experiences with sexually mature females, indicating the ability of males to learn mate preferences based on sexual history. our result of an innate male preference of androchrome females and the lack of a habituation effect on male mate preferences contrasts with studies on related species. studies using males of enallagma civile and i. senegalensis reared in isolation from females did not show any preferences towards female colour morphs  <cit> , and males of e. civile also showed no associative learning after habituation to one of the morphs  <cit> . the lack of a short term effect of the habituation treatment might indicate that learning in this species takes longer time than the duration of the experiment in our study. in some species of damselflies, mate preferences to discriminate against heterospecific mates are only learned following courtship interactions with the other species  <cit>  and in colour polymorphic damselflies, males may only learn to prefer the morph with which they had a successful mating experience  <cit> . the number that is needed of these interactions so that a detectable change in preferences can be detected is not known but our study suggest that it is likely higher than what can be achieved during 48 hours  <cit> . finally, we would like to stress that experiments using naïve individuals to estimate the genetic component of mate preferences have been underutilised in i. elegans and other odonate species despite such experiments offering tremendous potential to gain insights into the dynamic nature of mate preferences. we hope that more studies will evaluate naïve mate preferences in the future, particularly in phylogenetically related polymorphic species, to facilitate analyses of broader patterns, for example, the cross-species extent of innate male mate preferences and the stability of those over time. such insights will provide valuable clues regarding the processes underlying male mating harassment in insect like i. elegans, and thereby ultimately also into the processes that maintain the polymorphism in populations over space and time.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our results indicate that i. elegans males lose their innate preference for androchrome females and, once they mature and gather experience with females, either show a preference for gynochrome females or no preference for morph type. furthermore, the field estimates and molecular analysis showed that androchrome females mate less than gynochrome females, presumably because androchrome females mimic males in morphology and behaviour and because they are more aggressive towards males. the ontogenetic change in male mate preferences occurs most likely because of learned mate recognition, which in this case does not result in a preference for one of the morphs, but rather a loss of an innate preference for androchrome females. the importance of male mate choice in insects has received significant support over the last years  <cit>  and learning in this context can be an important component of mate preference formation, where preferences are often influenced by the phenotypic variation that individuals encounter throughout their lives  <cit> . the modification of male morph preferences observed in our study has parallels to that observed in invertebrate predators that learn to avoid certain colours of aposematic prey  <cit> . learned mate discrimination depending on copulation experience might help males to detect potential mates more effectively and to avoid sexually unreceptive females.

