BACKGROUND
diversity is an important characteristic of communities, with paramount influences on ecosystem properties  <cit> . a wide range of measures have been applied for quantifying diversity, the simplest of which is species richness : the number of species in a community  <cit> . sr assumes species as comparable, distinct entities of similar ecological importance. however, differences between species regarding ecological traits may range from almost ecologically similar to very different. therefore, in recent years the focus has turned from sr towards functional diversity, which considers components that influence ecosystem function rather than taxonomic units  <cit> . the general concept of species function being more important than species richness has been shown in several studies, e.g. in predicting plant community resistance  <cit>  and plant biomass accumulation  <cit> .

a common approach in measuring functional diversity is classification of functional species groups  <cit> . this requires an a priori classification of species resulting in a discontinuous and, therefore, less accurate measure of functional diversity  <cit>  than a continuous measure  defined by petchey & gaston  <cit> . additionally, it can be difficult to fit species varying ecomorphologically in a complex multidimensional space into predefined groups defined by a limited number of characters . alternatively, fd compiles a variable range of ecological characteristics of species and is regarded as a very powerful measure of functional diversity  <cit> .

patterns between changes in functional diversity and sr provide information on the relative contribution of a species' ecological function to the sum of ecological functions of the community. therefore, if functional diversity and sr show a one by one relationship, all species are different and contribute equally. deviations from this pattern occur with differences in species contribution, e.g., if sr changes but functional diversity remains constant, the additional or diminished species do not exhibit unique ecological traits and can be considered as functional redundant  <cit> . patterns of functional redundancy were identified using fd in mammal, bird  <cit> , and amphibian communities  <cit> . however, these findings of functional redundancy are so far only related to anthropogenically disturbed landscapes. comparing fd of observed and random assemblages can be used to test for non-randomness, which can highlight general processes of community assembly  <cit> , such as competition or environmental filtering  <cit> . communities harbouring a large number of species are likely to contain species that are redundant in their ecological traits. the question of functional diversity and redundancy in species communities is therefore of particular interest when facing taxonomic groups that are rich in species. tropical anuran communities represent an appropriate model as they are known to be remarkably rich but still taxonomically ascertainable. studies on tropical frogs often focus on the ecology of adults  <cit> , and have shown that sr can be predicted by environmental variables  <cit> , and that species specific habitat requirements may be overlaid by stochastic processes  <cit> . minor attention has focused on functional diversity and functional redundancy in tropical amphibians, although ernst et al.  <cit>  showed that functional redundancy can be found in disturbed tropical frog communities and the classical measure of species richness fails to reflect the real dimensions of biodiversity.

of the available amphibian community studies, only a few included larval stages  <cit> . even less attention was given to diversity patterns of the tadpole communities themselves  <cit> , although in pioneering studies different habitat variables were found to be possibly related to sr of tadpole communities  <cit> . there are no published data on functional diversity in tadpole communities and the validity of sr as an adequate measure of diversity remains to be verified.

this is especially true as there are several ways tadpole communities might influence ecosystem function. there is evidence that e.g. by moving sediment and feeding on primary algae producers, tadpoles can alter algae abundance, composition, and chlorophyll a level and therefore net primary production in stream ecosystems  <cit> . furthermore, due to their influence on basal resources e.g. removing sediments and exposing periphyton, they affect other primary consumers  <cit> . tadpoles can therefore affect stream ecosystem structure and function  <cit>  depending on where they live in the stream and how they forage. this might be especially true if some higher trophic levels are missing in the ecosystem.

the remarkable backlog of tadpole community studies may have been caused by identification difficulties, especially in species-rich tropical communities where the ecological importance of tadpole communities may be paramount  <cit> . madagascar, regarded to be one of the most important hotspots for biodiversity conservation  <cit>  harbours over  <dig> fully endemic frog species  <cit> . even if many of these species are yet undescribed scientifically, a near-complete database of genetic markers exists  <cit> . this allows application of molecular identification methods to identify tadpoles to species  <cit> , and allows community studies of tadpoles in an area known to harbour rich frog communities  <cit> .

here, we report on the sr and functional diversity of stream communities of tadpoles in ranomafana national park  in eastern madagascar as determined by dna barcoding, and on the environmental variables that might influence these measures of diversity. we addressed three main questions:  are stream tadpole communities in madagascar as rich as expected given the highly diverse amphibian communities,  is sr predictable by either adult or tadpole related environmental variables, and  does the functional diversity measure expose patterns of diversity that are not detectable by sr and point to general rules of species' trait assemblage?

RESULTS
habitat ordination
we could summarise the  <dig> original habitat variables to three pc factors  with pc <dig> representing  <dig> %, pc <dig>  <dig> %, and pc <dig>  <dig> % of the original variation. bootstrapping-eigenvector method highlighted these habitat variables as significantly contributing to pc1: stream slope , stream canopy cover and forest canopy cover , shrubs , and the stream microhabitats sand  and leaves  as well as rock  and gravel , stream width , mayfly larvae  and dragonfly larvae  . for pc <dig> this were stream width , stream microhabitat sand , and dragonfly larvae  as well as stream slope , and the stream microhabitats rock and gravel  . the strongest contributions to the pc <dig> come from forest leaf litter , forest canopy cover , and forest trees , however, the results were not significant.

pc <dig> therefore represents a gradient from smaller streams with a generally dense canopy cover and a high proportion of microhabitats consisting of leaf and sand substrate towards larger streams with a higher proportion of gravel and rock substrate and higher invertebrate larvae abundances. this gradient is highly significant and positively correlated with sr . pc <dig> represents a gradient from larger, slow-moving and sandy streams with high abundance of dragonfly larvae towards small and rocky streams with steep slopes. this gradient is highly significant and negatively correlated with sr . as the third pc was not correlated to sr, it was removed from the model in order to find the minimal adequate model.

we overlaid a pca biplot with sr , which illustrates a gradient of increasing sr from the top left corner to the bottom right corner . accordingly, sr increases mainly with stream width and dragonfly larvae, and decreases with stream slope, stream canopy cover and forest canopy cover. the proportion of specific stream microhabitats  did not have a major impact on sr.

functional diversity 
applying a polynomial regression model, we found a highly significant positive correlation between sr and fd . although the increase of r <dig>  was low, the included quadratic term still significantly contributed to the model . this correlation is therefore not linear but shows a decreasing slope with higher sr. this pattern expresses an increase in functional redundancy of tadpole species with increasing sr of the stream community.

the predicted fd of random communities showed a similar pattern . due to violation of independence of the residuals we could not fit a linear model for predicted fd and therefore applied michaelis-menten with parameter estimates for maximum fd and the sr of communities with mean fd to compare curve progression of both predicted and observed data. this non-linear regression model and t-tests applied on the parameter estimates show that the maximum fd for the observed communities  was significantly lower than the maximum predicted fd for the random communities . there was no difference in sr values at a mean fd between observed  and predicted communities . these tests and the graphical evaluation  describe a pattern of low functional diversity but only in species-rich communities.

discussion
madagascan streams as tadpole hotspots
madagascan rainforest streams harbour the world's most species-rich tadpole communities. in  <dig> m sections of rnp mid-elevational rainforest streams in the current study, species richness  of tadpole assemblages varied from two to  <dig> species, with an average of nine species and a total number of  <dig> species. at another site in madagascar, an'ala rainforest in central eastern madagascar, an even higher number of species was reported with a maximum of  <dig> species in a  <dig> m stream section  <cit> . distinctly lower numbers of species were reported from tropical streams in brazilian forests . equally remarkable is that the malagasy stream tadpole communities can be impressively rich in specimens. we detected up to  <dig>  tadpole individuals per  <dig> m of stream which emphasises their high importance for the malagasy stream ecosystems and claims for explanations beyond a simple correlation with frog species richness. in fact, the number of frogs in both rnp and the mantadia-analamazaotra area  is around  <dig> species which is very high but not markedly different from other tropical amphibian hotspots  <cit> . however, madagascan rainforests show a higher proportion of stream-breeding frog species than other tropical amphibian communities which often contain many pond breeders. in general, madagascan rainforests along the geographically steep eastern escarpment do not offer many pond breeding habitats which explains the low number of pond breeding species. there is little information available on species breeding in phytotelmata, tree holes or foam nests on the forest floor but we assume their relative frequency is low.

we also consider the virtual absence of fish possibly a main reason for the exceptional tadpole diversity and abundance in madagascan rainforest streams. both rnp and an'ala, and madagascan rainforest streams in general, are exceptional among tropical rainforest streams in their remarkably low density and diversity of fish. in most rnp streams, only the eel  occurs in detectable although very low numbers.

tadpole diversity is dependent on stream size and velocity
tadpole diversity is not explained by those habitat variables that are important for adult frogs. neither the forest structure around a stream nor its streamside vegetation structure correlated significantly with tadpole sr. this shows that tadpole diversity is not limited by environmental filters that affect adults and that might cause streams not being used for breeding although they might represent suitable habitat for tadpoles.

in contrast, those habitat variables that directly act on tadpoles explain tadpole diversity very well. based on the results of the pc and regression analyses, diversity concerning both, sr and fd, increases along a stream size-velocity gradient, i.e. it was highest in slow moving , large streams, with open canopy cover, and a high abundance of dragonfly larvae. the proportion of specific ground substrates within the streams was not important.

the observed stream size - sr dependency follows a general ecological pattern, i.e. the species-area relationship that is found very commonly for a wide variety of taxa and types of ecosystems, and only few exceptions exist . in fact, the species-area relationship is often referred to as the closest thing to a rule in ecology  <cit> . it states that along a gradient of ecosystems of increasing size, the numbers of species inhabiting those ecosystems increase, in general rapidly at first, and then more slowly for the larger ecosystems. however, many tadpole communities and their ecosystems, e.g. streams and ponds, are among the exceptions. for stream habitats studies on the dependencies of stream size and tadpole diversity are inconclusive. both positive and negative continuous relationships are found, i.e. the most diverse communities are in the largest  <cit>  or in the smallest streams  <cit> . for tadpole communities of tropical ponds, as a general pattern, tadpole sr increases with increasing pond size, but beyond a certain size, ponds are permanent , and an increasing number of fish eliminate tadpoles. this results in medium-sized water bodies harbouring the highest number of tadpole species  <cit> . our rainforest stream data are generally consistent with the predictions derived from these studies on ponds, although there is no peak in sr at an intermediate stream size. all the streams in the current study are permanent, and as a peculiarity, fish are not an important factor for tadpole survivorship. therefore, factors that limit sr beyond a certain water body size may thus not be effective in rnp tadpole communities.

the increase of sr along the stream size-velocity gradient cannot be attributed unambiguously to a higher number of different microhabitats in larger habitats. all microhabitats, i.e. ground substrates, were present in all streams, and their respective proportions were not significantly correlated to sr. high stream velocity, in contrast, might be a factor limiting sr. of the species occurring in the rnp region, only a few have morphological adaptations to strong currents  <cit>  and high currents might prevent some species from colonising streams. in general, selective pressures caused by stream current can be hypothesised to be stronger in fast-running portions of the streams, where tadpoles not adapted to such conditions will be washed away during high flow levels after heavy rain. in contrast, in slow-moving stretches, tadpoles adapted to stronger currents will be able to survive, even if they may suffer from increased competition with other larvae better adapted to these conditions.

fd and functional redundancy are dependent on species richness
we found both functional redundancy and low fd in tadpole communities of madagascan rainforest streams. the presence of functional redundancy indicates an overlap in the traits of species within a community. while this can be interpreted as dispensability of some species, it is also a buffer to ensure community resilience  <cit> . patterns of redundancy have been reported when using functional groups e.g. for bat  <cit> , plant  <cit> , bacterial soil communities  <cit> , and coastal marine assemblages  <cit> . however, the functional group approach highlights only some functions of species and disregards a possible wide range of others. as focusing on few traits likely leads to findings of patterns of functional redundancy  <cit> , we used a continuous measure using  <dig> morphological traits relating differently to habitat use and feeding ecology  to include a wide range of species functions that can influence stream ecosystem structure and function.

previous identification of functional redundancy quantified by continuous fd were generally attributed to agricultural landscapes or anthropogenic disturbed sites  <cit> . we here show, however, that functional redundancy is also an attribute of communities in primary freshwater stream habitats. whereas a linear but only slightly increasing relationship between sr and fd shows a continuous pattern of redundancy, the curvilinear shape observed for tadpole communities shows that functional redundancy depends on the level of sr, with the highest functional redundancy assigned to species-rich communities in large streams. we here face the world's most species-rich communities, however, compared to many other ecological systems, the absolute number of species is relatively low. for example, functional diversity studies on plant communities may include  <dig> to  <dig> species per community  <cit> , a study on deep sea nematode assemblage up to  <dig> species per site  <cit>  and up to almost  <dig> species per site in a reef fish study  <cit> . identification of potential sr-fd relationships may be difficult using only a low sr or low range of sr  <cit> . the range of sr of tadpole communities is obviously sufficient to detect patterns, as indicated both in the curvilinear fd curve and the species richness dependent functional redundancy . the fact that functional redundancy and low fd of tadpole communities are not very pronounced compared to other studies  still supports the need of a sufficient range of sr for studies on fd  <cit> . facing adult frog plus tadpole traits and using about twice the number of species as in the present study  showed quite clear patterns of redundancy in west africa  <cit> . however, studying a large number of species often implies a large geographical study area . consequently, using all ecological species traits available in the whole geographical range for random fd calculations and thereon depending comparisons with observed data may lead to patterns of e.g. low fd that are difficult to assign to either ecological or geographical filters, or both.

we could show that with increasing sr, the fd of tadpole communities was increasingly lower than the fd of randomly assembled communities of similar sr levels. this difference between observed and predicted fd values shows low fd and indicates that members of species-rich communities were more similar to each other than expected by random assembling. low fd was observed in bird  <cit> , plant  <cit>  and reef fish communities  <cit> , however, only the latter showed a similar sr-dependent pattern. this is an indication of sr dependent environmental filtering  <cit>  and whereas up to a certain level of sr the assemblage of different traits of tadpoles is random, in richer communities stream-specific traits accumulate. as discussed above, low fd in tadpole communities is statistically significant but still not as pronounced as e.g. in reef fish communities  <cit> . however, differences in the geographical ranges in the studies and the resulting difficulties of interpretation complicate the comparison of studies. if competition is a shaping force, species characterised by dissimilar traits would form a community, resulting in high values for fd  <cit> . this was not the case for any level of sr. as we used traits for calculation of fd related to habitat use and foraging of tadpoles, we conclude that interspecific competition for space and food does not influence the composition of tadpole communities in madagascan rainforest streams. it is habitat characteristics of the stream and/or the availability of food that filters specific traits and therefore specific species from communities, at least in species-rich large streams.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary,  sr of madagascan stream tadpole communities generally follows a species-area relationship leading to the worlds highest number of tadpole species,  evidence from these communities shows occurrence of functional redundancy in primary freshwater habitats, and  environmental filtering but not interspecific competition may be a major factor influencing assembly of tadpole communities. we could prove both findings of functional redundancy and low fd associated with high sr for reproducibility by repeated sampling of streams in rnp in  <dig> . these results highlight the potential of fd to provide insights into the under-investigated communities of larval stages of anurans. we see particular promise in future studies that integrate these findings with further community characteristics such as food web structures, and we predict these will help elucidating the fundamental processes that structure amphibian communities.

