BACKGROUND
bacterial phenotypes result from responses to physical and chemical conditions under which these organisms grow  <cit> . variation in environmental conditions, for example, changes in temperature  <cit>  and availability of nutrients  <cit> , alter bacterial responses. reduced gravity is one such environmental factor that profoundly influences microorganisms . specifically, in this study, we focus on low-shear stress, reduced gravity conditions  as a model. this model reflects conditions in which impacts of a cell's microenvironment may be most apparent and is particularly relevant to bacteria in certain parts of the human body  and those in orbit in spacecraft, such as the international space station. the importance of these conditions are multifaceted: serving as an approach for study of sensing of and responses to mechanical stimuli, providing information relevant to human utilization of space , and providing models for conditions microbes experience in parts of the human body 

to examine biological responses to such conditions, scientists widely rely on ground-based systems, such as rotating wall vessels  and clinostats, that create conditions of low-shear, low turbulence and no sedimentation when rotated in a horizontal direction at a specific velocity  <cit> . conditions achieved through clinorotation are also referred to as weightlessness, modeled reduced gravity , simulated microgravity, or low-shear modeled microgravity and hereafter are referred to as mrg in this paper. clinorotation provides a cost-effective, accessible approach to study these conditions relative to space-based research and has been demonstrated to serve as an effective model for examining bacterial responses  <cit> .

previous studies have shown that bacteria grown under either actual reduced gravity or mrg conditions, surprisingly, exhibit resistance to multiple antimicrobial methods  <cit>  and become more virulent, which has important potential impacts for human health  <cit> , reviewed by  <cit> . in addition, bacteria under these conditions have enhanced growth  <cit> , secondary metabolite production  <cit> , biofilm formation  <cit>  and extracellular polysaccharide production  <cit> . other studies have examined changes in transcription  and proteomes  revealing the large scope of responses to these environmental conditions. the mechanisms behind the responses observed are largely unstudied  <cit> . lastly, prior research has demonstrated that bacterial responses under actual reduced gravity conditions are similar to those in ground-based studies, demonstrating the effectiveness of this model  <cit> .

as noted above, a variety of metrics have been used to evaluate bacterial responses to mrg. however, few of these studies have examined cellular physiological properties or compared responses among different bacterial species . therefore, in this study we examined bacterial physiological properties under environmental conditions created by clinorotation. specifically, escherichia coli and staphylococcus aureus responses to mrg and normal gravity  conditions under different growth  conditions were examined by analysis of a suite of cellular parameters, including protein concentrations, cell volume, membrane potential, and membrane integrity. parameters chosen vary with availability of nutrients  <cit>  and are correlated with the physiological status of the cell, including its viability  <cit> . most of these parameters have not been studied in e. coli and s. aureus under mrg conditions and they provide critical information about bacterial "health" as well as microenvironmental conditions near bacteria. for example, membrane potential and membrane integrity play important roles in bacterial physiology , and are essential for viability  <cit> .

bacteria  chosen for this study differ significantly in their physiology and ecology as well as in their cell wall composition, motility, and morphology. perhaps most importantly, these bacteria differ in the way they respond to changes in concentrations of chemicals . in addition, e. coli  has the ability to disturb the quiescent fluid environment that is achieved under mrg conditions while s. aureus  cannot. taken together, these experiments provide data at the cellular level that helps us mechanistically understand bacterial responses to mrg conditions.

RESULTS
e. coli growth curves  were similar in luria bertani  broth and m <dig> minimal  media under mrg and ng conditions . although s. aureus growth curves were similar under mrg and ng conditions, in diluted lb, od values were consistently higher, beginning with the exponential phase of growth, under mrg than ng conditions . bacterial growth parameters such as lag duration, specific growth rate, and final cell yield were determined using od data. lag duration for both e. coli and s. aureus grown in either lb or m9/dilute-lb was not affected by mrg condition   suggesting that conditions of mrg neither stimulated nor suppressed the duration of the lag phase. specific growth rate was higher only for s. aureus grown in dilute lb under mrg than ng conditions . significantly higher bacterial yields were observed for both bacterial strains under mrg than ng, irrespective of the medium with the exception of e. coli grown in lb . significantly higher numbers of cells  were achieved under mrg conditions during stationary phase for e. coli and s. aureus grown in m <dig> and dilute lb, respectively .

statistically, ph of the e. coli and s. aureus cultures under mrg and ng conditions were not different in any growth medium with the exception of e. coli at stationary phase in lb . in this case, ph under mrg conditions was significantly higher than the ph in ng controls.

for e. coli cultures, under mrg compared to ng conditions, dissolved oxygen  concentrations were significantly higher in lb and lower in m <dig> media at stationary phase, but there were no significant differences in do at exponential phase in either medium . for s. aureus cultures in dilute lb, under mrg compared to ng conditions, statistically higher and lower do concentrations were found at exponential and stationary phase, respectively, and in lb do between mrg and ng treatments were not significantly different.

there were no significant differences in e. coli biovolume  and protein amounts per cell  when cells were grown under mrg compared to ng conditions at either growth phase or in either medium. on the other hand, s. aureus had, on average, a smaller biovolume at exponential phase in dilute lb under mrg compared to ng conditions; there were no other significant differences . the amount of protein per cell did not differ between mrg and ng conditions for s. aureus 

ratiometric membrane potential  measurements  showed e. coli and s. aureus had significantly higher average mp values at stationary phase in lb and dilute lb, respectively, under mrg as compared to ng conditions . during other growth phases and media conditions, there were no significant differences in mp between mrg and ng conditions for either bacterial species.

e. coli and s. aureus membrane integrity  measurements  demonstrated that there were more cells with intact membranes under mrg conditions than under ng conditions . however, this significant increase in mi was observed only when bacteria were grown in lb and there were no statistically significant differences in mi in lower nutrient media . there were strikingly, significantly higher percentages of dead cells of both species during stationary phase in rich medium under ng conditions compared to mrg conditions.

discussion
in this study, e. coli  and s. aureus  growth, morphology  and total protein expression were examined. in addition, membrane properties, namely membrane potential  and membrane integrity , under mrg conditions were assessed at the single cell-level via flow cytometry. analyses of basic bacterial functions, such as mp and mi, are critical in understanding bacterial physiological status and viability and previously these properties have not been examined in tandem across bacterial species under mrg conditions. these novel observations provide insight into previously unknown mechanisms that underlie the array of bacterial responses to reduced gravity .

in spite of the diverse suite of attributes that differ between e. coli and s. aureus, responses of the two organisms were generally similar. although there are few reports comparing responses of different bacterial species to mrg conditions  <cit> , differences in size, physiology, and motility were predicted to impact responses. this tendency to exhibit similar responses suggests that the phenomena observed here represent fundamental ways that bacteria respond to these conditions. consistency in findings across studies in basic responses  are supportive of this idea , but additional comparative studies are needed to determine if these trends hold.

our observation of higher bacterial numbers  under mrg conditions is in agreement with observations made by other researchers  and suggests that under mrg conditions, lack of sedimentation results in uniform cell distribution throughout the vessel and bacteria having higher accessibility to nutrients thus leads to higher final densities. differences in bacterial numbers observed in our study depended on the growth medium and growth phase; significant differences between mrg and ng were observed under nutrient poor conditions.

bacteria respond to nutrient limitation by reducing biovolume   <cit>  and protein synthesis  <cit> . however, no significant differences in bacterial biovolume  and protein amounts per cell were found under mrg conditions when compared to ng conditions. these findings suggest that nutrient limitation, caused by depletion of nutrients in microenvironments around the cells under mrg, was not a significant factor influencing responses.

membrane potential  is required for a variety of cellular processes, such as atp synthesis  <cit> , nutrient transport  <cit> , and chemotaxis  <cit> . in addition, mp is required for survival under stressful conditions, such as exposure to low ph  <cit>  or antibiotics  <cit> . accordingly, mp is one of the best studied physiological functions in bacteria under a variety of stressful environmental conditions  <cit> . in our study, higher mp values were found under mrg conditions for e. coli and s. aureus in lb and dilute lb, respectively, and this response was limited to stationary phase. however, e. coli grown in m <dig> minimal media and s. aureus grown in lb did not differ in their mp between mrg and ng conditions. this observation is consistent with expectations since mp varies with availability of nutrients  <cit> . we found higher average mp under mrg conditions suggesting that bacterial membranes were more energized under these conditions and which may be due to even distribution of cells that results in higher accessibility of nutrients. another possibility is that, under mrg conditions, bacteria may be subjected to controlled addition of nutrients  whereby nutrients enter in a more continuous fashion into the microenvironments around cells from the bulk fluid. regardless of the mechanism, higher bacterial mp under mrg conditions may contribute towards increased survival under the conditions examined.

another important cellular property examined in this study is membrane integrity . like mp, higher mi is strongly correlated with bacterial viability  <cit> . higher mi was found under mrg conditions for both e. coli and s. aureus grown in lb, but not in m <dig> minimal media and diluted lb, respectively. dramatically higher percentages of dead cells were found under normal gravity conditions in rich media.

interestingly, in congruence with earlier e. coli gene expression studies  <cit> , mp and mi observations are consistent with the observation that e. coli grown under mrg conditions exhibits enhanced ability to survive sub-lethal doses of antimicrobial agents  <cit> . as these stress- survival assays require growth of e. coli in culture, it is possible that differences in mp and mi account for bacterial phenotypes observed under mrg conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
documented responses to mrg or microgravity conditions include large scale changes in gene expression as well as more basic responses, such as higher cell numbers. our study demonstrates that such changes are accompanied by increased membrane potential and lower percentages of dead cells both of which are critical to bacterial population growth. the two species examined, generally, exhibited similar responses. however, responses observed varied with growth phase and were medium-dependent revealing that nutrient availability is a modulator of responses to these conditions. overall, our data provides novel information about e. coli and s. aureus mp and mi under mrg conditions and suggest that bacteria are physiologically more active and a larger percentage are viable under mrg as compared to ng conditions. future studies are needed to elucidate the mechanism leading to increased mp and mi and to determine if these differences are consistently observed regardless of bacterial species and growth conditions. finally, our findings have implications for fundamental biological responses, namely the ability for living cells to detect and respond to mechanical stimuli  <cit> . further study is needed to examine the inter-play between responses to mechanical conditions and other aspects of the environment and to explore potential mechanisms by which such conditions are sensed or detected to determine if they are conserved across taxa.

