BACKGROUND
dna methylation is a major epigenetic mechanism of gene regulation in higher eukaryotes. dna methylation can be defined as the addition of a methyl group to the base of a nucleotide by dna methyltransferases  <cit> . in prokaryotes, dna methyltransferases operate in tandem with restriction enzymes as a part of a defense mechanism against invading viral dna. prokaryotic dna methylation protects native dna from cleavage by endogenous restriction enzymes, thus creating a defense mechanism against invading viral dna  <cit> . in higher eukaryotes, dna methylation acts to protect the genome, by silencing the expression of retroviruses  <cit> ; however, it is gene regulation mediated by dna methylation that is of principal interest.

since the methylation of cytosine at position c <dig> in the context of cytosine guanine dinucleotides plays a significant biological role in higher eukaryotes, its detection forms the primary focus of our research. in higher eukaryotes, cpg dinucleotides are often clustered together forming cpg islands  <cit>  that frequently coincide with upstream regulatory elements and promoters of genes. a consequence of methylation of upstream promoter regions is repression of targeted genes. transcription repression occurs by either a direct obstruction of the major grove  <cit>  or via a methylation binding protein  <cit>  mechanism. in fact, methylation of cpg dinucleotides and cpg islands is the major mechanism for imprinting in eukaryotes. methylation profiles are mediated by mechanisms associated with factors such as age, nutrition, disease, or mutational events that may induce pathogenic changes in gene expression. both hypo- and hyper-methylation are known to play a role in the onset of oncogenic disease  <cit>  by either activating oncogenes or by silencing tumor suppressor genes. abnormal dna methylation plays a role in a myriad of disease, with a notable example being schizophrenia  <cit> .

the development of single molecule approaches for the discernment of genome wide methylation profiles that also obviate traditional chemical modification steps points the way towards creation of new high-throughput platforms. current methods for analysis of dna methylation require chemical treatment of dna bases that do not readily query genomic repeat elements  <cit> . bisulfite pcr  <cit>  is the current "gold standard" method for assaying dna methylation. during bisulfite treatment, cytosines are deaminated forming uracil while methylated cytosines remain unmodified. these changes can then be tested by pcr amplification of selected loci. to probe the methylation status of specific nucleotides, pcr products are cloned and sequenced. post bisulfite sequence is compared to wild type, where unmethylated nucleotides appear as c to t point mutations. while bisulfite sequencing is an excellent technique for sampling specific loci with an underlying hypothesis in hand, the computational complexity of designing pcr primers and multiple requisite steps make it impractical for comprehensive genome analysis. also due to inherent incompatibility of pcr analysis with regions of genomic repeats, it is difficult to use bisulfite pcr to analyze repeat regions of genomes, where high-resolution knowledge of methylation states may provide important biological insights.

currently, methods combining bisulfite treatment of dna with "beadarray" hybridization are being used to assay the methylation state of selected loci within the human genome  <cit> . the beadarray platform alleviates the inherent computational complexity of differential pcr primer design and obviates the need for hundreds of pcr reactions; however, such analysis does not interrogate many classes of genomic repeats. another promising approach is the direct sequencing of bisulfite pc amplicons using  <dig> sequencing  <cit> . the  <dig> sequencing approach eliminates the need for pcr product cloning. thousands of individual sequence reads are generated for each pcr product, compared to tens of reads generated using conventional bisulfite sequencing. the current methods for discernment of genomic methylation have been reviewed in great detail elsewhere  <cit> .

in contrast to bisulfite pcr which is time consuming, costly and difficult to use on a large scale when coupled with pcr analysis, optical mapping offers many advantages for comprehensive methylation profiling. it is an established single molecule platform for investigation of whole genomes. optical mapping has been used for the construction of complete physical maps of numerous bacterial, plant and human genomes  <cit>  .

the om system creates high-resolution physical maps of genomes based on ordered restriction maps of individual dna molecules. briefly, individual high molecular weight  dna molecules are unraveled and arrayed upon positively charged glass surfaces using a microfluidic device  <cit> . after deposition, molecules are restriction digested, then stained with a fluorochrome dye and finally imaged by automated fluorescence microscopy . "daughter" restriction fragments remain bound to the surface retaining original order allowing construction of ordered restriction maps from individual "parental" molecules. this step is accomplished through automated image processing and analysis of individual dna molecules, which are converted into "molecular bar codes" based on the distances  as measured by integrated fluorescence intensity between sites of restriction enzyme cleavage. the molecular bar code represents a unique identification "tag" for each individual molecule used by map alignment algorithms  <cit>  and software for construction of whole genome physical maps.

since optical mapping uses genomic dna substrates, which retain inherent cpg methylation patterns, we reasoned that methylation sensitive restriction enzymes would profile such patterns of dna modification on a whole genome basis. because methyltransferases and restriction enzymes operate in tandem in bacteria, the escherichia coli genome was used as a facile model system for methylation profiling by optical mapping. since most restriction enzymes will not cleave methylated cognate sequences, modified sites are directly detected as missing restriction sites, thereby obviating chemical modification steps as part of this detection process. more importantly, by selecting appropriate restriction enzymes, we can bias the investigation of specific repeated elements within a mammalian genome, such as cpg islands or lines  <cit> , by keying an enzyme's cognate sequence towards cleavage within chosen elements.

as such, our detection strategies use:  solely methylation sensitive restriction enzymes, or  a combination of methylation sensitive and insensitive enzymes within the same reaction. this enzyme combination, especially for mammalian genomes, produces interpretable bar codes through added flexibility in how single molecule restriction maps are created and then analyzed. consider that "consensus" maps, or contigs–constructed from merging multiple, overlapping optical maps –are assessed for methylation states by comparison against a sequence based in silico map . consequently, scheme  partitions genomic placement of such contigs from consideration of methylation status by anchoring contigs using only those restriction patterns created by the methylation insensitive enzyme. after contigs are placed against a reference map, methylation status is derived by comparing the nucleotide locations of methylation sensitive cleavage sites  within a contig to the corresponding in silico restriction map features of a reference genome. in other words, absence or presence of those restriction sites queried by the methylation-sensitive enzyme tabulates their modification state.

strategy , described above, is applied for the detection of the methylation profile of both an engineered and a wild type e. coli. the results firmly validate this strategy for small genomes. we then employed strategy , designed for analysis of complex genomes, for reporting cpg methylation of a mid passage  human embryonic stem cell line h <dig>  generating only modest coverage of optical maps across the entire human genome, over  <dig> sites of dna methylation were detected across ch  <dig> in regions showing usable coverage by optical maps. these findings illustrate the feasibility of using a single molecule approach for de novo discovery of methylation patterns presented by complex genomes.

RESULTS
strategy for detection of methylation sites using only a methylation-sensitive enzyme
we analyzed optical maps generated by a methylation sensitive restriction enzyme  for revealing genome-wide patterns of dna methylation ) engendered by alui methylase  on e. coli genomic dna molecules. by engineering such methylation sites within a genome, in contrast to assessing naturally occurring methylation sites, we generate a list of known modified sites. virtually all sites that block cleavage with nhei can be experimentally identified .

selection of appropriate methylase/restriction enzyme pairs is facilitated by the fact that most restriction enzymes do not cleave dna if their recognition, or cognate sequence is methylated . given a list of genomic locations that are expected to be enzymatically methylated in vitro, calculated from sequence information, we then select a restriction enzyme that will optimally detect expected restriction maps ; factors considered include the average size and distribution of restriction fragments produced after dna methylation. nominally, restriction maps constructed from individual molecules must present a sufficient density of restriction sites for confident map construction or alignment against a reference map. since alui dna methylase targets the cytosine in the sequence agct, we selected a restriction enzyme that partially overlaps with the alui methylation sites.  the cognate sequence of the restriction enzyme nhei  overlaps with alui methylation sites at the sequences: agcmetagc and gctagcmet, and at these nhei sites we expect to observe no cleavage. data acquired from sufficient numbers of randomly sheared e. coli dna molecules allow redundant coverage of the entire genome, thereby assaying all overlapping sites of nhei/alui methylase revealed as missing nhei cuts in the alignment of the nhei consensus optical map to the in silico sequence map.

detection of alui methylation sites in the e. coli genome
we evaluated strategy  across the entire e. coli genome using alui methylase treated dna, followed by optical mapping with nhei. alui methylation modifies  <dig>  sites in the e. coli genome, and it is expected to block cleavage at approximately 30%  of the nhei cleavage sites . a data set consisting of  <dig>  nhei/alui methylase e. coli optical maps  was created . from the raw data set, we selected  <dig> maps larger than  <dig> kb as the most informative for the construction of the de novo optical map spanning the entire e. coli genome. this filtering process compensated for the relatively large,  <dig>  kb, average fragment size observed in this data set by ensuring sufficient density of restriction cleavage sites across all considered molecules spanning the entire e. coli genome  <cit> .

given the experimentally derived average fragment size , we formulated preliminary measures of dna methylation. in the absence of alui methylation, nhei optical maps are expected to have an average fragment size of  <dig>  kb. thus, the apparent digestion efficiency of methylated dna was about 69%, so that ~30% of nhei cleavage sites were blocked by alui methylation, or partially digested. the final assembled contig contained  <dig> optical maps indicating a 28% contig rate ; the modest contig rate was due to the large average fragment size  <cit>  of the map data set. contig rate is calculated by dividing the number of maps in a contig by the total number of maps submitted for contig construction .

following assembly, the de novo optical map contig was aligned with the in silico map based on the e. coli sequence with the assumption of no methylation . based on this alignment, we were able to confidently identify  <dig> nhei sites as missing cuts blocked by alui methylation . given the known nucleotide locations of alui methylation and nhei cleavage, we had expected  <dig> nhei sites to be blocked by alui methylation. of the  <dig> sites that were not readily identified, all but one represented small restriction fragments . three of the above instances showed irregularly sized fragments in the alignment. of the  <dig> fragments not detected,  <dig> was not detected due to an assembly error,  <dig> were too small to be detected , and  <dig> small fragment  was in a low coverage area where detection was not possible. of course given more coverage, some of the above problems can be ameliorated.

dcm methylation profiling of e. coli strain k- <dig> mg1655
given the positive results of genomic methylation profiling reported above on a synthetically methylated e. coli genome, the same methylation profiling strategy  was chosen to evaluate an e. coli strain bearing endogenous methylation sites. for this experiment, we optically mapped the e. coli strain k- <dig> mg <dig>  positive for dcm methylase  <cit> , which is a modification system methylating the internal cytosine in the recognition sequence ccwgg, where w is a or t. there are a total of  <dig>  dcm sites in the genome, and a portion of these sites are detected using the methylation sensitive restriction enzyme stui, which cleaves agg^cct in e. coli at an average frequency of  <dig>  kb. the two possible sites of dcm stui overlap that would block stui cleavage include ccmeaggcct and aggccmetgg .

a data set of  <dig>  stui optical maps was created for determining the dcm methylation/stui profile of e. coli k- <dig> mg <dig>  these optical maps were then pairwise aligned to the stui in silico map of e. coli allowing selection of the  <dig> top scoring molecules for assembly . this filtering step reduced the computational complexity and accelerated map assembly when using data sets boasting densely spaced restriction sites on mapped molecules. the final contig comprises  <dig> maps , indicating a 67% contig rate and an average fragment size of  <dig>  kb.

the stui  contig map was aligned to the in silico stui map using a map assembler  <cit> . we identified  <dig> stui restriction sites as being methylated, assuming blockage from overlapping and adjacent methylation, by scoring a missing cut  in the optical contig map. following the process used for the characterization of the methylation status of nhei restriction sites, we compared our experimentally determined stui methylation profile to in silico sequence prediction. the e. coli genome contains  <dig> stui cleavage sites, and  <dig> of these are expected to be blocked by dcm methylation. our methylation profiling results are in close agreement with this analysis. all but  <dig> sites were identified , and the  <dig> sites that were not all consist of small , poorly detected, restriction fragments . one site was later identified as a mass increase; thus the number of undetected sites is  <dig> 

exploring the human methylome
we then evaluated the methylation detection capabilities of optical mapping within the human genome, using strategy  requiring one restriction enzyme for barcoding and a second for revealing methylation patterns. a set of optical maps was generated for the human embryonic stem cell line h <dig> , using the restriction enzymes swai  for barcoding and eagi  for detection of methylated restriction sites . swai  is an intrinsically cmepg methylation insensitive restriction enzyme cleaving the human genome at an average frequency of ~ <dig> kb, while eagi action is affected by methylation. in the absence of methylation, eagi cleaves human dna producing restriction fragments with an average size of  <dig> kb. not surprisingly given its cg-rich cognate sequence, eagi targets cpg islands, often multiply cleaving small cpg islands producing sub-microscopic restriction fragments. it is of significant interest that eagi targets about 78% of the  <dig>  cpg islands . eagi cleaves the human genome at  <dig>  sites . about half of the cpg islands  contain single eagi cuts, while another  <dig>  of these targeted islands comprise multiple cleavage sites .

ideally, the two-enzyme optical maps would be assembled into a genome-wide restriction map from which the methylation pattern of the genome would be inferred. because our assembly algorithm does not support two-enzyme maps, we employed the following scheme. briefly, two-enzyme optical maps are aligned to in silico two-enzyme maps of the human genome; maps that align are then stripped from the scaffold and independently assembled into contigs. the consensus maps from such contigs are then aligned back to in silico map  . this alignment supports elucidation of methylation patterns, in ways paralleling strategy , from comparison of experimentally derived eagi restriction sites  against the human reference map.

given the above synopsis of our analysis scheme, eagi and swai cleavage are conveniently merged together, both during sequential digestion  and for methylation profiling, since pervasive cpg methylation greatly attenuates the number of cleavable eagi restriction sites. it is important to note that this tact enables confident placement of serially digested molecules , using just swai restriction patterns on the human reference map. as such, our analysis readily considers cleaved eagi sites as "extra cuts," or modeled errors  <cit> , appearing within a swai restriction map after comparison against the human reference map. consequently, eagi restriction sites, reflecting lack of methylation, are identified by their intersection with an eagi  human reference map, which is overlaid upon the swai resource. based on these analysis guidelines, we developed several optical map alignment approaches, described below, for building map data sets supporting methylation profiling of the human genome.

optical maps, using a combination of swai and eagi digestion, are aligned to the human reference map using three complementary approaches :  pairwise alignment against an in silico swai map for capturing maps from heavily methylated regions with few eagi cuts;  pairwise alignment against the swai map with relaxed penalties for extra cuts  for capturing maps from unmethylated loci; and  alignment against a swai/eagi in silico reference map for capturing maps from those genomic regions with below average densities of swai sites, but densely populated by available eagi sites.

we chose chromosome  <dig> for detailed analysis . our data set contained  <dig> optical maps that aligned to chromosome  <dig> using at least one of the above approaches . following assembly, the molecules formed  <dig> contigs, of which  <dig> aligned back to in silico reference map. the  <dig> aligned contigs were assembled from  <dig> molecules and spanned  <dig>  mb. the genomic regions covered by these contigs contained  <dig> eagi sites. from the analysis of cleaved vs. uncleaved swai restriction sites tabulated on the set of aligned optical maps, we estimated the digest rate for swai as being about 85%. since these very same dna molecules were also cleaved with eagi under similar conditions, we reasoned that the eagi and swai digest rates were closely linked. accordingly, estimation of eagi digestion rate allows confident assessment of methylation status using the analysis described below.

since extra cut errors are random events and are only modestly observed in optical maps, these characteristics are leveraged for revealing unmethylated eagi restriction sites within contigs. consider that the probability of an extra cut error occurring within a given interval of a mapped molecule is 1-e-⌊x; where ⌊ is the rate of extra cuts per mb  and x is the interval in kb  <cit> . using this analysis we identified  <dig> extra cuts  in the consensus maps within  <dig> kb of an eagi site. these unmethylated loci contained  <dig> eagi sites  and all except  <dig> were located within cpg islands.

since missing cut errors that are due to partial digestion are prevalent in optical maps, identification of methylated sites is more complex, and we deal with this issue by the development of analysis leveraging the clustered cleavage pattern shown by eagi in cpg islands. accordingly, when several eagi cuts are in close proximity to each other, detection of methylation status in such clusters is actually enhanced because there are multiple opportunities for scoring cleavage events bounded by the spatial resolution of light microscopy. consider that the maximum resolution of light microscopy corresponds to ~ <dig> bp of dna , so that a cluster of eagi cuts within a  <dig> bp region is imaged as one merged cleavage event.  given an 85% digest rate, the probability of having no cuts within a cluster of n eagi cut sites is n. we then identify methylated eagi sites  located in areas containing multiple eagi sites in close proximity  to each other that also do not show any corresponding cuts in the optical maps. in this way, we identified  <dig> such loci, containing a total of  <dig> eagi sites . essentially, this analysis allows confident calls by trading deep map coverage at a given genomic location for consideration of cleavage sites that are clustered.

the analysis of non-clustered , methylated eagi sites follows a different strategy. given the previously discussed swai and eagi digest rate of 85%, we designed data filters requiring a minimum depth of  <dig> molecules for calling methylation status; this analysis identified  <dig> methylated eagi sites  , with  <dig> sites located within cpg islands . within this region we found that  <dig> out of  <dig> characterized eagi sites were cleaved, inferring an apparent methylation rate of 80%. the above rate is in agreement with the estimated rate of cpg methylation in the human genome  <cit> . unmethylated cpg dinucleotides are localized primarily to cpg islands with only ~35% of the islands being methylated in stem cells  <cit> . in our findings unmethylated loci are largely associated with cpg islands while the methylated loci are located outside of cpg islands .

to further validate our methods, we intersected data from a recent  microarray survey of human stem cell methylation  <cit>  with our findings. a locus common to both datasets was further confirmed by bisulfite pcr. for example, the promoter region of the dbc <dig> gene contains a cpg island with  <dig> eagi cut sites. this locus is represented by  <dig> probes on the illumina methylation bead array  <cit> . corresponding optical mapping data show that one of the eagi sites located in the cpg island associated with the dbc <dig> promoter is cleaved, indicating hypomethylation. the illumina results in the dbc <dig> locus  report the hypomethylation  of the cpg dinucleotide  that is directly adjacent to the cleaved eagi site at  . our analysis also reports the adjacent eagi site as being hypomethylated. we developed primers for bisulfite pcr analysis of this locus, followed by cloning and sequencing . the sequencing results confirmed that the eagi restriction enzyme site  is unmethylated  in the h <dig> p <dig> human embryonic stem cell genome . these data also demonstrate that all c's in the dbc <dig> sequence shown in table  <dig> are unmethylated.

f
r
sequences  of  <dig> bisulfite pcr product clones, aligned to the reference . the eagi site in the dbc <dig> promoter is in red, data point from illumina is bracketed. both are shown to be unmethylated in our sample.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that direct analysis of single genomic dna molecules is a viable means for genome wide, de novo methylation profiling, based on our analysis of optical mapping data from several e. coli systems, engineered and wild, and a partial map of the human genome. although restriction endonucleases are simple, reliable reagents for discernment of methylation patterns, their use on a whole genome basis has been limited for lack of complementary analysis systems for fully exploiting the practical advantages they intrinsically represent–methylation status at cognate sites directly revealed by cleavage without the use of damaging chemical modification steps, or amplification. in this regard, the optical mapping system, based on the high-throughput analysis of ordered restriction maps, offers whole genome methylation profiling capabilities working from unmodified, unamplified genomic dna molecules that directly pinpoint cleavage events across genomes. pcr amplification, however, does in theory allow the analysis of any genomic locus, but practical considerations–primer design and number of amplicons–often limit comprehensive analysis of entire genomes.

furthermore, optical mapping readily profiles repeat-strewn regions of mammalian genomes posing formidable challenges for techniques using both amplification and hybridization steps. on the other hand, optical mapping-based profiling is limited by those methylation sites interrogated by a given restriction enzyme; however, we have shown here that judicious choice of enzymes  ensures significant sampling of critical genomic elements, such as cpg islands, despite very modest coverage of the entire human genome by this data set. additional map coverage and other enzyme pairs targeting additional genomic elements  would greatly augment the scope of our human methylation profiling approach. this scope is limited by the size of restriction fragments produced by a selected enzyme. such limitations arise because small restriction fragments are not uniformly detected, so that their occurrence limits enzyme choice and spatial resolution of methylation patterns. however, if the algorithm used for the detection of dna methylation presented in this paper is combined with map data using the recently published optical barcoding system  <cit>  – using direct labeling in place of restriction digestion – the limitations imposed on the method by enzyme choice will be largely alleviated.

in many ways, the work we have presented here resembles classical "footprinting" approaches, where nuclease action is attenuated by the occurrence of protein-dna complexes as assayed by gel electrophoresis. instead, our findings show the footprint detection of modified dna sites. as such, we envision genomic footprinting of transcription factors and other dna binding proteins using the approaches we have presented, and those we will develop around the recently published dna barcoding approach  <cit>  using nicking restriction enzymes and fluorochrome labeling in place of the assessment of restriction fragments. this new approach would likely complement the capabilities of the cognate site identifier  <cit>  technique by use of genomic targets fully presenting native patterns of dna modification and comprehensively addressable genomic repeats. lastly, we also envision that mammalian genomes will be profiled by optical mapping for both methylation sites and structural variants   <cit>  through analysis of deep single molecule data sets revealing altered patterns of genomic structure and dna modification.

