BACKGROUND
molecular cloning of immunoglobulin variable  genes from single isolated plasma cells is a powerful tool for the unbiased generation of recombinant monoclonal antibodies  <cit> . fluorescence-activated single-cell sorting followed by a single-cell reverse-transcription polymerase chain reaction  has been shown to enable the high-throughput production of v gene dna fragments  <cit> . however, the proper insertion of the v gene dna fragments into expression vectors remains an obstacle to the high-throughput production of recombinant monoclonal antibodies.

the most commonly employed cloning method for introducing v gene dna fragments into vectors is ligation-dependent cloning  <cit> . however, ligation-dependent cloning is often hampered by the requirement for multiple rounds of enzyme treatments and purification of both the inserts and vectors. furthermore, the limited number of appropriate restriction enzyme sites in the insert and vector dna limits flexibility in constructing recombinant molecules. recently, site-specific recombination-based cloning has emerged as a ligation-independent cloning method  <cit> . however, this technology introduces extra codons into the gene's primary sequence at the site of recombination, which may interfere with the folding and stability of the resulting protein. in contrast, homologous recombination technologies enable the seamless insertion of any dna fragment at any desired position  <cit> . recently, in-fusion homologous recombination, which can join a dna fragment and a linear vector with  <dig> bases of homology at their ends, was used in the production of recombinant monoclonal antibodies  <cit> . although the in-fusion technology offers several advantages as a high-throughput procedure, the amplified v gene dna fragments must be purified to remove salts, primers and nonspecifically amplified dna before the reaction. subsequent steps are also necessary to screen single colonies for a correct clone, which can result in additional labor and increased cost. thus, a method for the high-throughput cloning of pcr-amplified v gene dna fragments into vectors that bypasses these tedious preliminary steps is needed.

we have developed a method, termed target-selective homologous recombination , in which pcr-amplified v gene dna fragments can be selectively cloned into vectors, even in the presence of nonspecifically amplified pcr products. this system, together with the additional methods described herein, circumvents the problems associated with the amplification and cloning of v gene dna fragments and provides a system for the high-throughput production of recombinant mouse monoclonal antibodies from large numbers of single plasma cells within a one-week time span .

RESULTS
low cloning specificity in conventional, red/et-mediated homologous recombination
red/et-mediated recombination is a powerful homologous recombination system based on the function of either the red operon of lambda phage or rece/rect from rac phage  <cit> . to evaluate the cloning specificity of conventional red/et-mediated homologous recombination, we conducted a pilot experiment using a linear nonselective vector  and an artificially amplified v gene and mock dna. the v gene was composed of an upper primer-derived sequence , a poly-dg/dc sequence , a human vh sequence, part of the constant gene sequence  and a lower primer-derived sequence . the mock dna was composed of the p <dig> sequence, part of the gfp sequence and the p <dig> sequence. the linear ns-vector contained homology arms at its ends  that were homologous to the p <dig> and p <dig> sequences, respectively . when the v gene and the mock dna were mixed in a 1: <dig> molar ratio and introduced into competent cells with the ns-vector, each dna fragment was inserted into the ns-vector with the same probability . transformation of the bacteria with the v gene and the mock dna fragment in a 1: <dig> molar ratio resulted in the insertion of the v gene in 25% of the clones  . because the conventional homologous recombination reaction was mediated through the primer-derived sequences, the dna fragments containing the primer sequences at their ends were non-selectively inserted into the ns vector.

high cloning specificity of ts-hr
to selectively clone the v gene, even in the presence of nonspecific amplified dna, we constructed a new vector: the target-selective vector . the ts-vector has homology arms  on its ends. the vp <dig>  sequence shares homology with the p <dig>  sequence, which is a primer-derived sequence. vt <dig>  shares homology with t <dig> , which is a part of the v gene-specific sequence internal to p <dig>  . when the v gene and the mock dna were mixed in a 1: <dig> molar ratio and introduced into competent cells with the linear ts-vector,  <dig> % of the analyzed colonies contained the v gene . transformation of the bacteria with the v gene and the mock dna in a 1: <dig> molar ratio resulted in the insertion of the v gene in  <dig> % of the analyzed colonies  . this result confirms the high cloning specificity of the ts-hr method, even in the presence of an excess amount of nonspecific amplified dna.

the mechanism for selective cloning in the ts-vector is illustrated in figure  <dig>  the 5' ends of the linear dna are removed by the redα 5'→3' exonuclease in e. coli, resulting in the generation of 3' single-stranded tails from the ts-vector, target and non-target dna. when the single-stranded tails of the target dna anneal to the complementary single-stranded tails of the ts-vector through the long homology overlaps , the recombination reaction proceeds via route i. when the single-stranded tails of the mock dna anneal to the complementary single-stranded tails of the ts-vector through the short homology overlaps , the recombination reaction proceeds via route iii. however, the route i reaction dominates over the route iii reaction because the homologous recombination reaction depends on the length of the homology overlap. the homologous recombination reaction also proceeds when the single-stranded tails of the ts-vector anneal to the complementary single-stranded tails of the target dna . however, the homologous recombination reaction does not proceed when the single-stranded tails of the ts-vector anneal to the single-stranded tails of the mock dna. the 3' ends of the single-stranded tails of the ts vector  fail to serve as primers for strand extension due to the 3' end mismatches .

application of ts-hr for high-throughput production of recombinant mouse antibodies
to demonstrate the usefulness of ts-hr, we amplified the variable region of the immunoglobulin heavy chain  and the variable region of the immunoglobulin light chain  genes from single mouse plasma cells by 5' race pcr and attempted to insert the fragments into the expression vectors. the pairs of vh and vl genes were successfully amplified from single plasma cells . when conventional red/et-mediated homologous recombination was conducted with a non-selective vector  and unpurified pcr products from lane  <dig> or  <dig>  only 50% and 30% of the colonies contained the vh gene were obtained, respectively . these results clearly indicate that purification of the v gene is required prior to the conventional homologous recombination reaction. however, when ts-hr was conducted with a v gene-selective vector  and unpurified pcr products from lane  <dig> or  <dig>  80% and 90% of the colonies contained the vh gene were obtained, respectively . theses results were in good agreement with the pilot experiment in figure  <dig> 

in light of the high cloning specificity of the ts-hr technique, we prepared the immunoglobulin expression plasmids without screening single colonies for a correct clone. when the pool of plasmids was extracted from the bacteria directly cultured in liquid medium after transformation, all  <dig> examined plasmids contained an insert of the expected size . furthermore, the v gene dna sequence was present in all of the plasmids examined, and the cloning reaction proceeded as expected, with no insertions or deletions at the cloning junctions . we also observed the successful in-frame insertion of vh genes belonging to g <dig>  g2a and g2b, indicating the unbiased insertion of the igg subclass .

pools of plasmids originating as described in figure 4c were sequenced, and their v--j- repertoires were determined.

co-transfection of the cognate pair of heavy chain and light chain expression plasmids into 293ft cells resulted in the secretion of recombinant antibodies ; seven clones specifically reacted with the antigen .

the major advantages of the ts-hr system include its specificity, rapidity and robustness. by using the ts-hr technique, the time-consuming processes inherent in current cloning methods, such as the purification of the v gene dna fragment and the plating of transformed bacteria to screen single colonies for correct clones, are dramatically reduced. due to the simplicity of our system, dozens of expression plasmids can be produced simultaneously, enabling us to produce recombinant antibodies from large numbers of single plasma cells. in addition, unlike other cloning systems, red/et-mediated recombination can be performed inexpensively in large quantities, saving investigators significant time and expense. the ts-hr system can be applied to the selective cloning of dna fragments in which primer regions and their internal gene-specific sequences are constant but the intervening regions vary; t-cell receptor genes are an example of such a target sequence.

CONCLUSIONS
the method described here overcomes several major obstacles to the cloning of pcr-amplified v gene dna fragments into expression vectors. first, unlike currently employed cloning techniques, the ts-hr method does not require purification of the v gene. second, ts-hr does not require the screening of transformed bacterial colonies for correct clones. these features suggest that ts-hr is directly applicable to high-throughput applications.

