BACKGROUND
reactive oxygen species  are by-products of aerobic cellular metabolism. the use of oxygen  to oxidize nutrients and to obtain energy through respiration also generates superoxide and hydroxyl radicals, such as superoxide anion radical , hydrogen peroxide , and the highly reactive hydroxyl radicals . in addition, environmental agents such as ionizing or near-uv radiation can also lead to the production of ros  <cit> . these compounds are potentially harmful to cells, causing damage by inactivating proteins, breaking nucleic acid strands, and altering the lipids and fluidity of cell membranes. for this reason, cells possess numerous mechanisms to repair these many forms of damage and to adapt to oxidative stress  <cit> .

a number of adaptive mechanisms have been revealed in e. coli through the use of biochemical assays together with mutagenesis experiments. for example, the transcription factors oxyr and the soxrs have been identified as two key regulators defending ros effects. oxyr responds primarily to the oxidative stress initiators h2o <dig> and nitrosylating agents, whereas soxrs responds primarily to superoxide and nitric oxide  <cit> . the mechanism of responses to superoxide stress is now considered to involve the reversible oxidation of a sensor, soxr, which in turn enhances expression of a regulator soxs  <cit> . the activation of these regulators greatly increases cellular resistance to oxidizing agents.

changes in the activities of these  transcriptional factors can alter global gene expression patterns in cells, which may in turn lead to global changes in protein activities and metabolic fluxes. such global responses have previously been studied using proteomics and gene microarrays, which allow the simultaneous and systematic overview of thousands of genes or proteins  <cit> . for example, greenberg and demple used a proteomics approach for the analysis of the soxrs regulon and were able to identify about  <dig> proteins that were activated by superoxide-generating agents  <cit> . a genome-wide transcriptional profile of the e. coli responses to superoxide stress revealed the activation of sets of coregulated genes required for the maintenance of cellular homeostasis  <cit> . recently, a time series microarray design was used to reveal soxrs-dependent and independent dynamic transcriptional networks that respond to superoxide stress. a model of the primary transcriptional response containing  <dig> protein-coding genes and srna sequences has been proposed  <cit> .

besides gene expressions, influences of oxidative stress on the central carbon metabolism  network, especially on the distribution of metabolic fluxes through this network, are of important interest. several previous studies have focused on key enzymes involved in central carbon metabolism, such as glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase  <cit> , fumarase  <cit> , aconitase  <cit> , and α-ketoglutarate dehydrogenase   <cit> . however, systematic analysis of metabolic responses to superoxide stress directly based on metabolic flux distributions has not yet been reported.

metabolic flux analysis  using 13c labeling has been frequently used to follow the intracellular fluxes in the central metabolism in bacteria, yeast, filamentous fungi, and animal cells  <cit> . 13c-labeled metabolites can be monitored throughout the metabolic system and their distribution in certain metabolites can be measured either by two-dimensional nuclear magnetic resonance   <cit>  or by gas chromatography/mass spectrometry . from these measurements, intracellular fluxes can then be estimated by parameter fitting procedures  <cit> .

in the present study, we used mfa to investigate the metabolic response of e. coli exposed to paraquat , a known inducer of oxidative stress. we have cultivated wild type e. coli cells in the normal minimum medium and in a pq-containing one using chemostat cultivations. after comparing some general growth parameters and metabolite production parameters under the two conditions, we have used steady state 13c flux analysis to determine the metabolic flux distributions in the central carbon metabolism network. the network comprises the embden-meyerhof pathway , the pentose phosphate  pathway, the entner dourodouf  pathway, the tricarboxylic acid cycle , the anaplerotic reaction, and the glyoxylate shunt. the 13c-flux software was used for estimation of optimal flux values and 90% confidence intervals of flux values were calculated by monte carlo sampling method  <cit> . one output of the metabolic network that comprises the most notable shift in the adaptation to superoxide stress, the cellular nadph:nadh ratio, has been measured. enzymes that are of potential importance in regulating the observed flux changes or the cellular nadph:nadh ratios have been subjected to activity assays and/or quantitative gene expression analysis by real time rt-pcr. the observed flux redistributions upon pq exposing are discussed in terms of the mechanisms of the adaptation to superoxide stress, and in terms of the correlations between the metabolic flux, gene expression and enzyme activity data. details of the network model and the experimental procedures are presented in methods.

RESULTS
 <dig>  changes in some general growth parameters and metabolite production parameters of e. coli jm <dig> under paraquat  stress
certain growth parameters of wild type e. coli in normal as well as in pq-containing minimum media were both measured in chemostat cultivations. in the pq cultivation, pq concentration was carefully chosen to be  <dig> μm, at which the intracellular environments should have been sufficiently disturbed while the cells can still maintain a growth rate equal to or greater than the diluting rate . more details are given in methods.

cell proliferation rate and dry weight increases determined for wild type e. coli growing in normal and in pq-containing minimum media are shown in table  <dig>  under pq exposure, the rate of biomass accumulation was reduced. in addition, the rate of α-ketoglutaric acid production was more than doubled and that for acetic acid also increased dramatically. rates of pyruvic acid and lactate production decreased.

data are expressed as means ± standard deviations of three measurements.

aspecific α- ketoglutaric acid production rate.

bspecific pyruvic acid production rate.

cspecific lactate production rate.

dspecific acetic acid production rate.

eyield of biomass on glucose.

 <dig>  the redistribution of metabolic fluxes
the metabolic fluxes are summarized in figure  <dig>  to simplify notations in this figure and in the following presentation and discussions of results, we have used shorthand names to represent the metabolic steps comprising the network. these shorthand names as well as other abbreviations such as shorthand enzyme and metabolite names are collectively defined in abbreviations.

as shown in figure  <dig>  the metabolic fluxes showed observable shifts between a range of pathways in the central carbon metabolic network upon pq exposure, including the following.

 the fluxes associated with all five steps of the pp pathway, including gdh, gnd, tk <dig>  tk <dig> and tal, increased.

 acetate efflux increased from almost zero to  <dig>  .

 fluxes associated with the metabolic steps in tca cycle, including glta, icd, akd and fum, decreased in response to pq treatment. the changes associated with akd and icd were the most substantial. the flux of akd decreased from  <dig>  to  <dig> , while the flux of icd decreased from  <dig>  to  <dig> . accompanying the decreased fluxes associated with icd and akd, the fluxes in both the glyoxylate shunt  <dig> and glyoxylate shunt  <dig> were moderately elevated.

 the fluxes through the anaplerotic process were reduced at the mez and ppc steps.

 <dig>  changes in cellular nadph:nadh ratios
as seen in figure  <dig>  an almost two-fold increase in the nadph:nadh ratio occurred following pq exposure.

in table  <dig>  the calculated nadh and nadph production fluxes in e. coli under the two growth conditions are compared . following pq exposure, the ratio of metabolically generated nadph over nadh was increased by  <dig> - <dig>  fold.

 the values represent the sum of nadh producing fluxes.

acomputed yields from flux values of the optimal fit.

bupper and lower bound of nadh generation in the pq stress experiment.

cthe 90% confidence interval of the respective total fluxes.

 <dig>  changes in the activities of selected enzymes
the results of enzyme activity assays are summarized in table  <dig>  upon exposure to pq, the activities of malate dehydrogenase  and glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase  showed the most significant increases, while those of isocitrate dehydrogenase  and α-ketoglutaric acid dehydrogenase  showed the most significant decreases. moderate increases were seen in glucose phosphate isomerase , isocitrate lyase and transhydrogenase  activity.

aenzyme activities in cell extracts of control or paraquat-treated wildtype e. coli jm <dig> grown on glucose at d =  <dig>  h- <dig> under aerobic chemostat conditions. ratio calculation was based on control conditions . the unit of enzyme activity is μmol min- <dig>  - <dig>  all measurements were performed in triplicate. data are expressed as means ± s.d. idh: isocitrate dehydrogenase nadp-dependent, akgdh: α-ketoglutaric acid dehydrogenase, pgi: glucose phosphate isomerase, mdh: malate dehydrogenase, g6pdh: glucose-6-phosphate dehydrogenase, icl: isocitrate lyase, eno: enolase, thd: transhydrogenase.

 <dig>  changes in the gene expression of selected enzymes
upon pq exposure, the glucose phosphate isomerase, citrate synthase, and aconitasea genes were up-regulated as indicated by increased transcription of approximately 52%, 20%, and 14%, respectively. the expression of udha and pntab, which are respectively soluble and membrane-bound transhydrogenases catalyzing the inter-converting between nadh and nadph, was increased by 32% and 19%, respectively.

discussions
 <dig>  possible mechanisms of increased cellular nadph generation and reduced nadh production upon pq exposure
although nadh and nadph have identical reduction potentials, available data increasingly suggest that they have distinctive physiological functions and play opposite roles in cellular oxidative stress. nadh serves primarily for the generation of atp; its oxidation during cell respiration is responsible for the generation of most of the endogenous cellular ros. on the other hand, nadph serves primarily to provide the reductive power for biosynthesis and to maintain the reductive environment necessary for cellular activities  <cit> . as suggested by brumaghim, the difference in reactivity with iron fe between nadph and nadh may result in the depletion of the nadh pool very rapidly upon imposition of oxidative stress, leaving nadph, which is less reactive with fe3+, to function as the major nicotinamide nucleotide reductant  <cit> .

the oxidative stress-induced regulation of nadph:nadh generation has also been reported in a number of systems. for example, brumaghim observed a 90-fold increase in the nadph:nadh ratio within  <dig> min after cells were treated with hydrogen peroxide  <cit> . singh also reported that oxidative stress evokes a metabolic adaptation that favors increased nadph synthesis and decreased nadh production in pseudomonas fluorescens  <cit> .

e. coli cells appeared to increase their nadph generation in response to pq-induced superoxide stress. our results show that this effect largely occurred through an increased glucose carbon flux through the pp pathway , which is one of the primary sources for the generation of nadph. in addition to up-regulating metabolic modules needed for the generation of nadph, the pq-stressed e. coli cells also apparently down-regulating those modules responsible for the generation of nadh. this is done by increasing acetate production through the pox or pdh steps , increasing the flux through the glyoxylate shunt and thus bypassing the main tca cycle. the nadph:nadh ratio may also be changed by modulation of transhydrogenase  activity  <cit> . based on our results, the following regulatory changes may have played key roles in the global metabolic response.

 regulation of g6pdh activity
the experimentally measured metabolic fluxes added direct evidence in support of increased pp pathway activities and nadph generation as a general cellular response to oxidative stress. the increased flux through the pp pathway may have been regulated via the large increase in the activity of g6pdh, the enzyme that catalyzes the first step  of the pp pathway.

the physiological importance of regulations of g6pdh for increased nadph generation through the pp pathway can be further highlighted by noting that a zwf gene-knock-out mutant strain is much more sensitive to pq stress than is the wild type . previously, a zwf mutant of yeast has been shown to be more sensitive to hydrogen peroxide-induced oxidative stress than is the wild-type strain  <cit> .

 regulation of carbon partitioning between acetate excretion and the tca cycle
following pq exposure, an increased production of acetate through the pox or pdh-ace step was evident by the large increase in the residual acetate level in the cell culture medium. neither of these steps leads to nadh yields. the fluxes entering the glta and ppc step decreased, meaning that pyruvate was channeled increasingly into acetate and less into the tca cycle following pq exposure, which led to a significant reduction in nadh production.

 regulation of idh and on carbon partitioning between tca and the glyoxylate shunt
the idh system is a well-known regulator of carbon partitioning between the tca cycle and the glyoxylate shunt. the precise partitioning of carbon flux between the tca cycle and the glyoxylate shunt can be achieved by regulating the activity of idh through changes in its phosphorylation state. under normal growth conditions, idh is mostly unphosphorylated and active. thus, most of the carbon flux is directed into the more efficient tca cycle. in contrast, during growth on acetate, most of the idh is phosphorylated and inactive, so that a greater part of the carbon flux is directed into the glyoxylate bypass  <cit> . as shown in table  <dig>  the production rate of acetic acid is significantly increased by pq treatment. acetic acid may induce phosphorylation and inactivation of idh, as evidenced by the significantly decreased idh activity and increased icl activity.

the flux through the akd step was significantly decreased upon pq exposure, further reducing the production of nadh. a moderate  increase in the flux through the glyoxylate shunt was also apparent. the tca cycle is geared primarily to energy production, and it "consumes" carbon units by giving off co <dig>  in contrast, when e. coli employs the glyoxylate shunt, it produces four-carbon compounds from two-carbon acetate units  <cit> . reactions of the glyoxylate shunt do not produce nadh in addition to co <dig>  increased metabolite flow through the glyoxylate shunt instead of the tca cycle reduces the amount of nadh produced from glucose. reduced nadh generation may decrease the ros produced by cell respiration, thus helping to relieve superoxide stress.

 regulations of transhydrogenases 
thds, namely the soluble udha and the membrane-bound pntab forms, play important roles in nadph metabolism. the soluble form was reported to be essential for growth under metabolic conditions that lead to excess nadph formation and the subsequent reoxidation for nadph, while the membrane-bound form corresponds with the reduction of nadp+, with nadh as a source of reductant  <cit> . our results show that pq exposure causes upregulation of the udha and pntab genes and increases in the total thd activity. although we were unable to determine the actual direction of the reaction nadh + nadp+ ↔ nad+ + nadph catalyzed by these enzymes, the results still suggest that thds may be important in regulating the nadh:nadph balance under oxidative stress conditions.

 <dig>  the accumulation of α- ketoglutaric acid under pq stress
 regulation of akgdh
in addition to idh, akgdh is another enzyme that may play a pivotal role in controlling carbon flux through the tca cycle. although gene expression of akgdh has been shown to have almost no change upon pq treatment  <cit> , we found that the enzyme activity decreased dramatically . the flux through the associated akd step is also dramatically reduced. the oxidative stress-induced inactivation of akgdh might have taken place at the post-transcriptional level, rather than at the transcriptional level. akgdh is a multi-enzyme complex whose activity depends on the lipoic acid in its e <dig> subunit. this lipoic acid moiety could be subject to oxidation under oxidative stress conditions, which would lead to enzyme inactivation  <cit> .

 roles of α-ketoglutaric acid
the decreased flux through akd was accompanied by a doubling of the production rate of α-ketoglutaric acid  . this phenomenon has also been recently observed in pseudomonas fluorescens under oxidative stress  <cit> . because akg is a critical metabolite that connects carbohydrate and protein metabolism, it has been proposed to be capable of scavenging ros and diminishing ros production  <cit> . thus, the inactivation of akgdh leads not only to the reduced generation of nadh, but also to the accumulation of akg. this increased akg pool might enhance the scavenging of ros  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have quantified a range of changes that occur in metabolic carbon flux during pq stress in e. coli. these changes are, to a large extent, coherent and lead to systematic adjustments of cellular physiological states. one major adjustment is the increased nadph generation and decreased nadh generation. this reflects a cellular strategy whereby efficiency is traded for survival under stressful conditions. our results provide direct data of specific changes in the metabolic fluxes leading to such systematic changes, and suggest that global redistributions of metabolic fluxes upon superoxide exposure may have been achieved through the regulation of key enzyme expression/activities.

more generally, our study provide an example in which metabolic flux analyses present direct measurements of the physiological states of cells, while gene expression and proteomics studies measure the molecular states. in complex systems such as the metabolic networks, the different molecular processes that eventually determine the physiological states are tightly coupled to each other; i.e., there may not always be simple, process-by-process correspondence between changes in the physiological states and in the molecular states of cells. for instance, we have seen that the reduced akd flux is associated with the inactivation, but not the reduced expression, of akgdh. occasionally, reduced fluxes are found with unchanged or even increased expression of the respective genes and/or activities of associated enzymes . these types of results highlight the important complementarity between different types of systems level approaches. used together, these approaches can provide comprehensive and undistorted pictures of how microorganisms respond to oxidative stress or other drastic environmental challenges.

