BACKGROUND
economic growth is often accompanied by the increase in energy consumption. depletion of fossil fuel reserves and rising crude oil prices prompt renewed interest in algae biofuel research. green microalgae are unicellular photosynthetic organisms capable of converting photon energy into chemical energy and assimilating carbon dioxide to form glucose. it has been proposed that microalgae farming could avoid competing with food crops for arable land and fresh water and the energy yield from algae per acre per year would be much higher than other crops . in addition, it mitigates greenhouse gas emission. however, current microalgal species and cultivation methodologies are thought to hamper production of algae-based energy in an economically viable manner  <cit> .

many studies have focused on the enhancement of lipid contents in microalgae. nitrogen deprivation  is one of the most widely used methods to increase lipid storage in algae . it is known that nd triggers gametogenesis and zygospore formation in the model green microalga c. reinhardtii  <cit> . zygospores can survive under harsh conditions without nutrients for long period of time and ready to revive through germination when external nutrients become available. storage molecules such as starch and fats  are the major source of energy essential for spore germination before they are capable of assimilating external nutrients. therefore, enhancement of lipid storage following nd is at the cost of cell growth arrest and differentiation.

global transcriptional profiling of microalgal cells in response to nd using next-generation sequencing  technologies allows identification of gene regulatory networks involved in adaptation and survival  <cit> . global transcriptional profiling indicates that alteration of lipid metabolic pathways is complex: enhancement of tag accumulation could be a result of recycling of membrane lipids and de novo glycerolipid biosynthesis  <cit> . comparative transcriptome analysis with other algal species may allow gaining insight into molecular mechanisms underlying the metabolic pathways involved in growth arrest and biosynthesis of storage molecules.

currently, a number of microalgal genome such as chlamydomonas reinhardtii and chlorella variabilis are fully sequenced and comprehensively annotated  <cit> . additionally, assembly of genomes and transcriptomes from the millions of short sequence reads generated by ngs technologies has been greatly aided by the use of de bruijn graph-based sequence-alignment algorithms . several green microalgal transcriptomes have been assembled without reference genomes by using these methodologies . however, most of these analyses are primarily focused on gene discovery and metabolic pathway reconstitution.

the green microalga botryosphaerella sudeticus  has been previously isolated from a culture of the hydrocarbon-rich slow-growing microalga botryococcus braunii as a contaminant  <cit> . phylogenetic analysis based on rdna sequence indicates that b. sudeticus is more related to characiopodium hindakii rather than b. braunii  <cit> . observation of gametes leads to the suggestion that b. sudeticus may have sexual life cycle  <cit> . we showed that the maximal cell density of b. sudeticus cultures was 2-fold of that of c. reinhardtii under conditions of phototrophic growth, suggesting a useful candidate for algal biomass production. gametogenesis and lipid accumulation were induced by nd. to investigate transcriptional alteration of metabolic pathways following nd, we performed global transcriptional profiling of b. sudeticus cells in response to nd based on the transcriptome assembled without reference genome. by using a pathway-based approach, we show that ests encoding photosynthetic function and ribosomal proteins are the most abundant ests in rapidly growing b. sudeticus cells. upon nd, photosynthetic function-encoding but not ribosomal protein-encoding ests are drastically downregulated, suggesting a programmed cellular response for differentiation. this transcriptional response to nd is found to be conserved in c. reinhardtii, possibly in most green microalgae.

RESULTS
gametogenesis and lipid accumulation are enhanced by nitrogen deprivation  in b. sudeticus
b. sudeticus  was often found to overgrown in cultures of b. braunii  . it was partly because of the slow growth rate of b. braunii. to investigate how well b. sudeticus grew, we tested its phototrophic growth in media of hs  <cit> , bb  <cit> , and 2x bb in shaking flask with bubbling of co <dig> under constant light . we compared the growth curve of b. sudeticus with that of c. reinhardtii, a best-studied green microalga. the growth rate and the maximal cell density of b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii were very similar in hs medium . on the other hand, though the growth rate of b. sudeticus remained to be similar as that of c. reinhardtii, the maximal cell density of b. sudeticus was increased by ~25% in 1xbb medium and nearly by 100%  in 2x bb medium compared to that of c. reinhardtii. this result suggests that b. sudeticus is a useful strain for potential microalgal biomass production.figure  <dig> 
characterization of growth, gametogenesis, and lipid content in
b. sudeticus
. 
b. sudeticus culture reaches relatively high maximal cell density. growth curves of b. sudeticus  and c. reinhardtii  in various media indicated are shown. x- and y-axis indicate time  and cell dry weight , respectively. hs and bb stand for high salt and bold-modified bristol media, respectively. error bars represent the standard deviation of triplicate samples.  gametogenesis is induced by nd in b. sudeticus. upper panel shows a gamete whose tip of flagella is denoted by an arrow. bottom panel shows part of conical flasks in which sedimented cell aggregates are denoted by an arrow-head. medium with nitrogen  or without nitrogen  is indicated.  lipid accumulation is enhanced by nd in b. sudeticus. left panel shows the increased intensity of nile red signal in cells after nd. x- and y-axis indicate the time  and nile red signal level , respectively. nile red signal level of cell samples are based on the median level derived from facs analysis as shown in the mid panel. right panel shows the nile red stained cells prior to  and after  nd.  level of triacylglycerol  and squalene is increased in b. sudeticus following nd. left panel shows the tlc analysis and right panel shows the gc-ms analysis  of total lipid in b. sudeticus prior to  and after  nd.  contents of nitrogen , carbon , and total lipid . bar-plots show the level of n, c, and tl against cdw in nitrogen-replete  and nitrogen-starved  cells.



we subsequently investigate if gametogenesis would be induced by nd. we noted that there were ~1% of gametes in log-phase growth culture . on the other hand, ~10% of gametes were found three days after nd. though we did not obtain the cell-cell fusion event in em analysis , aggregation and precipitation of cells upon nd was apparent . hence, we concluded that nd induced gametogenesis in b. sudeticus.

to examine whether nd would enhance lipid storage, nitrogen-deprived  cells were stained with a lipophilic dye nile red and subjected to facs analysis . average level of nile red signals in cells  <dig> days after nd was increased by 40-fold compared to that prior to nd. tlc and gc-ms analyses indicated that tag and squalene  contents  were increased by ~50-fold and  <dig> -fold compared to that of nitrogen-replete cells , respectively . notably, total lipid of the early log-phase cells exhibited the relatively low level of tag content.

actively growing b. sudeticus cultures were maintained by subculturing or 8-fold dilution in fresh bb+n medium prior to exhaustion of nitrate in the medium . we noted that the cell mass continued to increase under nd conditions . to examine the alteration of nitrogen  and carbon  contents in cells after nd, we performed elemental analysis of n and c in cells. it was clear that n contents in the nd cells was greatly dropped by  <dig> -fold compared to that of nitrogen-replete cells  . on the other hand, the c content in the nd cells was only slightly reduced compared to that of nitrogen-replete cells . this result suggests that carbon assimilation is not strongly affected upon nd for  <dig> days. while tag content were drastically increased by 50-fold upon nd stress , total lipid  content in nd cells was only slightly increased by  <dig> -fold compared to that of nitrogen-replete cells . this result indicates that majority of the storage tag molecules in nd cells are accumulated through the modification of pre-existing lipids, rather than de novo synthesis.

de novo assembly and annotation of the b. sudeticus transcriptome
for analysis of transcriptional profiling of b. sudeticus cells in response to nd, we first wanted to assemble the transcriptome without reference genome. for this reason, cdna libraries were constructed from the nd and nitrogen-replete cells. a total of  <dig> , <dig> paired-reads  pooled from both growth conditions were subjected to de novo transcriptome assembly using the clc genomics workbench software . to this end,  <dig>  non-redundant contigs/ scaffolds/ ests  were generated. length of ests ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  bps with a median of  <dig> bps or average of  <dig> bps . approx. 90% of all reads in either growth condition was mapped to the ests. absolute level of ests was normalized to rpkm  ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  with a median of  <dig>  .figure  <dig> 
characteristics of the
b. sudeticus
transcriptome. a total of  <dig> thousand ests is assembled based on  <dig> million paired-end reads , of which, ~ <dig>  ests were annotated.  length distribution of all ests. x- and y-axis indicate the binned est length and the number of ests in each bin, respectively.  level distribution of all ests. levels are normalized to rpkm. x- and y-axis indicate the binned est level  and the number of ests in each bin, respectively.  list of go-terms that are associated with ests annotations. top  <dig> go-terms in each category are shown. x-axis indicates the go-terms and y-axis indicates the number of ests associated with the go-terms. bp, cc, and mf stand for biological process, cellular component, and molecular function, respectively.  list of kegg metabolic pathways that are associated with ests annotations. top  <dig> metabolic pathways are listed. the display is identical to .



b. sudeticus ests were annotated based on the best-hit proteins generated by sequence homology comparison using the basic local alignment search tool blastx suite  against the “best” proteins in the model green microalgae c. reinhardtii and c. variabilis  <cit>  with a cutoff expectation-value of 1e- <dig>  as a result, a total of  <dig>   non-redundant ests in b. sudeticus were annotated, of which,  <dig>  ests had best-hits in c. reinhardtii and  <dig>  in c. variabilis  <cit>  .

gene ontology   <cit>  and kegg ortholog   <cit>  annotations that associated with the best-hit proteins in c. reinhardtii and c. variabilis were extracted for transcriptome analysis in b. sudeticus. of a total of  <dig>  annotated ests,  <dig>  were found to be associated with at least one of the  <dig>  go-terms . go terms associated with the highest number of ests in three categories were metabolism , membrane , and atp-binding . the top  <dig> go-terms in three categories were shown in figure 2c .

out of  <dig>  ests,  <dig>  were found to be associated with at least one of the  <dig> kegg metabolic pathways  <cit> . top  <dig> kegg metabolic pathways were shown in figure 2d . we took a pathway-based approach to study the coherence of ests absolute abundances in the rapidly growing cells and the coherence of ests abundance alterations  upon nd in b. sudeticus .

overview of the pathway-based transcriptome analysis
based on kegg databases, we focused on the coherence analysis of the absolute abundance  and relative abundance  of a subset of the metabolic pathway-associated ests. we assumed that co-regulated basal or constitutive transcription of the pathway-associated ests would display a high consistency in est levels in rapidly growing cells. likewise, co-regulated transcriptional alteration in response to nd would exhibit a high coherence of the pathway-associated est ratios between levels in nd and nitrogen-replete cells.

we used the occurrence density of the pathway-associated ests in a range that contained the first 50%, middle 50%, or second 50% of the ests based on ranks to approximate the transcriptional coherence of a given metabolic pathways . coherence of the constitutive transcription and nd-induced transcription of the pathway-associated ests was determined based on ranks by the absolute abundance and relative abundance or ratio, respectively. a metabolic pathway was designated as a co-transcriptionally regulated  pathway if the occurrence density of the pathway-associated ests in one of the three half ranges was 2-fold above background and the p-value was less than  <dig>  based on ranks by level  or ratio . we also tested the occurrence density in the top 10% of the most abundant ests based on ranks by level or in the top  10% of the most upregulated  ests based on ranks by ratio  for coherently regulated metabolic pathways .

we proposed that coherent pathways were potentially co-transcriptionally regulated. given that the magnitude of alteration in transcription levels following nd was a function of time, magnitude of change in transcription levels would vary in cells sampled at different time point after stress. on the other hand, coherence of transcriptional response for metabolic pathways would be remained throughout the course of response.

coherent transcription of the ribosomal protein-encoding ests in b. sudeticus
absolute level of the  <dig>  annotated ests in b. sudeticus was approximated by rpkm . we found that  <dig> out of top  <dig> most abundant ests encoded putative ribosomal proteins, indicating that rp-encoding ests are enriched in the topmost expressed ests compared to background  in actively growing b. sudeticus cells . this result is consistent with a notion that protein synthesis is one of the most active functions in actively growing cells  <cit> .table  <dig> 
list of the top  <dig> most abundant ests in
b. sudeticus


rka
note: a, rank; b, est id; c, protein id in c. reinhardtii or c. variabilis; d, est function based on its best hit protein.



cytosolic or eukaryotic ribosomal proteins  are encoded by nuclear genes in green microalgae. on the other hand, chloroplast and mitochondrion or archaea ribosomal proteins  are encoded by both the nuclear and chloroplast or mitochondrion genes, respectively. transcriptional coordination would be relatively easy to achieve for a group of genes localized in a single genome compared to those in two genomes such as nuclear and chloroplast or mitochondrial genomes. hence, we hypothesized that the transcription consistency of the erp-encoding ests would be high compared to that of arp-encoding ests. to test this hypothesis, we first determined the relative occurrence density in the  <dig> half-ranges  of the erp- and arp-encoding ests  based on the rank by abundance . it was clear that the relative occurrence densities in the first and middle halves of the erp-encoding ests were much higher than background , indicating that 75% of the erp-encoding ests displayed a coordinated level of constitutive transcription. on the other hand, the relative occurrence density only in the range of the first 50% of the arp-encoding ests was higher than background .figure  <dig> 
coherence of transcription levels in ribosomal protein-encoding ests in
b. sudeticus
.  distribution of ests encoding erps and arps based on rank by level. the heat-map shows the est occurrence that is binned by an average sliding window of  <dig> consecutive ranks and normalized to  <dig> for each pathway or component. the color key for percent levels is shown at the bottom. the box-plot indicates the minimum , first quartile , median , third quartile , and maximum  of erp and arp est levels by rank.  occurrence densities of erp and arp ests. upper table shows the range of ests based on rank by level. four ranges are shown: first 50% , middle 50% , and second 50%  of erp- or arp-ests and top 10%  of most abundant ests based on rank by level. mid table shows the occurrence density of erp- or arp-ests. bottom table shows the relative occurrence density in  <dig> half-ranges containing 50% of the erp or arp-ests. coherent transcription or relative density in one of the  <dig> half-ranges is 2-fold above background and p-value is less than  <dig> . different levels of statistical significance are indicated as triple asterisk , double asterisk , and single asterisk  for p-value <  <dig> , <  <dig> , and <  <dig> , respectively.  distribution of erp- and arp-ests based on rank by ratio. top panel shows the heat-map and box-plot of erp- and arp-est distribution based on rank by ratio. bottom table shows the relative occurrence density of erp- and arp-ests in  <dig> half-ranges and in top or bottom of the most differentially transcribed ests. levels of statistical significance are indicated as .  distribution of erp- and arp-est ratios. change of median ratios  of erp- and arp-ests compared to background is indicated.



we noted that the occurrence density of both erp- and arp-encoding ests was clearly enriched in the top 10% of the most abundant ests in actively growing b. sudeticus cells , indicating that protein synthesis is highly active in both cytoplasm and chloroplast/ mitochondrial to support growth of b. sudeticus cells.

we subsequently examined the relative occurrence density of the erp- and arp-encoding ests based on ranks by ratio between levels in nd and nitrogen-replete cells. occurrence density of the erp-encoding ests was found to be enriched in the range containing the middle half and the second half of the erp-encoding ests , suggesting that change in transcription levels of erp-encoding ests is consistent during response to nd . on the other hand, occurrence density in all  <dig> ranges of arp-encoding ests was not enriched. this result supports our hypothesis that co-transcriptional regulation of genes localized in a single genome is relatively easy to achieve compared to those located in different genomes. we noted that transcription of rp genes was not significantly downregulated in b. sudeticus cells  <dig> days after nd .

energy metabolism-associated ests appear to be most abundant and highly coherent in actively growing b. sudeticus cells
we examined the consistency in levels of ests associated with various metabolic pathways in actively growing b. sudeticus cells. to this end,  <dig> kegg metabolic pathways were found to associate with at least  <dig> ests based on annotation of the b. sudeticus transcriptome . the erp- or arp-encoding ests were included as control. relative occurrence density of individual metabolic pathways in ranges containing the first, middle, and second halves of the pathway-associated ests based on ranks by level was determined . fourteen out of the  <dig> metabolic pathways exhibited high relative occurrence density in one of the  <dig> ranges of the pathway-associated ests based on ranks by level ,  <dig> of which were found to be enriched in the top 10% of the most abundant ests .figure  <dig> 
coherence of transcription levels in various metabolic pathways in rapidly growing
b. sudeticus
cells.  distribution of pathway-associated ests based on rank by level. left panel shows the heat-map of individual est occurrence based on rank by level. classes of metabolic pathways are indicated on the far left. numbers of ests associated with the pathway is shown in parentheses. rp stands for ribosomal proteins as control . right panel shows the relative occurrence density in the  <dig> half-ranges  of the pathway-associated ests and in the range of top 10% of the most abundant ests . metabolic pathways are numbered on the far right.  coherently transcribed metabolic pathways in rapidly growing b. sudeticus cells. distribution of metabolic pathway-associated ests displaying the enriched level  in one of the  <dig> half-ranges  is shown. level of statistical significance is indicated by triple asterisk , double asterisk , and single asterisk  for p-value <  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig> , respectively.



coherent transcription was found in  <dig> carbohydrate,  <dig> lipid,  <dig> amino acid, and  <dig> energy metabolic pathways . of the  <dig> coherently transcribed pathways,  <dig> were enriched in the top 10% of the most abundant ests:  <dig> involved in carbohydrate metabolisms  and  <dig> involved in energy metabolisms . glycolysis is the process of converting glucose into pyruvate and generating small amounts of atp  and nadh  molecules; and the pentose phosphate pathway is a process of glucose turnover that produces nadph and pentoses   <cit> . both were primary metabolism and essential for cell growth. photosynthesis  is the process of harvesting light energy and generating atp and nadh which in turn utilized to reduce carbon dioxide to organic molecules in a process known as carbon fixation . oxidative phosphorylation is the process of transferring electrons to oxygen and generating atp in mitochondria. majority atp in cells were generated through oxidative phosphorylation  <cit> . hence, we concluded that photosynthesis and energy metabolisms are the most active functions required for rapidly growth of b. sudeticus.

transcription of photosynthetic ests is most drastically downregulated upon nd in b. sudeticus
to investigate metabolic pathways that exhibited co-transcriptional alteration in response to nd, the relative occurrence density of the  <dig> metabolic pathways in the  <dig> ranges  of the pathway-associated ests was determined based on ranks by ratio between levels in nd and nitrogen-replete cells . five out of the  <dig> metabolic pathways such as glutathione metabolism, atp synthesis, oxidative phosphorylation, photosynthesis, and riboflavin metabolism exhibited coherent response to nd . it was interesting that  <dig> of the  <dig> coherently responsive metabolic pathways displayed a consistency in constitutive transcription . on the other hand, of the  <dig> metabolic pathways exhibiting coherent response, only photosynthesis showed to be downregulated by  <dig> % based on the median of photosynthesis-associated ests following nd  . median level of the remaining  <dig> pathways was hardly altered. photosynthesis was the only pathway whose associated ests were enriched in the top 10% of the most downregulated ests, indicating that photosynthesis is the most drastically downregulated pathway in b. sudeticus following nd.figure  <dig> 
coherence of transcriptional alterations in various metabolic pathways in
b. sudeticus
cells following nd.  distribution of pathway-associated ests based on rank by ratio. the display is identical to figure 4a. relative occurrence density in the top <dig> % and bottom 10% of the most differentially transcribed ests is denoted as t and b, respectively.  coherently responsive metabolic pathways in b. sudeticus cells following nd. the display is identical to figure 4b.  distribution of pathway-associated est ratios. the display is identical to figure 3d. asterisk indicates the level of statistical significance.  levels of chlorophyll content  and efficiency of quantum yield of photosystem ii .



consistent with the downregulation of photosynthesis-associated ests, chlorophyll contents  in nd cells were also greatly reduced by  <dig> -fold compared to that of nitrogen-replete cells  . we subsequently determined the relative quantum yield or efficiency of photosystem ii  = /fm’, see methods), a measurement that is directly related to the quantum efficiency of carbon assimilation or photosynthesis  <cit> . interestingly, photosynthesis efficiency was only reduced by 20% upon nd compared to nitrogen-replete conditions  , not markedly reduced as seen in levels of chlorophyll content. marginal reduction of quantum yield is consistent with the observation that cell mass increase and carbon assimilation were only slightly affected by nd stress . these results implied that photosynthetic components such as light harvesting proteins are in excess under optimal growth conditions. these proteins would be recycled for synthesis of new proteins required for gametogenesis and zygospore formation under nd conditions.

we investigated pathway-associated individual ests whose levels were greatly upregulated upon nd. from the  <dig>  ests that were associated with  <dig> pathways, we found that  <dig> involved in  <dig> pathways were upregulated by 3-fold or greater . two lipid metabolism-specific enzymes, monoacylglycerol lipase  and 3-oxoacyl- reductase  were found. they might play a role in tag accumulation upon nd.

abundant and coherent transcription of energy metabolic genes is conserved in actively growing b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii cells
we wanted to investigate if the basal transcription of energy metabolic genes was abundant and coherent in the model green microalga c. reinhardtii. for this reason, we obtained the transcription profiles of c. reinhardtii generated using illumina technologies in the studies by miller et al. and gonzales-ballester et al.  <cit> . based on the best hits in c. reinhardtii, there were  <dig>  b. sudeticus ests whose best hits  were available in transcriptomic datasets of c. reinhardtii <cit>  . by using the common set of  <dig>  ests, we found that correlation between basal transcription profiles in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii was moderate . the correlation between the two independent experiments in c. reinhardtii was relatively high , indicating a good quality of the two datasets .figure  <dig> 
coherently transcribed metabolic pathways in rapid growing
b. sudeticus
or
c. reinhardtii
cells.  correlation between est levels based on rank by level in b. sudeticus  and c. reinhardtii by miller et al.,  and by gonzalez-ballester et al. . correlation coefficient is shown.  relative occurrence density of various pathway-associated ests based on rank by level in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii. the display is identical to the right panel in figure 4a.  common consistently transcribed pathways in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii. the display is identical to right panel in figure 4b. datasets based on b. sudeticus  and c. reinhardtii by miller et al.  and gonzalez-ballester et al.  are indicated.  unique consistently transcribed pathways in b. sudeticus or c. reinhardtii. the display is identical to .



based on the set of  <dig>  ests,  <dig> metabolic pathways had  <dig> or more associated ests . we found  <dig> metabolic pathways and ribosomes  showed coherent transcription in rapidly growing log-phase b. sudeticus cells . though  <dig> of the  <dig> pathways were not previously shown when a set of  <dig>  ests were used , the coherent pathways with high level of statistical significance  remained unchanged.

to ensure a fair comparison, we applied a common set of  <dig>  ests in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii. the relative occurrence density of the  <dig> metabolic pathways in  <dig> ranges  was determined based on rank by level using the common set of  <dig>  ests in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii .

comparative analysis showed that erp- and arp-encoding ests were both abundant and coherent in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii . furthermore, we found that there were  <dig> metabolic pathways that were coherent in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii. of those,  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> involved in carbohydrate metabolisms, amino acid metabolisms, and energy metabolisms, respectively. we noted that  <dig> out of the  <dig> energy metabolic pathways were abundant in b. sudeticus. on the other hand, all  <dig> energy metabolic pathways were abundant  in c. reinhardtii. in addition,  <dig> carbohydrate and  <dig> amino acid metabolic pathways were coherent and abundant in c. reinhardtii. coherent pathways tended to be abundant in c. reinhardtii, but not in b. sudeticus.

we noted that  <dig> pathways were coherent in b. sudeticus but not in c. reinhardtii . on the other hand,  <dig> were coherent in c. reinhardtii but not in b. sudeticus,  <dig> of which were also abundant. interestingly, all coherent pathways were found to be involved in energy, carbohydrate, and amino acid metabolisms, but not in lipid metabolisms except for sterol biosynthesis in b. sudeticus.

transcriptional alteration of metabolic pathways but not individual ests is correlated in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii following nd
unlike the absolute level of ests, the relative level  of ests in b. sudeticus showed no correlation  with that of c. reinhardtii following nd based on the common set of  <dig>  ests . on the other hand, a moderate correlation  was observed between est ratios in c. reinhardtii following nd and sulfur deprivation, suggesting that the global transcriptional response to nd was, to some extent, species-specific in green microalgae.figure  <dig> 
coherently responsive metabolic pathways in
b. sudeticus
or
c. reinhardtii
following nutrient deprivation.  correlation between est ratios in b. sudeticus  and c. reinhardtii  following nd and c. reinhardtii  following sulfur deprivation . correlation coefficient based on est ratios is shown.  relative occurrence density of various pathway-associated ests based on rank by ratio. the display is identical to the right panel in figure 5a.  correlation between median ratios of various metabolic pathway-associated ests based on rank by ratio in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii following nutrient deprivation.  common consistently responsive pathways in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii following nd. the display of the upper and bottom panels is identical to right panel in figure 5b and figure 5c, respectively.  unique consistently responsive pathways in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii following nutrient deprivation. the display is identical to .



to compare the nd-induced transcription of ests associated with various metabolic pathways in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii, we determined the relative occurrence density in the  <dig> half-ranges of the pathway-associated ests based on rank by ratio . we noted that median ratio of the pathway-associated ests in b. sudeticus was clearly correlated with that of c. reinhardtii following nd but not sulfur deprivation . this result suggested that transcriptional response of metabolic pathways rather than individual ests was conserved in green microalgae b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii following nd.

in b. sudeticus, only erp-ests but not arp-ests showed coherent response to nd . on the other hand, both erp- and arp-ests exhibited coherent response in c. reinhardtii. we noted that none of them displayed a significant alteration in transcriptional levels  following nd in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii. interestingly, though, the median level of erp- or arp-ests was significantly altered in c. reinhardtii following sulfur deprivation.

we found that there were  <dig> metabolic pathways exhibited consistent response  in b. sudeticus following nd, of which,  <dig>  were also found to showed coherent response in c. reinhardtii in response to nd. while the median level of citrate cycle and atp biosynthesis was not significantly changed, the median level of photosynthesis was obviously downregulated in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii following nd. in fact, it was also greatly downregulated in c. reinhardtii following sulfur deprivation. consistent with it, arp- but not erp-ests were also downregulated in c. reinhardtii following sulfur deprivation. these results suggested that transcriptional downregulation of photosynthesis is a common response to nutrient deprivation.

among the coherent pathways specific to species or stresses , folate biosynthesis was upregulated  in b. sudeticus following nd and porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism was downregulated  in c. reinhardtii following sulfur deprivation. folate and its derivatives are cofactors of one-carbon metabolism that is required for the biosynthesis of nucleotides and amino acids and upregulation of folate biosynthesis was in agreement with biosynthesis of novel proteins for gametogenesis upon nd. chlorophyll is critical to photosynthesis. hence, downregulation of porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism was consistent with the repression of photosynthetic transcription.

discussion
based on the pathway-based approach, we show that the absolute level of ests encoding rps and energy metabolic pathways such as photosynthesis, carbon fixation, and oxidative phosphorylation are highly coherent and abundant in b. sudeticus  and c. reinhardtii  by using the analysis of est occurrence density based on rank by level, implying that protein synthesis and energy metabolisms are the most active functions in the rapidly growing b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii cells, possibly in all actively growing green microalgal cells. interestingly, many coherent carbohydrate and amino acid metabolic pathways in c. reinhardtii but not in b. sudeticus tended to be abundant, probably reflecting the difference between b. sudeticus phototrophic growth and c. reinhardtii heterotrophic growth. we noted that almost all of the pathways whose coherence in est steady-state levels occurred in the first 50%  of the pathway-associated ests. it implies that there is a tight regulation of the abundantly expressed transcripts in microalgal cells. it would save energy for optimal function of complex metabolic pathways in microalgae.

nd is one of the most widely used methods for enhancement of storage lipids in green microalgae . however, nd induces cell cycle arrest and sexual differentiation and spore formation for survival  <cit> . in this study, we show that photosynthesis is only metabolic pathway whose transcription is most downregulated in b. sudeticus following nd and c. reinhardtii following nd or sulfur deprivation . in c. reinhardtii following sulfur deprivation, porphyrin and chlorophyll metabolism and arp-ests are also downregulated. in plant, it is known that photosynthetic genes are downregulated in infected or damaged leaf by biotic agents such as arthropods, fungi, bacteria and viral pathogens  <cit> . additionally, accumulation of carbohydrate under sink limitation can lead downregulation of photosynthesis in plant  <cit> . in unicellular green microalgae, it is not known if downregulation of photosynthesis is partly a result of carbohydrate  accumulation in chloroplast.

in this study, we show that, upon nd, the level of nitrogen in cells is reduced by  <dig> -fold. while transcription of photosynthetic genes is drastically reduced, chlorophyll level is also reduced by 3-fold. on the other hand, under nd conditions, cell mass still increases. carbon content in nd cells is only decreased by 7% compared to that of nitrogen-replete cells. this is consistent with the observation that photosynthesis efficiency is only reduced by 20%. these data indicate that drastic downregulation of photosynthetic transcripts or chlorophylls is primarily for recycling of nitrogen-rich proteins. it implies that photosynthetic proteins such as light-harvesting proteins are in excess in b. sudeticus, similar to large-sized antenna-bearing c. reinhardtii. it is found that cells with small-sized antenna in c. reinhardtii are more productive compared to that with large-sized antenna  <cit> .

in yeast, genes encoding rps and protein synthesis are downregulated in response to a number of stress factors including nd  <cit> . however, ribosome activity is not abolished. it is required for novel protein synthesis for preparation of sexual differentiation and zygospore formation. in mammalian systems, it has been shown that downregulation of protein synthesis is not mediated through dramatic repression of rp gene transcription but through reduced efficiency of translation  <cit> . it is possible that translation efficiency is decreased upon nd in green microalgae. this would explain the upregulation of erp-ests in c. reinhardtii following sulfur deprivation . downregulation of photosynthesis in algae following nd may provide a pool of nitrogen-rich molecules for synthesis of novel proteins required for adaptation and survival  <cit> . given that most green microalgae resemble shade leaves having large-sized antenna, recycling of excessive photosynthetic proteins may be not immediately affect the photosynthesis capacity and carbon assimilation upon nd.

transcriptional response to nd has been thoroughly studied in diatoms . in phaeodactylum tricornutum, carbon assimilation is found to continue after nd  <cit> . in addition, tag content but not total lipid content is greatly increased following nd  <cit> . noticeable reduction of photosynthesis activity  upon nd has also observed in diatom  <cit> . these results are very similar to what we have observed in b. sudeticus .

nd induces lipid accumulation in b. sudeticus  and in c. reinhardtii  <cit> . however, no apparent up-regulation of lipid metabolic pathways based on kegg database  <cit>  is observed following nd in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii. this is consistent with the notion that regulation of storage lipid accumulation is complex in cells following nd: remodeling of membrane lipids for gametogenesis and accumulation of storage lipids through de novo biosynthesis and membrane lipid recycling  <cit> . alternatively, regulation of tag biosynthesis may involve post-translational modification  <cit> . comparative analysis of global transcriptional response to nd in other microalgal species should provide insight into underlying molecular mechanisms of storage lipid accumulation following nd. dissecting pathways responsible for lipid accumulation from those regulating sexual differentiation would allow construction of microalgal strains suitable for biomass and lipid production.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we utilized the commercial software clc genomics workbench  <cit>  to assemble the transcriptome without reference genome . we show a clear correlation between transcription abundances of homologs in b. sudeticus and c. reinhardtii, suggesting a decent assembly of b. sudeticus transcriptome without reference genome using commercial software . it provides a way for biologists to perform transcriptome studies in nonmodel organisms  without much bioinformatics skills. by using the pathway-based approach, without performing time-course experiments, we are able to identify a number of probable gene regulatory networks  that are involved in regulation of various metabolic pathways in rapidly growing or nd-induced b. sudeticus cells. our result is useful for construction of motif-specific transcription regulatory networks when genome sequence is available. for transcriptome analysis involving a large numbers of samples such as in a time-course experiment with multiple repeat, it is economical to use dna microarray-based technologies. hence, de novo assembled transcriptome is also useful in designing dna microarray.

