BACKGROUND
animals experience stress in a variety of naturalistic and artificial contexts and often successfully cope. the stress response and related coping mechanisms are essential and adaptive to an individual. organisms that are unable to adequately cope with stressors often do not survive in the wild or in the case with humans, may be diagnosed with a mental health disorder  <cit> . an animal or human’s ability to cope with stress is influenced by genetic and environmental factors. while the neuroendocrine mechanisms of the stress response have been extensively studied, it is also important to understand the molecular mechanisms for coping with stress. in this study we characterize the neurogenomic mechanisms associated with differences in stress coping using wild-derived zebrafish lines selectively bred to exhibit variation in coping with stress.

across a diverse range of animal taxa, two qualitatively different stress coping styles have been repeatedly documented: proactive and reactive coping styles  <cit> . individuals with a proactive coping style are characterized by relying on a feed-forward memory process , possess low behavioral flexibility, and exhibit a relatively low glucocorticoid stress response  <cit> . in contrast, individuals displaying a reactive coping style will often wait to gather additional environmental information before responding. reactive coping style individuals also tend to have high behavioral flexibility and will have a higher glucocorticoid stress response  <cit> . both coping styles are adaptive responses to challenges in the environment, and theory predicts they will be maintained in a population due to different fitness optima in variable environments  <cit> . while individual variation exists for the magnitude of the responses within each coping style, mechanisms underlying this variation are not well understood .

although an established model for developmental biology and toxicology  <cit> , the zebrafish  is only recently emerging as a valuable translational model system to study human health  <cit> . zebrafish and mammals share a high degree of similarity in their genomes and neuroanatomy  <cit> . teleost fishes also have a well-characterized stress response, and zebrafish can be quickly screened for and bred to exhibit differences in trait anxiety-like responses  <cit> . for example, our wild-derived hsb  and lsb  lines of zebrafish exhibit characteristics of a reactive and proactive coping style, respectively, that is consistent across both time and contexts  <cit> . importantly the behavioral, neuroendocrine, and neurotranscriptomic responses to anxiolytic and anxiogenic drugs are similar between zebrafish and mammals  <cit> .

many previous studies have documented behavioral, neuroendocrine, and neural bases of different coping styles but we are only beginning to understand the neurogenomic contributions to coping style variation  <cit> . the goal of this study is to characterize neurogenomic profiles that are associated with proactive and reactive stress coping styles. rather than focusing solely on well-studied molecular pathways associated with the stress response, we aimed to identify other candidates in an unbiased manner by comparing neural transcriptomes through rna-sequencing. another objective was to understand the relationship of individual variation of baseline gene expression levels with variation in behavioral coping styles. we identify a core set of genes whose expression patterns are associated with proactive and reactive stress coping styles at both an individual and gene network level.

RESULTS
behavioral differences between lines and sexes
there was a significant main effect of line on stationary time . the hsb line displayed significantly more time stationary than the lsb line  when controlling for sex. there was also a significant main effect of sex on stationary time .within both lines, females spent significantly more time stationary than males . there was no line x sex interaction effect on stationary time .fig.  <dig> stationary time in each line. lsb and hsb lines are gray and white fill, respectively. ***, p <  <dig> 



neurotranscriptome differences between lines
through rna-sequencing we obtained on average  <dig> million reads for each biological replicate. for the protein coding genes in the zebrafish genome ,  <dig>  genes passed default edger filters. multidimensional scaling plot analysis clearly revealed that the samples clustered together by line . of the genes analyzed,  <dig> genes showed significant differences in basal transcript abundances between the hsb and lsb lines . of these differentially expressed genes,  <dig> and  <dig> genes showed line-bias in the hsb and lsb lines, respectively. we subsequently measured eight genes  through qrt-pcr for validation of the rna-sequencing results. all of the genes except for gapdh showed expression patterns consistent with our rna-sequencing results . more specifically, after controlling for sex differences comta , prodha  and sell  showed significantly higher expression in lsb than hsb. genes with higher expression in hsb relative to lsb were gabbr1a , hsd11b <dig> , oxtl , and msmo <dig> .fig.  <dig> multidimensional scaling plot of all genes for each biological replicate. square and circle symbols are lsb and hsb lines, respectively. filled and open symbols are male and female samples, respectively



gene ontology analyses showed that a number of key cellular processes are differentially regulated between the lines . in particular, for all genes identified as differentially expressed , they are generally associated with inter- and intra-neuronal communication, translation, t cell mediated immunity, and oxidation-reduction processes. after accounting for direction of expression, there are a number of gene ontology terms overrepresented in each line. genes with higher expression in the lsb line are generally associated with protein metabolic process , regulation of the cell cycle, and ribosomal proteins . interestingly, genes showing hsb biased expression are associated with synaptic transmission, response to gonadotropin and purine-containing compound, cell adhesion, and transmembrane transporter activity .

weighted gene coexpression network analyses
the use of weighted gene coexpression network analysis  in transcriptome studies serves to characterize gene coexpression networks and serves as an alternative method to identify genes associated with a trait   <cit> . wgcna analysis revealed that the neural transcriptome can be parceled into  <dig> modules of similarly coregulated genes . three modules were significantly associated with line differences , but only the antiquewhite <dig> module remained significant after a benjamini-hochberg correction  <cit> . the antiquewhite <dig> module consists of  <dig> genes . gene ontology analysis shows that these genes are associated with metabolic, catalytic and lipid biosynthesis . to assess if genes more central to the antiquewhite <dig> network are more closely associated with line differences, we ran a pearson correlation and observed that there was a significant and positive correlation  between gene significance for line and antiquewhte <dig> module membership.fig.  <dig> hierarchical eigengene diagram of gene modules. all modules and dendrogram were obtained from wgcna analysis. modules in bold show a significant association with line differences 



core set of genes distinguishing coping styles
unsurprisingly, transcriptome-wide analyses identified many genes that were differentially regulated by line . to narrow down the list to a core set of genes associated with coping style, we focused on behavioral phenotype and genes which were similarly differentially expressed in this study  and our previous study assessing transcriptome effects of the anxiolytic drug fluoxetine in our hsb line fish  <cit> . we identified  <dig> genes that showed differential expression between comparison groups in the two studies , and they showed significant congruence of expression . more specifically,  <dig> of the genes  showed a consistent direction of expression differences across experiments . gene ontology analyses revealed that organic acid biosynthetic process , carboxylic acid biosynthetic process , fatty acid metabolic process  and fatty acid biosynthetic process  terms were significantly overrepresented.fig.  <dig> venn diagram of genes identified to be associated with line differences. genes comprise those found in edger analysis , wgcna analysis , and anxiolytic drug treatment )



using a different analysis method, wgcna, we identified genes in the antiquewhite <dig> module that were significantly associated with line differences . to further narrow down the list of core genes associated with coping style, we compared the overlap of the gene lists generated by two different analysis methods in this study and our previous study  <cit> . we identified  <dig> genes that showed a common occurrence in all three lists . these genes were associated with many organic acid biosynthetic processes including fatty acid metabolism . of note, wgcna analyses demonstrated that genes associated with the go term organic biosynthetic process and fatty acid metabolic process have low preservation between the hsb and lsb lines .table  <dig> gene ontology analysis of  <dig> genes found associated with coping style differences across analysis methods and experiments

bp, biological process

fig.  <dig> fatty acid metabolic process gene coexpression network. genes associated with fatty acid metabolic process showed low preservation in direction of correlation , correlation coefficient , and network centrality  between  lsb and  hsb lines



individual variation in gene expression and behavior
to more directly assess the precise nature of the relationship between gene expression and behavioral stress coping styles, we examined whether individual variation in stationary behavior is related to variation in gene expression  through qrt-pcr of independent biological samples. there was no significant correlation between expression of any gene and stationary behavior exhibited by individual fish across both lines . we observed, however, line-specific correlations between stationary time and presumed baseline gene expression levels . in the lsb line, there was a significant positive correlation between stationary time and the expression of msmo <dig> and hsd11b <dig>  but a negative correlation with gabbr1a . the hsb line, however, showed a different pattern such that there was a significant positive correlation in oxtl expression but a negative relationship with gapdh and stationary time .

discussion
coping with stress involves the modulation of a variety of neural and physiological processes in the brain, which results in behavioral displays. exploratory activity in novel or stressful environments is a distinguishing characteristic between reactive and proactive coping styles  <cit> . the hsb line showed a significantly higher duration of stationary time  than the lsb line  in the open field test, which is consistent with previous studies from this laboratory  <cit> . higher exploratory activity in the open field test and lower freezing time in other anxiety-related behavioral paradigms is indicative of an animal that is proactively coping with stress . we have also previously shown that behavioral differences between the hsb and lsb lines are consistent over a variety of other behavioral paradigms  <cit>  including the open field test and stationary time measurement used in the current study. thus, our behavioral results suggest our lines differ in stress coping styles and do not represent a selection artifact on only general activity levels. it is noteworthy that many previous studies on anxiety-like behaviors and stress coping have used selection lines or strains in rodents and teleosts that are highly inbred  <cit> . consequently there is likely a loss of phenotypic and genetic variation compared to individuals in the wild  <cit>  including zebrafish  <cit> , which may hinder detection of naturally occurring genetic mechanisms. our zebrafish lines originated from approximately  <dig> wild caught individuals and were bidirectionally selected for differences in stationary behavior. given that the zebrafish used in this study are only six and seven generations removed from the wild, it creates opportunities to identify genes associated with stress coping styles from a genetic background that is more similar to natural genetic variation in the wild.

studies have shown that stress coping styles  differ across strains despite being reared in similar conditions and exposed to the same testing paradigm, suggesting that genetic variation appears to play a key role in coping with stress. we identified  <dig> genes that are differentially expressed between lines. our results are consistent with previous studies documenting the involvement of gabaergic  <cit> , nonapeptides  <cit> , and glucocorticoid  <cit>  neurotransmitter and molecular pathways in physiological and behavioral responses to stress. it should be emphasized that our fish did not experience a stressor prior to tissue collection for the rna-sequencing results. this likely explains why we did not detect more differences in genes associated with the stress response between the lines. regardless, of the genes showing significant differential expression by line, they support our behavioral results that the hsb and lsb lines are exhibiting the reactive and proactive stress-coping styles, respectively.

in addition to demonstrating the involvement of several well-documented molecular pathways associated with stress, we simultaneously assessed the association with other pathways in an unbiased manner. using a gene ontology analysis on all  <dig> differentially expressed protein-coding genes indicated that a variety of biological, molecular, and cellular properties are involved in distinguishing the coping styles . of particular note is the overrepresentation of genes associated with the immune response and translation-related processes. the influences of cortisol and stress on the immune system are well documented  <cit> . as reactive coping style individuals are generally characterized by having a more pronounced endocrine stress response  <cit> , we predict that the differences in genes associated with immunity are a consequence rather than a causal mechanism of variation in stress coping. one noteworthy result includes that many differentially expressed genes were associated with the processes of translation and, synaptic activity and plasticity. previous studies have shown that synaptic plasticity is important for learning and glucocorticoid-mediated increases in protein synthesis in the brain facilitates memory  <cit> . proactive coping style individuals rely heavily on previously ingrained memories  whereas reactive coping style individuals  will quickly learn and adapt to an environment when exposed to a stressor  <cit> . we observed that the lsb line  has higher basal expression of genes associated with protein synthesis and the hsb line  has higher expression of genes associated with synaptic plasticity and activity. we believe these results represent, in part, the molecular predispositions that facilitate the hypothesized differences in learning and memory between the hsb and lsb lines.

the lsb and hsb lines also showed differences in expression for genes associated with metabolic processes . this is confirmed using wgcna as an alternative analysis method to identify genes associated with line differences. the antiquewhite <dig> module showed overrepresentation of genes associated with small molecule and lipid metabolism . furthermore, comparing across different analysis methods and experiments showed that the overlapping  <dig> gene set is associated with fatty acid metabolic activity . changes in oxidation-reduction chemical processes are characteristic of oxidative stress  <cit> . handling oxidative stress in the brain is a relatively recently described mechanism associated with anxiety and stress coping  <cit> . in particular glyoxalase, glutathione peroxidase and other genes in the oxidative stress pathway have been strongly linked to anxiety  <cit> . in this study, glyoxalase  <dig> and glutathione peroxidase showed significant differences in expression between our zebrafish lines . unexpectedly, we observed glyoxalase  <dig> expression patterns to be opposite of what was documented in other studies, but other molecular mechanisms may be compensating  <cit> . furthermore one consequence of oxidative stress is the breakdown of lipids . while the current study did not directly measure reactive oxygen species or lipid peroxidation products, we did observe changes in the expression of genes associated with lipid and fatty acid metabolic activity between the lines. it is plausible that the observed regulation of genes linked to lipid breakdown or synthesis could be due to oxidative stress. taken together, these findings suggest that the hsb and lsb lines may differ in their oxidative stress load capacities. we hypothesize that possessing a proactive or reactive stress coping style may be due to the brain’s capability to handle oxidative stress.

proactive and reactive stress coping styles are two qualitatively different responses to stressors observed in a variety of species. in addition to a relative bimodal distribution of coping styles in a population, there is also between-individual variation in the magnitude of the stress response within a coping style  <cit> . the genomic contribution to population and individual level variation in stress coping style is only beginning to be characterized . previous studies have identified genes associated with a particular coping style, but how these genes contribute to population or individual level variation is unknown . through comparing data generated in the current as well as our previous pharmacological study, we identified a core set of  <dig> genes - whose functions are associated with fatty acid and metabolic and organic acid biosynthetic processes - that contribute to line level differences in stress coping styles. intriguingly, the genes comprising fatty acid metabolic and organic acid biosynthetic process gene ontology terms showed low gene network preservation between lines . this suggests that there is line specific gene coregulation of these two processes. specifically, for both fatty acid metabolic and organic acid biosynthetic processes, the hsb line  showed reduced coregulation across approximately half of the genes. variation in coregulation of these genes might be a mechanism contributing to the approximate bimodal distribution of coping styles in a species. variation in a variety of other behaviors has been attributed to changes in the coregulation of suites of genes  <cit> . future studies should explore more precisely how changes in these gene networks modulate stress coping behavior.

to assess potential mechanisms contributing to inter-individual variation in stress coping, we examined the relationship between the expression of select genes and the amount of stationary behavior within each line. we selected eight genes  because they were differentially expressed between the lines or were previously associated with stress or anxiety-related behaviors in other studies  <cit> . within each line, many genes showed no significant correlation between expression and stationary time, potentially because these genes have threshold effects on stationary behavior. the lsb fish showed a significant correlation between expression of gabbr1a, msmo <dig>  and hsd11b <dig> and stationary behavior. surprisingly, gabbr1a, msmo <dig>  and hsd11b <dig> showed no significant correlation in the hsb line but oxtl and gapdh were significantly correlated with stationary time. although we cannot determine the direction of causality from our study, we expect that the expression of the five genes can be used to predict the behavioral display. given that many immediate early genes  show peak transcript levels at 30 min. of stimulus exposure  <cit> , our 5 min. behavioral trial likely does not give sufficient time for large changes in gene expression. hence, we are likely measuring baseline expression levels of each gene and these levels can predict the amount of stationary time in an open field test . overall, our results suggest that the variation in the behavioral stress response may be controlled by different molecular mechanisms within each line.

to our knowledge, only one other study has explored mechanisms of stress coping in zebrafish at the genomic scale  <cit> . we identified  <dig> genes that were similarly differentially regulated between our study and rey et al. . this, however, is not a greater number of common differentially regulated genes than expected by chance . it is possible that we are observing independent molecular mechanisms that contribute to the same behavioral display. as our study utilized recently wild-derived selectively bred lines whereas rey et al. behaviorally screened a commercial population to identify proactive and reactive stress coping styles, it suggests that different genetic architectures can lead to the same phenotype. although it is outside the scope of the current study to explore across other taxa, our study provides a basis for such meta-analyses. for example, evidence from both the current and our previous pharmaceutical manipulation studies suggest that fatty acid metabolic processes may be key mechanisms for stress coping. future studies should examine the role of fatty acids in stress coping in other species.

CONCLUSIONS
the behavioral and physiological responses to stressors vary within a species, but nonetheless are considered adaptive in a natural context. the proactive and reactive stress coping styles are found in a diverse range of animal taxa suggesting stress coping styles are highly conserved. it is uncertain if the underlying proximate mechanisms are similarly conserved or if independent mechanisms can generate the same phenotype. in this study we i) identify genes associated with stress coping styles, ii) characterize differences in gene coexpression networks and iii) characterize differences in line-specific regulation of gene expression related to the magnitude of behavioral displays. differences in basal whole brain neurotranscriptomic states between lines might explain the observed behavioral differences. individuals from the proactive coping style line  had increased expression of genes associated with translation . reactive coping style individuals  showed upregulation of genes linked to inter- and intra-neuronal communication and response to gonadotropin stimulus. ultimately, through comparisons across studies from our laboratory, we identify a core set of  <dig> genes that differentiates coping styles. this core set of genes shows a significant congruence in the direction of expression between the two studies  is similarly elevated in the pharmacologically induced proactive coping style ), which suggests these genes are not artifacts of our selection procedure or drug effects. these genes represent fatty acid metabolic and organic acid biosynthetic processes, which may be key processes mediating differences in stress coping styles. these cellular processes may be more broadly linked to oxidative stress and neurometabolism, two processes that warrant further investigation on their precise roles in coping with stress.

