BACKGROUND
the mammalian gut harbors a vast and complex microbial community. the human intestinal microflora is estimated to contain  <dig> to  <dig> species and the size of the population is ~ <dig> times greater than the total number of our somatic and germ cells. the role of microbiota in many physiological processes has been demonstrated by using animal models reared under gnotobiological conditions  <cit> .

studies in germ-free  animals have shown that gut microbiota play a crucial role in the development and maturation of the immune system  <cit> . it was demonstrated that the gut-associated lymphoid tissue , which is the largest immune organ, is immature in gf mice. the content of the lamina propria cd4+ t cells, iga producing b cells and intraepithelial t cells is reduced in gf animals  <cit> .

comparative experiments have also shown that the gene expression profiles of the intestinal epithelial cells are shaped by the presence of gut microbiota and that upregulated genes contribute to secretion of antibacterial molecules at the intestinal surface and the regulation of intestinal angiogenesis  <cit> .

the effects of gut microbiota are not only limited to the galt but systemic immunity is also affected. gf mice have decreased serum immunoglobulin levels and their mesenteric lymph nodes and spleens are smaller and less cellular  <cit> .

a role of gut microbiota in establishing equilibrium between th <dig> and th <dig> immunological responses, which is critical to overall human and animal health, has been postulated  <cit> . it is not yet clear whether gut microbiota and microbial components play a role in the development and function of tregs  <cit>  which were recently suggested to be a crucial factor in establishing immunological homeostasis. it has been demonstrated that cells with regulatory function are foxp3-expressing cd4+ t cells  <cit> . regulatory t cells  suppress activation of the immune system and thereby maintain immune system homeostasis and tolerance to self-antigens and harmless exogenous antigens  <cit> . depletion or functional abrogation of these cells can cause inflammatory diseases  <cit> .

enormous amount of gut microbiota and their products are in an intimate contact with epithelial surface of the intestinal mucosa. microbe-associated molecular patterns  present in the intestinal content are sampled mainly by dcs and recognized by their receptors – pattern recognition receptors , which include the transmembrane toll-like receptors   <cit>  and c-type lectin receptors   <cit> , and the cytoplasmic nod-like receptors   <cit> . the activated dcs traffic from the intestinal epithelium and peyer's patches into the mesenteric lymph nodes, where they activate cells of the adaptive immune system.

gnotobiotic  models represent an important tool for unraveling the function of gut microbiota, especially their effects on the mucosal and systemic immunity. germ-free animals are free of live bacteria but their sterile food contains microbial components and other immunogenic components. to exclude the effects of these components a chemically defined ultrafiltered antigen-free diet was introduced but is rarely used due to technical and financial obstacles  <cit> .

the aim of the present study was to investigate the effects of live gut microbiota and lps content of the sterile diet as one of the markers of bacterial contamination on the development of the immune system. our preliminary data have shown that the effect of a low lps diet  is negligible in conventional  mice. to address the specific aims of the study we have established three experimental groups different in terms of stimulation with live gut microbiota and lps: the group of gf mice fed a low lps diet , the group of gf mice fed a lps-rich diet  and the fully stimulated group of cv mice .

to analyze the effects of gut microbiota and lps content of the sterile diet on the maturation of the immune system, the weight, cellularity and cellular composition of lymphoid organs were compared using the above-mentioned experimental groups. in addition to the immunophenotypic analysis of major lymphocyte populations, we have focused on the subpopulation of foxp3-expressing t cells. the study was complemented by determining in vitro proliferative and cytokine response of spleen cells to lps and concanavalin .

RESULTS
purified diet may have almost  <dig> times lower lps content than a grain-based diet
we have decided to use lps concentration as a measure of overall bacterial contamination in diets. to study the effect of lps content of the sterile diet on the development of the immune system we had to first identify the diets with both very low and very high lps content. the concentration of lps was measured by chromogenic lal test and expressed in endotoxin units  per μg of pellet. the diets sorted by lps concentration from the lowest to the highest were ain-93g diet ,  <dig> diet , standard diet , nih- <dig> diet  and st <dig> diet . in our experiments we used ain-93g diet, which is a purified diet, and st <dig> diet, which is a grain-based diet. these diets have been selected on the basis of maximum difference in the lps content .

gut microbiota and the lps-rich sterile diet increase the weight and cellularity of lymphoid organs
we did not detect any significant difference in the weight and cellularity of thymus isolated from cv or gf mice fed the low lps diet  or lps-rich diet . however, we observed a decreased weight and cellularity of spleens from gf mice fed either diet compared to spleens from cv mice . the peritoneal cell number was not affected by the lps content of the sterile diet or by gut microbiota. in contrast, the overall mln and pp cell numbers increased in gf mice fed the lps-rich diet  compared to gf mice fed the low lps diet  and the cell numbers further increased in the group of cv mice .

gut microbiota and the lps-rich diet decreases the proportion of cd19+ b cells in mlns
we found that mlns of gf mice fed the low lps diet  have a higher proportion of cd19+ b cells than gf mice fed the lps-rich diet . in addition, the group of gf mice fed the lps-rich diet  had a higher proportion of cd19+ b cells in mlns than the group of cv mice . however, we would like to emphasize that the presence of gut microbiota increases the absolute numbers of cd19+ b cells in pps, mlns and spleen and that the lps-rich diet increases the absolute number in pps . the observed discrepancy between the proportion and total number of cd19+ b cells in mlns is mainly caused by the vigorous expansion of mln cd4+ t cells. the proportion of cd19+ b cells in peyer's patches, spleen and peritoneal cells remains constant irrespective of the degree of microbial stimulation.

the single cell suspensions were stained with the monoclonal antibodies as described under "methods" and analyzed by facs. pp and mln cell numbers represent the overall cell pool isolated from one mouse. data is a summary of at least four independent experiments  and values represent the mean ± se.

gut microbiota and the lps-rich diet stimulate the expansion of cd4+ t cells
to determine the role of gut microbiota and lps content of the diet in the development of major t cell subpopulations, including foxp3-expressing t cells, we have isolated cells from peyer's patches, mlns, spleen, thymus and peritoneum of cv and gf mice fed either the low lps diet  or the lps-rich diet . the distinct cell surface and intracellular markers were analyzed by flow cytometry. we observed that the stimulating effect of lps-rich sterile diet leads to the expansion of cd4+ t cells in mlns and spleen. the presence of gut microbiota further increased the proportion of cd4+ t cells in mlns but not in spleen where the lps-rich diet had already increased the proportion of cd4+ t cells to the level found in cv mice. the proportion of cd4+ t cells in peyer's patches, thymus and peritoneal cells remains constant regardless of the level of microbial stimulation .

neither gut microbiota nor the lps-rich diet affects the proportion of cd8+ t cells in lymphoid organs
the presence of gut microbiota has no effect on the proportion of cd8+ t cells in spleen, as previously described  <cit> . in addition, we show that the proportion of cd8+ t cells is independent of gut colonization also in other lymphoid organs including mlns, peyer's patches, thymus and peritoneal cells. in accordance with these findings we did not observe any effect of lps content of the diet on the proportion of cd8+ t cells in lymphoid organs of gf mice .

both gut microbiota and the lps-rich diet drive the expansion of foxp3-expressing cd4+ t cells in mlns
to investigate the effect of gut microbiota and lps content of the sterile diet on the development of cd4+foxp3+ t cells we analyzed their proportion in peyer's patches, mlns, spleen, thymus and peritoneal cells in cv mice and gf mice fed either the low lps diet  or lps-rich diet . we found that both gut microbiota and the lps-rich diet drive the expansion of cd4+foxp3+ t cells in mlns . however, the proportion of cd4+foxp3+ t cells in other lymphoid organs was not affected. we would like to stress that the cd4+foxp3-/cd4+foxp3+ ratio remains constant in all lymphoid organs including mlns and is not influenced during the lymphocyte expansion driven by gut microbiota or lps .

gut microbiota stimulate the expansion of foxp3-expressing cd8+ t cells in peyer's patches and mlns
we observed a stimulating effect of gut microbiota on cd8+foxp3+ t cells. the proportion of cd8+foxp3+ t cells increased in peyer's patches and mlns. the effect of lps-rich diet on the expansion of cd8+foxp3+ t cells in all lymphoid organs of gf mice was not significant .

in vitro proliferative response of spleen cells is not influenced by gut microbiota or lps content of the sterile diet
spleen cells isolated from cv mice and gf mice fed either the low lps diet  or lps-rich diet  were stained with cfse fluorescein and stimulated with concanavalin a . after  <dig> h the cfse staining profile of spleen cells negative for cd <dig> antigen  was analyzed by flow cytometry. no significant difference was found between the groups of cv and gf mice fed either diet . thus we conclude that neither gut microbiota nor lps content of the sterile diet influences non-specific proliferative response of spleen cells in vitro.

both gut microbiota and the lps-rich sterile diet influence a spleen cell cytokine profile
to characterize the effect of gut microbiota and lps content of the sterile diet on a cytokine response, spleen cells were stimulated with cona and lps. we have observed that both gut microbiota and the lps-rich sterile diet influence in vitro cytokine profile of spleen cells. both gut microbiota and lps-rich diet increase the production of interleukin- <dig> and decrease the production of interleukin- <dig> after cona stimulation. in addition, the presence of gut microbiota increases the production of interferon-γ and an anti-inflammatory cytokine interleukin- <dig>  we have also found that the presence of gut microbiota increases the production of interferon γ and interleukin- <dig> in response to lps stimulation .

discussion
lps-driven lymphocyte expansion in pps and mlns of germ-free mice
it is generally accepted that live gut microbiota are essential for the development and maturation of the mammalian immune system  <cit> . multiple studies revealed that animals kept under germ-free conditions have reduced cellular components of mucosal and systemic immunity. gf mice have decreased frequency of dcs, cd4+ t cells, iga producing b cells and intraepithelial t cells in gut lamina propria  <cit> . pps and mlns are smaller, less cellular  and do not have germinal centers  <cit> . spleens of gf mice are also smaller, less cellular and the proportion of cd4+ t cells is reduced  <cit> . our studies confirm the important role played by gut microbiota. in addition, we show that microbiota-derived components present in the sterile diet stimulate the development of the immune system even in the absence of live gut microbiota. in the present study, we show that lps-rich sterile diet partially corrects the profound immunological deficiencies found in gf mice. we demonstrate that lps-rich diet stimulates the expansion of all major lymphocyte subpopulations in gf mlns and pps, including cd19+ b cells, cd8+ t cells and cd4+ t cells. the proportions of cd19+ b cells, cd8+ t cells, and cd4+ t cells in pps of gf mice remain constant during the lps-driven expansion. in contrast, we observed a significant increase in the proportion of cd4+ t cells at the expense of cd19+ b cells in mlns of gf mice. our observation of the significant increase in the proportion of cd4+ t cells in spleen of gf mice fed lps-rich diet is in line with recent studies showing that monocolonization of germ-free animals with bacteroides fragilis results in cd4+ t cell expansion  <cit> .

the effect of gut microbiota and lps-rich diet on the development of foxp3-expressing t cells
regulatory t cells are a component of the immune system that suppresses activation of other immune cells and thus maintains immune system homeostasis. the latest research suggests that tregs are best defined by the expression of the transcription factor foxp <dig>  <cit> . the large majority of foxp3-expressing tregs is found within cd4+ helper t cell population and expresses high levels of the interleukin- <dig> receptor alpha chain . regulatory t cells comprise about 5–10% of the mature cd4+ helper t cell subpopulation in mice. mutations in the gene encoding foxp <dig> result in the development of overwhelming systemic autoimmunity in the first year of life in both humans and mice.

it is still controversial whether gut microbiota and microbiota-derived components play a role in the development and maturation of tregs. in the transfer model of colitis developing in cd4+cd45rbhigh t cell reconstituted immune-deficient scid mice we have shown that the presence of normal gut microbiota enhances a functional potency of the treg population. the inhibitory activity of cd4+cd45rblow t cells from gf mice was significantly impaired compared to the population isolated from specific-pathogen free mice  <cit> . it has been recently reported that gut microbiota are crucial for the generation and expansion of tregs  <cit> . ostman et al. reported that cd25+ tregs from gf mice are less effective in suppressing proliferation of responder cd4+cd25- t cells. however, they did not find any difference in the proportion of cd4+foxp3+ t cells between cv and gf mice. the only deficit of cd4+foxp3+ t cells in gf mice was detected in the liver-draining celiac lymph nodes  <cit> . paradoxically, it was reported that cd25+ tregs from gf mice are as suppressive and protective as those from cv mice  <cit>  and min et al. recently reported that peptide antigens derived from intestinal microorganisms are not essential for the generation, in vivo proliferation or suppressive activity of tregs  <cit> .

our results are consistent with the results of strauch et al. and ostman et al., which demonstrate the important role of gut microbiota in the development and function of tregs. we show that both live gut microbiota and lps-rich sterile diet expand the absolute cell numbers of foxp3-expressing cd4+ t cells in mlns and pps . in addition, we observed that the stimulating effect of both gut microbiota and lps-rich sterile diet significantly increased the proportion of cd4+foxp3+ t cells in mlns.

gut microbiota and inflammatory diseases
increase in hygienic standards associated with a lack of undefined infectious stimuli mainly during the early postnatal period was regarded to be responsible for increasing prevalence of chronic inflammatory diseases in developed countries – the so called "hygiene hypothesis" was formulated  <cit> .

based on epidemiological studies it was suggested that the composition of gut microbiota could affect the susceptibility to the development of inflammatory diseases including allergic and autoimmune diseases  <cit> . the major recently proposed mechanism explaining the "hygiene hypothesis" is that the developing immune system must receive sufficient stimuli in order to adequately develop tregs, or it will be more susceptible to autoimmune and allergic diseases, because of insufficiently repressed effector th <dig> and th <dig> responses, respectively  <cit> . our data are in line with the proposed mechanism as we have found that both gut microbiota as well as lps-rich diet drive the expansion of cd4+foxp3+ t cells in mlns. in addition, we observed a stimulating effect of gut microbiota on il- <dig> production.

the role of tregs in the development of chronic inflammatory diseases and its relation to microbiota composition is currently the subject of our research performed in gnotobiotic animal models.

how microbiota-derived components influence the maturation of the immune system
several mechanisms by which gut microbiota and their components may influence the development of the immune system have been proposed. according to the current knowledge the nature of tlr, clr and nlr ligands selectively determines the cytokine production by dcs and thus modulates t-cell differentiation.

gut intraluminal antigens are sampled by dcs in the peyer's patches and the intestinal epithelium and carried to the mlns via the afferent lymphatics. in the mlns the dcs induce t-cell activation and differentiation. the dcs are activated through the recognition of microbial components, such as lps. however, other activating components of the intestinal content including fatty acids   <cit> , beta-glucan   <cit> , wheat  <cit>  and other molecules may be involved in the initiation of immune responses. the activation of dcs leads to the production of cytokines and expression of co-stimulatory molecules. the presentation of processed antigens bound to mhc class ii results in the activation and differentiation of t cells. the cytokines secreted by activated dcs play a critical role in t-cell differentiation. the pivotal cytokines that control t-cell differentiation are ifnγ and il- <dig> , il- <dig>  and tgf-β and il- <dig>  and tgf-β . the activated cd4+ t cells then migrate to effector tissues where they help to orchestrate the immune responses.

mlns serve as a bridge between innate and adaptive immunity and are the key site for the induction of mucosal tolerance to intestinal antigens  <cit> . our data show that the stimulating effect of gut microbiota and microbiota-derived components is essential for the maturation of cd4+ t cell subpopulations including foxp3-expressing t cells in mlns.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, our results demonstrate that the presence of gut microbiota and to a lesser extent also the lps-rich sterile diet drive the expansion of b and t cells in peyer's patches and mesenteric lymph nodes. the most prominent was the expansion of cd4+ t cells including foxp3-expressing t cells in mesenteric lymph nodes. further, we have observed that both the presence of gut microbiota and the lps-rich sterile diet influence in vitro cytokine profile of spleen cells. both gut microbiota and lps-rich diet increase the production of interleukin- <dig> and decrease the production of interleukin- <dig>  in addition, the presence of gut microbiota increases the production of interleukin- <dig> and interferon-γ. finally, we would like to emphasize that the content of microbial components in sterile diets has a significant effect on the development and function of the immune system under germ-free conditions and thus the quality of diet should be tested in all gnotobiotic models.

