BACKGROUND
in mammals establishment and maintenance of dna methylation patterns are crucial for embryonic development, cell differentiation, silencing of transposable elements, x inactivation and allele-specific expression of imprinted genes  <cit> . dna methyltransferases  are responsible for establishment and maintenance of methylation patterns. in contrast to dnmt3a and 3b, which catalyze de novo methylation of unmethylated dna, dnmt <dig> shows a preference for hemi-methylated dna and is targeted to replication foci by binding to pcna during s-phase  <cit> . thus, dnmt <dig> is thought to maintain genomic methylation through dna replication by reproducing the cytosine methylation pattern of the parental dna strand onto the newly synthesized strand.

genomic methylation patterns undergo drastic changes during gametogenesis and early embryonic development. in the germ line, methylation patterns are erased early in development and gamete-specific ones are established during gametogenesis  <cit> . in the mouse zygote there is a drastic decrease of dna methylation in the paternal genome within a few hours after fertilization  and both the maternal and paternal genomes undergo progressive demethylation during segmentation stages  <cit> . this is followed by establishment of new, tissue specific methylation patterns beginning around the time of implantation  <cit> .

different isoforms of dnmt <dig> are encoded by the mouse dnmt <dig> locus. a longer isoform  is expressed in somatic and embryonic stem cells where it is strictly nuclear, except in post-mitotic neurons where it is also found in the cytoplasm  <cit> . a shorter, maternally contributed isoform lacking  <dig> amino acids at the n-terminus  is found in the cytoplasm of maturing oocytes and preimplantation embryos and enters the nucleus only transiently at the 8-cell stage  <cit> . the methylation maintenance function of dnmt <dig> is shared by the long and short isoforms as the latter can rescue methylation patterns and differentiation potential in es cells and mice lacking the former  <cit> . it is believed that retention of dnmt1s in the cytoplasm of preimplantation embryos may prevent maintenance of gamete-specific methylation patterns, determining their erasure by passive demethylation and thus contributing to epigenetic reprogramming of the embryo. however, it is far from clear how methylation patterns at imprinted loci and transposable elements are maintained throughout preimplantation development and how dnmt1s is prevented from entering the nucleus. interestingly, during xenopus early embryonic development a dnmt <dig> isoform equivalent to the mouse long isoform is present in the nuclei and only limited demethylation occurs  <cit> .

here we investigated the localization of gfp fusions of the long and short dnmt <dig> isoforms in mouse preimplantation embryos and directly compared their mobility in the nucleus and cytoplasm of living embryos.

RESULTS
to directly compare the subcellular localization of the two dnmt <dig> isoforms in cycling somatic cells and preimplantation embryos we expressed gfp-fusions of dnmt1s and l  in both systems. after microinjection of the expression constructs in 1-cell embryos both fusion proteins were localized in the cytoplasm of preimplantation embryos , while they were exclusively nuclear in transfected mouse myoblasts . these results confirm earlier immunolocalization studies and indicate that the differential localization of the two dnmt <dig> isoforms in somatic cells and embryos does not depend on the additional n-terminal  <dig> amino acids in dnmt1l  <cit> . nuclear localization of both isoforms in somatic cells is likely due to the fact that all active nuclear localization sequences are found within the region shared by the two dnmt <dig> isoforms  <cit> . indeed, overexpression of both isoforms by injection of 2– <dig> fold more plasmid dna resulted in nuclear localisation of a fraction of the fusion proteins also in preimplantation embryos , suggesting a saturable cytoplasmic retention mechanism.

posttranslational modification, in particular phosphorylation, is a well documented mechanism controlling the nuclear-cytoplasmic localization of a large number of proteins. the only posttranslational modification reported so far for dnmt <dig> is phosphorylation of serine  <dig>   <cit> . to test whether the phosphorylation state of this residue determines the differential localization of gfp-dnmt1s we generated mutations either mimicking the phosphorylated state  or preventing it . as shown in figure 2c and 2d neither mutation changed the nuclear localization of gfp-dnmt1s in somatic cells or the cytoplasmic localization in preimplantation embryos.

to further investigate whether gfp-dnmt1s is soluble or tightly bound to cytoplasmic structures in preimplantation embryos we tested fluorescence recovery after photobleaching of a defined region in the cytoplasm of microinjected embryos . fluorescence recovery was very slow in living embryos with very little decrease of fluorescence in the non-bleached regions apart for those just next to the bleached area. this slow recovery could be explained by repeated association with fixed binding sites restricting its diffusion in the cytoplasm. we further assayed the stability of such binding of the endogenous dnmt1s by salt extraction experiments . essentially all dnmt1s was found in the insoluble fraction with up to  <dig> mm nacl, but was solubilized at  <dig> mm. this result provides biochemical evidence for strong interactions of dnmt1s in early embryos. since dnmt <dig> is highly mobile in nuclei of somatic cells  we directly compared the mobility of the short dnmt <dig> isoform in the cytoplasm to that in the nucleus of the same embryo. for this we extensively bleached a region spanning across the nuclear-cytoplasmic boundary . although only about one tenth of the nuclear volume was illuminated, the nuclear fluorescence was entirely depleted, indicating a high mobility of gfp-dnmt1s molecules in the nucleus. in contrast, only regions within and close to the targeted area in the cytoplasm showed decreased fluorescence. as above, the rate of fluorescence recovery was slow, which is consistent with dnmt1s binding to fixed structures in the cytoplasm. these results clearly show that dnmt1s has a much higher mobility in the nucleus than in the cytoplasm of preimplantation embryos.

in summary, the subcellular localization of dnmt <dig> does not depend on either the additional  <dig> amino acids at the n-terminus of dnmt1l or the phosphorylation state at serine  <dig> of dnmt1s. previously, we showed that dnmt1s fused to a sv <dig> nls was still retained in the cytoplasm, ruling out that masking of the nls of dnmt1s could be the mechanism preventing nuclear localization like in the case of iκb preventing nuclear import of nf-κb. the biochemical extraction data indicate a strong binding of dnmt1s, the overexpression experiments show that these binding sites are saturable and the fluorescence bleaching results demonstrate that gfp-dnmt1s is specifically immobilized in the cytoplasm of preimplantation embryos.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together the data presented in this study argue for a strong binding of dnmt1s to immobile structures in the cytoplasm of early embryos. sequestration of dnmt <dig> in the cytoplasm of embryos is likely to prevent full maintenance of methylation patterns during preimplantation development. since mice expressing reduced levels of dnmt <dig> protein already show severe genomic hypomethylation  <cit> , even partial cytoplasmic retention of dnmt <dig> could account for global passive demethylation and epigenetic reprogramming. at the same time, preferential targeting of remaining nuclear dnmt <dig> could allow maintenance of parental methylation patterns at imprinted loci and silencing of endogenous retroviral elements.

