BACKGROUND
transmissible spongiform encephalopathies , including scrapie in sheep and goats, chronic wasting disease  in deer and elk, bovine spongiform encephalopathy  in cattle, and creutzfeldt–jakob disease  in humans, are infectious and fatal neurodegenerative diseases
 <cit> . proteinaceous infectious agents called prions are thought to be responsible for tses, which are characterized by the accumulation of the pathogenic form of prion protein  in the nervous tissues of infected subjects
 <cit> . prpsc is a conformational isoform of the normal cellular prion protein , which is rich in beta-sheet structures, insoluble in mild detergents, and resistant to protease digestion
 <cit> .

because prions retain infectivity after undergoing routine sterilization processes
 <cit> , contaminated meat and bone meals  are suspected to be the source of bse infection
 <cit> . mbms are manufactured through a multi-step process involving the crushing of carcasses in a pre-breaker, heating at 120°c–140°c in yellow grease  in a cooker, and degreasing from solid material by an oil separator. to determine bse prion inactivation during the manufacturing process of mbms, industrial processes were replicated on a pilot scale by using bse-infected brains, and the infectivity of processed materials in each step was investigated in detail
 <cit> . however, in reality, processing conditions for mbms differ among rendering houses producing commercial mbms. since the efficiency of prion inactivation could be influenced by various factors such as treatment temperature, time, steam pressure in the cooker, size, water and fat contents of carcasses
 <cit> , it is difficult to identify the risks attributable to specific processing conditions. furthermore, prpsc retained in the manufacturing process of mbms remains to be elucidated.

the governments of many countries prohibited the feeding of bovine mbms following the feeding ban on mbms in the united kingdom. a prion detection method with high sensitivity and high accuracy must be developed so that mbms can be used safely in the future. in addition, bse prion is more resistant to physical and chemical treatments than are scrapie and cjd prions
 <cit> . therefore, experiments using bse-infected materials are essential for the assessment of bse prion inactivation as they can be considered a worst case among prions. in recent years, it has become possible to perform in vitro amplification of prpsc derived from various animals
 <cit>  by using protein misfolding cyclic amplification 
 <cit> . we developed an ultrasensitive method for bse prpsc detection using potassium dextran sulfate 
 <cit> . the pmca technique can also be used to quantitatively assess scrapie prpsc <cit> , and our pmca method can be applied as an effective test for the assessment of prion inactivation by monitoring residual bse prpsc <cit> . in the present study, we investigated efficiency of bse prion inactivation following heat treatment in yellow grease by bioassay and quantitative pmca.

RESULTS
infectivity of heat-treated homogenates
long-term follow-up confirmed infectivity in the mice intracerebrally inoculated with up to a 10– <dig> dilution of the 10% homogenate of the pooled spinal cords . prpsc accumulation was confirmed in the brains of the diseased mice by western blotting and histopathological analysis . the infectious titer of the homogenate was estimated to be  <dig>  ld <dig> per gram. a strong linear correlation  between the incubation times and dilution ratios of the inoculated homogenate was observed in mice inoculated with up to a 10– <dig> dilution. some mice inoculated with 10– <dig> and 10– <dig> diluted samples developed the disease after similar prolonged survival times . in the extreme dilution range, lower rate of transmission and prolonged incubation time are generally observed in the mice intracerebrally inoculated with prion-infected brain homogenates. since prpsc tends to aggregate, these phenomena may be due to the near-absence of prpsc which would have been almost completely diluted out.

table 
 <dig> shows the effect of various heat treatments in yellow grease on the bse-infected spinal cord homogenates. all mice inoculated with samples treated at 140°c for 1 h died after an average of 304 days. the infectivity was reduced to approximately 1/ <dig>  following the heat treatment. when the samples subjected to temperatures above 140°c were used, 100%  and 67%  of the mice developed the disease after prolonged average survival times. regarding the treatments for 3 h, infectivity was still detected in some mice inoculated with the samples treated at 140°c or 160°c. because the incubation times of these diseased mice were beyond the range of application of the regression line obtained using the titrated bse-infected homogenates, the log reduction of infectivity in each sample was estimated to be more than  <dig> . meanwhile, mice inoculated with samples treated at 180°c for 3 h did not exhibit disease onset 790 days after inoculation.

*,†,‡ significant differences  were observed among mice with respect to the mean incubation times as indicated by identical superscript character.

prpsc detection by pmca
figure 
1a illustrates the results of the amplification of the samples subjected to the grease-heating method. no prpsc signals were detected in the heat-treated samples by western blotting before amplification . after one round of amplification, prpsc signals were detected in the samples treated at 140°c–180°c for 1 h and at 140°c for 3 h. prpsc signals were also detected in both duplicate samples treated at 160°c and 180°c for 3 h after two or three rounds of amplification. in the samples treated at 180°c for 3 h, trace amounts of prpsc remained after the treatment, although infectivity was not detected in the bioassay.

quantitative analysis of prpsc
figure 
1b shows the results of the amplification of each diluted sample of untreated bse-infected spinal cord homogenate. prpsc present in 10– <dig> dilution of the infected homogenate was detected in all tubes after three rounds of amplification. prpsc signals were detected in three of the 10– <dig> and one of the 10– <dig> dilutions after three rounds of amplification. however, no additional tubes became positive for prpsc in these dilutions after four rounds of amplification. no signals were detected in the more extreme dilution ranges even after four rounds of amplification. thus, the pmca <dig> of the 10% homogenate was calculated to be  <dig>  units on the basis of the results obtained from the fourth round of amplification.

to evaluate the prpsc inactivation efficiency of each heat treatment, we estimated the pmca <dig> from the results obtained at the fourth round of amplification of serial 10-fold dilutions of heat-treated samples. serial pmca was sufficiently sensitive to detect prpsc in these diluted samples . the log reduction of pmca <dig> values of the heat-treated samples are shown in table 
 <dig>  regarding the treatments for 1 h, prpsc inactivation appeared to be most efficient in the samples treated at 160°c. this finding is concordant with the observations of partial transmission of infectivity  in the mice inoculated with this sample and prolonged incubation times of the diseased mice. log pmca <dig> decreased with extended heat treatment time: although 180°c for 3 h was the most effective treatment, it was unable to completely inactivate the proportion of prpsc that is amplifiable by serial pmca.

figure 
 <dig> shows the relationships between the transmission rate in the bioassay and the log pmca <dig> values of the inoculated samples. a strong linear correlation  was observed between the log pmca <dig> values and transmission rate. when the log pmca <dig> exceeded  <dig> , the transmission rate in the bioassay reached 100% as observed in the mice inoculated with samples treated at 140°c or 180°h for 1 h. infectivity was not detected in the mice when the log pmca <dig> of the inoculated sample was reduced to  <dig> .

discussion
in this study, bse prion inactivation was analyzed quantitatively in terms of infectivity and the prpsc contents of the samples after heat treatment in yellow grease. following treatment at 140°c for 1 h, which is the heat treatment condition generally used for carcasses in rendering houses in japan, the infectivity of the bse-infected spinal cord homogenate was reduced to at most 1/ <dig> of that of the untreated control samples; furthermore, prpsc retained its capability for in vitro propagation. because carcasses are usually heat treated in closed cookers, prions are affected by the steam pressure from the water contained in the carcass. if a sufficient amount of water is present in the carcass, prion inactivation may proceed more efficiently in the cooker than under atmospheric pressure. however, some degree of bse infectivity was still detected after autoclaving at 133°c in spiked raw materials with high infectivity levels
 <cit> . furthermore, the precise effects of high-pressure steam on carcasses submerged in yellow grease are not known. therefore, high-risk materials such as brains and spinal cord should be excluded from the rendering process for effective inactivation of bse prion.

we previously examined residual infectivity and prpsc after heat treatment of scrapie-infected hamster brains under various experimental conditions
 <cit> . the pmca results were concordant with bioassay results. however, bse prpsc was detected in the samples treated at 180°c for 3 h, although infectivity was not detected in the bioassay. there are several possible explanations for this discrepancy between infectivity and prpsc occurrence. for example, bse prpsc might contain various forms of prpsc with different amplification properties and infectivity, and a pmca-compatible form of prpsc with low or no infectivity might predominate after heat treatment and be maintained over other forms throughout the amplification process. however, in the present study, the log pmca <dig> values were strongly correlated with the transmission rate in the bioassay , suggesting that such pmca-compatible but less-infectious prpsc was not selectively amplified in vitro.

in our previous paper, we demonstrated our amplification system was highly sensitive and accurate, and no spontaneous generation of prpsc was observed in the amplification of various kind of samples derived from uninfected animals
 <cit> . determination of pmca <dig> based on quadruplicate amplification was also done in our previous study
 <cit> , and we confirmed that similar pmca <dig> values  were obtained in two independent studies. in the present study, the pmca <dig> of the bse-infected spinal cords was estimated to be  <dig>  per gram, which is approximately  <dig> -fold greater than the corresponding intracerebral ld <dig> per gram  determined by the bioassay. the pmca50/ld <dig> per gram of bse prion was considerably higher than those of scrapie prion strains 
 <cit> . if this ratio reflects the number of prpsc particles that compose an infectious unit of prions, more prpsc particles might participate in an infectious unit of bse prions; moreover, such a large mass of prpsc particles might be processed into several smaller ones with lower infectivity in vivo.

alternatively, prpsc accumulation might proceed in animals inoculated with prpsc when the prpsc concentration is below a specific cut-off, but the animals might not develop the disease within their lifetimes. actually, clinically asymptomatic infections are known as the subclinical infection stage
 <cit> . in the present study, we examined prpsc in brains of asymptomatic mice inoculated with titrated bse-infected homogenate, and prpsc was found at various levels in four of five mice inoculated with 10– <dig> dilution of the infected homogenate . therefore, pathogenicity might be detected by serial transmission in animals as in the case of serial pmca. if so, the detection sensitivity of the bioassay used in the present study may not be sufficiently high for proper safety evaluation, because ecycling of bse-infected bovine tissues possibly augments the concentration of prpsc in commercial mbms if the carcasses contain infinitesimal amounts of prion.

another aspect of heat treatment in yellow grease is that higher-temperature treatments do not necessarily inactivate bse prion more effectively. in the case of heat treatment for 1 h, the results of both the bioassay and pmca indicate that bse prion inactivation proceeded more effectively with treatment at 160°c rather than at 180°c. samples treated at 180°c were dark brown, suggesting that the surface was scorched during treatment. in such high-temperature conditions, thermal conduction may be inhibited by scorching of the sample periphery, consequently requiring longer treatment time to reach thermal equilibrium in the sample. extension of the treatment time to 3 h was actually necessary for the loss of infectivity. however, further studies are needed to confirm the above possibility.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we demonstrated that heat treatment at 180°c for 3 h is required for the loss of infectivity of bse prion in grease heating in our experimental conditions. furthermore, bse prpsc retains amplification ability even after such a treatment. the inactivation efficiency of bse prpsc could be quantitatively analyzed with the introduction of the pmca <dig>  which is strongly correlated with the transmission rate in the bioassay. the serial pmca technique is more practical and less time consuming than bioassays, and may be applicable for monitoring residual prpsc in the other steps of the manufacturing of mbms and useful for safety evaluation for recycling and effective utilization of mbms as an organic resource.

