BACKGROUND
the uk  <dig> epidemic of foot and mouth disease highlighted the need for national governments to have well thought out and workable contingency plans to control the spread of highly infectious animal diseases. these plans must be based on quantitative predictions of epidemic size and extent under various conditions which, in turn, must be based on an understanding of how disease spreads between livestock premises. for a disease like foot and mouth that has a multitude of transmission routes between premises, predicting the course of an epidemic is complicated by demographic and topographic heterogeneity. the uk  <dig> foot and mouth epidemic has furnished us with unique data on the temporal and spatial spread of this disease. this, coupled with demographic data of livestock holdings within the uk, gives us the opportunity to study in detail the various risk factors associated with disease spread. in this paper we focus on the effect caused by geographical features within the uk landscape.

foot and mouth disease is a viral infection of mainly domesticated and wild cloven-hoofed animals. it is an acute, febrile disease typically associated with lesions on the feet and in the mouth  <cit> . there are seven serotypes of foot and mouth disease virus  which may differ in their transmission characteristics  <cit> . the introduction of type o fmdv into the uk in early  <dig> resulted in reported infection in livestock on  <dig>  mainland premises.  <dig>  million animals on over  <dig>  premises were slaughtered in the ensuing operation to wipe out the disease  <cit> . before the nationwide movement ban on 23rd february  <dig>  the disease was seeded across the uk by the transportation of infected sheep. after the ban, disease spread became more highly localised – about 50% of infections occurred within  <dig> km of an infectious infected premises , and about 80% occurred within  <dig> km  <cit> . early models of the epidemic quantified the risk of transmission using a simple concept called a transmission kernel  <cit> . the kernel encapsulated multiple and diverse transmission routes in a simple function of euclidean distance between infectious and susceptible farms. an estimate of the kernel, based on the uk government's department of environment, food and rural affairs  contact tracing data, is shown as the black line in fig.  <dig> <cit> .

using euclidean distance between farms in the transmission kernel was a first approximation to quantify the effect of spatial separation on fmdv transmission. however, contact tracing of infection by defra highlighted several important transmission routes that occurred via road after the movement ban. these included movement of vehicles, personnel, milk tankers, farm equipment and livestock  <cit> . thus, road-based measures may be better predictors of transmission risk than just simple euclidean distance, especially in areas where roads go around large geographical features such as hills, rivers and estuaries. showing this, however, is complicated by the non-unique, non-linear relationships between euclidean distance and road-based measures, and by the fact that euclidean distance is already a risk factor. nevertheless, with detailed descriptions of the uk road network and the uk  <dig> foot and mouth disease dynamics, we have developed a statistical test that can detect risk associated with road-based measures. in this paper we consider shortest and quickest routes.

briefly, the test looks for a significant difference in the mean shortest or quickest route between farms where a possible transmission occurred and the mean shortest or quickest route between farms where no transmission occurred; the rational being that if shortest or quickest routes are risk factors, farms closer to an ip by road are more likely to have been infected than farms farther away. a detailed description of the test is given in methods

RESULTS
we analyse the regional epidemics in devon, cumbria, dumfries and galloway, settle and the welsh borders. counties included in the analyses are given in table  <dig> 

shortest route versus euclidean distance for the epidemic in devon for all possible transmission events after 23rd february and within  <dig> km are shown as open black circles in fig.  <dig>  all non-transmissions in devon after 23rd february and within  <dig> km are shown as yellow closed-circles.

the p-value for the null hypothesis that the difference in the mean shortest route between possible transmissions and the mean shortest route between non-transmissions could have arisen by chance is  <dig>  . therefore we conclude that shortest route in devon is no better a predictor of risk than euclidean distance. quickest route is similarly no better: p =  <dig> . these conclusions are robust to assumptions about latent period and species transmissibilities . similar conclusions can be drawn for the other epidemics in the welsh borders, cumbria, settle and dumfries and galloway. when the analysis is done with only those 65% of ips that were positively confirmed as infected by the institute of animal health at pirbright, our conclusions remain unchanged .

these tests show that shortest and quickest routes are no better predictors of transmission risk than euclidean distance. however, it does not prove that they are any worse. in order to test this we turn the analysis around and ask if euclidean distance is a better predictor of transmission risk than shortest or quickest route. this requires the calculation of shortest and quickest route transmission kernels . the p-values for the null-hypothesis that the difference in the mean euclidean distance between possible transmissions and the mean euclidean distance between non-transmissions could have arisen by chance are given in table  <dig>  for all regions and all parameter values the p-values are significant, strongly suggesting that euclidean distance is a better predictor of risk than shortest and quickest routes. when the analysis is done with only those ips that were positively confirmed as infected the results are not significant for shortest route in devon, dumfries and galloway and the welsh borders, and for quickest route in the welsh borders. this is most likely due to small sample sizes reducing the power of the test .

the above statistical test acts on the regional scale, therefore, distance-based risk associated with specific geographical features is lost when we analyse over a region with widely variable topography. of particular interest are geographical features that act as barriers to direct fmdv transmission between farms. such features include lakes, rivers, estuaries, hills, mountains, railway lines and major arterial roads. a key question is whether transmission across such features is better modelled using euclidean-distance or some other distance measure; road-based measures being the most obvious candidates because the road network is shaped by such geographical features: roads go around lakes; are diverted, sometimes by long distances, by rivers, estuaries, railway lines and motorways; and tend to follow valleys rather than climb hills and mountains. this is demonstrated in fig.  <dig>  mean shortest route between pairs of low-lying, inland farms is usually less than about 50% longer than euclidean distance . areas where mean shortest route is greater than 50% longer than euclidean distance  include many rivers and estuaries, the east anglian fens, the norfolk broads, moorland, and hill and mountain ranges. of particular interest in terms of the uk  <dig> epidemic are the solway firth  and the river severn  where infected premises were observed at the same time during the epidemic on both sides of these estuaries. in the absence of wind-borne viral plumes  <cit> , transmission did not occur directly over these large bodies of water. models using a euclidean-distance based transmission kernel may over-estimate the number of transmission events across these features; therefore a shortest route based kernel may be more appropriate. in methods we describe a statistical test that detects if transmission between farms on opposite sides of a barrier is better modelled by a shortest route based kernel or a euclidean-distance based one. the solway firth estuary partially separates cumbria from dumfries and galloway. many farms were infected on both sides of the solway firth throughout march and april. because it is so broad, any transmission between farms on its opposite sides most probably occurred via road. the p-value for the test is less than  <dig>  ; a highly significant result suggesting, not unexpectedly, that transmission between farms on opposite sides of the solway firth is best modelled using a shortest route based transmission kernel.

the river severn and its estuary are crossed by the m4/m <dig> motorway in the southwest and by the a <dig> trunk road in the northeast, which themselves are about  <dig> km apart . the p-value for the test is less than  <dig>  ; a highly significant result suggesting that transmission between farms on opposite sides of the severn is best modelled using a shortest route based transmission kernel.

in fig. 4a we plot the percentage reduction in the case reproduction ratio  across the river severn due to its presence. close to the river and midway between the a <dig> and m <dig> bridge crossings, the reduction in r <dig> is close to 100%: farms in this area are therefore unlikely to infect farms on the opposite side of the river. as we move further away from the river or toward the bridges the reduction in r <dig> is less severe, as one would expect. a similar conclusion naturally applies to the solway firth .

we have also applied this test to other barriers. for example, during the epidemic it was suggested that the m <dig> motorway, running north-south through cumbria – and therefore through the centre of the cumbrian epidemic – may have acted as a barrier to fmdv transmission between farms adjacent to it . indeed, it is illegal for people, livestock and vehicles to directly cross the m <dig>  we may therefore speculate that infection of farms across the m <dig> was exclusively via road. the network of minor roads that existed before the m <dig> was built still exist today – they cross the m <dig> via numerous tunnels and bridges. thus, roads between farms on either side of the m <dig> do not show large excursions as observed around the severn or the solway firth. the p-value of the test for ips within  <dig> km of the m <dig> is  <dig>  ; a non-significant result suggesting that a euclidean-distance based transmission kernel is a sufficient model of transmission between farms on opposite sides of the m <dig> motorway. we have also tested medium to large inland rivers  and railway lines . thus transmission between farms on opposite sides of these barriers is also best modelled by a euclidean-distance based kernel rather than a shortest route based kernel. the p-value for railway lines in cumbria is close to significant. however, given that the other regions are not significant it is reasonable to assume the same for cumbria.

CONCLUSIONS
why does euclidean distance work so well, given that some transmission was certainly caused by movement of livestock, people and vehicles between farms via the road network? we do not have a definitive answer, although possible explanations include: 1) farms with a common boundary have more potential routes of infection than just a main road, for example tracks and private roads that cross both farms that are not recorded in the digimap meridian™  <dig> database; 2) infection via social networks may be a significant confounding factor.

in conclusion, euclidean distance between infectious and susceptible farms is a better predictor of transmission risk than shortest or quickest routes, except that is where major geographical features intervene; then shortest route is the preferable measure of distance. thus, mathematical models of the uk  <dig> epidemic were justified in using euclidean distance as a risk factor. however, future models should take into account the many large estuaries around the uk coastline.

in this paper we have developed a statistical test that can detect risk associated with various measures of the spatial relationship between infectious agents over and above that of simple euclidean distance. its use on other economically important livestock diseases may help in understanding their spread in potential future outbreaks. this work stresses the importance of analysing parallel geographical and disease outbreak data in order to construct parsimonious models which capture the essence of disease dynamics and control.

