BACKGROUND
mating with several males   <cit>  can incur various costs to the females  <cit> . mostly for this reason, the adaptive significance of this behaviour has been under considerable debate. when females gain no direct material benefits from mating, indirect  advantages are believed to explain the evolution of polyandry  <cit>  . by mating with many males, females may increase the probability of their eggs becoming fertilized by the sperm of genetically superior or compatible male  <cit> . thus, certain genes or gene combinations should result in polyandrous females producing offspring of higher fitness than monandrous females.

"good sperm" hypothesis predicts that sperm that are more successful in competition for fertilising the eggs are also more effective in producing viable offspring. in other words, a male's sperm competition ability should correlate with the fitness of his offspring  <cit> . previous studies that have demonstrated genetic benefits of polyandry have often been confounded by differential maternal investments . accordingly, the empirical evidence supporting the "good sperm" hypothesis is scarce  <cit> . hosken et al.  <cit>  found that males that were more successful in sperm competition had offspring that developed faster than offspring of males with lower quality sperm. however, no association between offspring mortality and the competitive ability of sperm was detected. to the best of our knowledge, only one study, with the australian marsupial  has demonstrated that males gaining high paternity under sperm competition  also sire offspring with lower mortality rate  <cit> . although the genetic female benefits of polyandry have been demonstrated in numerous studies, some recent studies have also shown that the benefits of polyandry may not always be transmitted through conventional additive genetic pathways  <cit>  . in addition, benefits of polyandry may depend on certain female characteristics , which suggest that genetic benefits are not necessarily equal to all individuals  <cit> .

in many oviparous fish with no parental care, starvation during the critical transition period from endogenous feeding to independent foraging is among the most important causes of mortality in the course of the ontogeny . thus, the development of newly hatched larvae is highly dependent on yolk reserves  <cit> , larger reserves giving more time to initiate external feeding before exhaustion  <cit> . in general, the amount of yolk may be critical to the survival of the offspring  <cit> . the size of the egg and yolk has often been considered solely as a female dependent factor and the possible male effects have often been neglected  <cit> . however, the male may contribute to egg size after fertilization by affecting the water uptake of the eggs  <cit>  . in addition, males can also affect to the size of the offspring  indirectly, through metabolic rate of the embryo  <cit>  . hence, males could indirectly contribute to progeny quality and survival, even in species that provide no parental care.

the arctic charr  has a lek-like breeding system, where both sexes mate multiply. during egg release one large male is usually in close contact with the female  <cit>  and generally fertilizes the greatest proportion of the eggs  <cit> . however, several smaller males are usually also present in the vicinity of the female and these sneaking males fertilize a proportion of the eggs leading to intense sperm competition between males  <cit> . thus, two types of polyandrous mating occur: first, females mate with different males in different spawning acts, and second, several males compete for fertilizing eggs within single act.

as the "good sperm" hypothesis predicts, sperm velocity is the most important factor predicting the paternity of the male arctic charr, and also in other salmonids  <cit>  . on the other hand, ovarian fluid affects the velocity and longevity of charr sperm  <cit> , indicating that cryptic female choice may be an important mechanism affecting the fertilization success of males  <cit> . females may cryptically select for males that have optimal degree of genetic similarity  with the female  <cit> . this indicates that polyandrous mating and sperm competition could be adaptations to avoid inbreeding. thus, both male sperm characteristics and cryptic female choice for good  may be important mechanisms predicting offspring fitness in arctic charr .

we studied the benefits of polyandry by using the arctic charr as a model species. two main questions were: 1) what kind of benefits do females gain from polyandrous mating under sperm competition treatment? 2) is sperm quality associated with higher offspring quality as the "good sperm" hypothesis predicts? to test these hypotheses we used a maternal half-sib breeding design, where confounding maternal investments and sire environmental effects were controlled.

RESULTS
the fitness benefits of sperm competition
offspring mortality did not differ among the three male treatments , but the effect of female  and the interaction between male treatment  and male combination  were statistically significant . when the single male treatments were combined and tested against the sperm competition treatment, the mortality of offspring was lower in sperm competition trials  and the effects of female as well as male combination were also significant . again, there was a statistically significant interaction between male treatment  and male combination . these results indicate offspring mortality differences between females and that the differences between small, large and sperm competition trials were not consistent across all  <dig> male groups . thus, although sperm competition group had lower mortality than in single males on average, this was not the case in all individual combinations.

mc = male combination , mt = male treatment . statistically significant p-values are indicated with boldface. degrees of freedoms  for offspring body mass, total length and yolk volume are given in parentheses. male combination comprises  <dig> small males,  <dig> large males and a sperm competition group . see methods for details.

the mean body mass and total length of the offspring did not differ between male treatments . female effect was significant for body mass , but not for total length. the yolk sac volume varied significantly across male treatments . tukey post hoc tests revealed that the size of the yolk was higher in sperm competition trials than in either of the single male trials. however, small and large males did not differ from each other in terms of the offspring yolk volume . when comparisons were made between the combined single male and sperm competition groups, we found a statistically significant difference in the mean size of the offspring , even though the mean offspring size difference between sperm competition and single male groups was negligible  . these results can mainly be explained by the very low variance in within-group offspring body size.

male and female effects on offspring fitness
female identity had a significant effect on all of the fitness traits we measured . male effects were significant for offspring mortality , but not for the other three response variables . small and large males did not differ from each other in any of the four offspring fitness traits .

sperm quality and offspring fitness
sperm velocity was higher in small males than in large males  and there was also a female effect on sperm velocity . no male group  × female interaction was found for sperm velocity , indicating that the effect of the female was similar for the different male groups. a statistically significant negative correlation was found between offspring mortality and sperm velocity  . sperm velocity was not associated with offspring body mass, total length or yolk volume .

statistically significant p-values are indicated with boldface. vsl: straight line velocity, vap: average path velocity: vcl: curvilinear velocity.

discussion
in the present study, eggs from the polyandrous matings had lower mortality rates and also larger yolk reserves than the eggs from the monandrous fertilizations. it has been demonstrated that yolk mass is positively related to starvation time and thus to early performance of offspring  <cit> . thus, our results suggest that sperm competition increases offspring fitness, not only via mortality, but that offspring may also have better ability to resist unfavourable feeding conditions during post-hatching period which are not uncommon in arctic conditions. although our results clearly show that polyandry is beneficial on average, they also indicate that this is not necessarily the case in all female-male combinations .

the "good sperm" hypothesis of polyandry is believed to require the presence of additive genetic variance for male effects on offspring fitness  <cit> . indeed, we found a significant male effect on offspring mortality, which indicates that survival benefits of polyandry might be explained by superior genetic quality  of certain male genotypes. however, male identity did not affect offspring yolk volume, although the results suggested that yolk volume was higher in offspring from polyandrous matings than offspring of either of the two males when mated monandrously. this suggests that genetic differences between males may not be sufficient to explain yolk volume differences.

although not supported by the present results, some other studies have shown that males can indirectly contribute to offspring or yolk size  <cit> . in addition, the metabolic rate of arctic charr eggs can vary significantly between families and this metabolic variation can have a sire component  <cit> . furthermore, elevated testosterone concentration inside the eggs may increase the yolk absorption efficiency , but does not affect the hatching size of the offspring  <cit> . if the total steroid concentration of the seminal fluid is higher when two or more males are releasing sperm simultaneously , it may lead to increased steroid concentrations inside the eggs. this may increase the yolk utilization efficiency  <cit> , enabling higher growth rate with the same amount of yolk and thus bigger post-hatching yolk volume. alternatively, if the nutrients transmitted through seminal fluid to the eggs reduce the yolk utilization rate during the incubating period, a higher proportion of the yolk may be reserved for post-hatching development.

we used the same volume of spermatozoa both in single-male and sperm-competition trials, which suggest that material benefits cannot explain the differences in yolk size. furthermore, the maternal half-sib design allowed us to control for differences in maternal investments  <cit> , which therefore did not contribute to the variation in offspring fitness observed in our study. we also minimized the biasing effect of offspring age differences on yolk reserves by sampling all the fish at the same time at the beginning of the yolk sac stage, when all the offspring had hatched. in addition, hatching was rather synchronous owing to the warm weather with most of the fish hatching within one week. these facts together with the observations that early hatching individuals are often less developed than larvae that hatch later  <cit>  suggests that the observed yolk size differences in the present study were not related to the age of the offspring. as the higher yolk volume of offspring in sperm competition trials was not associated with the larger size of these fish, we cannot completely rule out the possibility that some minor differences in developmental rate between male treatments may have occurred. however, available data does not allow us to draw firm conclusions on this question at this stage, and thus, this question is an interesting avenue for further research.

as the effects of potential material benefits and maternal effects are precluded in the present study, what might explain the observed larger yolk volumes in sperm competition treatments? theoretically, the presence of foreign sperm during sperm competition should lead to stronger competition between sperm cells and also to intensified selection for good sperm, with only the highest quality sperm  fertilizing the eggs  <cit> . therefore, it seems plausible that sperm competition may intensify the selection on high quality  sperm also within ejaculates . in theory, this could lead to higher fitness of offspring in sperm competition compared to single matings. it is well known that only a minor proportion of sperm is capable of fertilizing the eggs  <cit> . thus, sperm competition by males may benefit the female via two different mechanisms: first, by cryptic selection for high quality males and second, by selection for highest quality sperm within each ejaculate. however, as we did not found any association between sperm quality  and offspring yolk volume, there is also a possibility that some other, currently unknown effect may have contributed to our finding.

when the low number of founders of the study population is taken into account it seems possible that the observed fitness benefits could also be partly related to genetic incompatibility avoidance of the females  <cit> . thus, polyandrous females could reduce the risk of inbreeding via cryptic selection of sperm, which would result in paternity bias towards unrelated or genetically compatible males  <cit> . as the genetic variability is extremely low in many natural arctic charr populations  <cit>  inbreeding avoidance can be an important mechanism explaining the evolution of polyandry in the arctic charr. as it has been demonstrated that good genes and compatible genes may both be involved in female choice at the same time  <cit> , these two mechanisms are not mutually exclusive mechanisms of sexual selection.

the "good sperm" hypothesis predicts that there should be a genetic correlation between male fertilization success and offspring viability  <cit> . in support of this view we found a negative association between sperm velocity and offspring mortality rate. in addition, small males had faster sperm than large males , probably indicating status-dependent shifts in reproductive tactics  <cit>  . sperm velocity is a good predictor of male fertilization success in the absence of sperm competition  <cit> . additionally, in arctic charr, sperm velocity is the most important parameter explaining variation in male fertilization success within in vitro sperm competition trials  <cit> . the positive association between sperm velocity and male sperm competition success is demonstrated also in a variety of other taxa, including the domestic fowl, gallus domesticus  <cit> , atlantic salmon, salmo salar  <cit>  and mallards  <cit> . gage et al.  <cit>  have also shown that fertilization success of male salmon is not related to sperm number or total length and that the sperm longevity is negatively correlated to competition success . therefore, although the relative paternity success of competing males is not known, it is likely that sperm velocity has important effects on offspring survival also under sperm competition.

CONCLUSIONS
different fitness benefits of polyandry documented in the present study were probably caused by different mechanisms. we demonstrate that the mortality of the embryos probably had a genetic male component and that according to "good sperm" hypothesis, sperm velocity was positively associated with offspring survival. on the other hand our results suggest that the paternal effects on offspring fitness are not necessarily under direct genetic control. instead, in addition to potential minor developmental rate differences of offspring in different male treatments, yolk size differences may result from intensified selection pressure on high quality sperm within ejaculates or some other non-genetic factor.

