BACKGROUND
drug candidate selection through small-molecule screening is a rational and widespread method in the current drug discovery cascade. initially, drug discovery research involved cell-based phenotypic screening as a core approach to obtaining drug candidates  <cit> . however, since the completion of the human genome project in  <dig> and the finding that sequences include numerous potential target proteins for drug discovery, target-based drug screening has been pursued actively  <cit> . in addition, target-based drug screening procedures were initially accelerated to increase the research and development productivity of drug discovery in pharmaceutical companies. however, the number of fda-approved drugs screened from the target-based approach was much less than expected because a large number of drug candidates failed during drug development owing to safety issues and a lack of efficacy  <cit> . in contrast, recent analysis of all first-in-class new molecular entities showed that phenotypic screening approaches accounted for 37 % in comparison with 23 % from target-based approaches  <cit> . accordingly, classical cellular phenotypic screenings, also called phenotypic drug discovery , are being reevaluated as complementary and efficient strategies for probing drug candidates.

chemical probes are powerful tools for target validation of hit compounds from pdd. however, some well-known chemical probes have been used incorrectly and have resulted in misleading biological conclusions  <cit> . therefore, target identification of these compounds is essential for pdd. to date, target identification methods that use chemical proteomics or activity-based proteomics have been developed, and they have uncovered many unique target proteins associated with bioactive compounds  <cit> . although they are certainly useful methods, they require mass spectrometry instrumentation and further chemical syntheses to add tags to compounds of interest without deteriorating their activities. to determine the target molecules of compounds without affinity tags, petrone et al. developed the chemical biological descriptor “high-throughput screening finger-print ” that employs accumulated hts data  <cit> . on the other hand, frederick et al. developed a screening platform that consists of a series of reporter gene assays to disclose the mechanisms of action  of compounds and by conducting assays in a quantitative hts format  <cit> . to develop a much simpler target identification approach with tag-free compounds, we exploited a pathway profiling database using only tens of cellular assays representing cellular signaling cascades through evaluation of compounds at a single concentration.

oncology has become one of the largest therapeutic areas in the pharmaceutical industry. various kinds of molecular targets and cellular signals have been reported to inhibit cancer growth. among them, cellular senescence is considered to be the most important cellular phenotype for permanently arresting the cell cycle  <cit> . to date, reports have shown that genetic mutations and cellular stressors such as oxidative stress enhance cellular senescence and that some small molecules induce cellular senescence  <cit> . in particular, compounds that induce cellular senescence are expected to be potent drugs for suppressing cancer growth  <cit> . here we conducted a phenotypic screening campaign based on high-content cellular imaging to probe small molecules that induce cellular senescence.

RESULTS
pathway profiling database classifies compounds according to their moa
the pathway profiling database mainly comprises reporter gene assays using firefly luciferase that cover  <dig> different signaling pathways and cellular proliferation assays with  <dig> commercially available cell lines . these types of cellular assays are widely used in cell biology research and are highly accessible because of their simple procedures and low cost. in addition, these assays are very robust and demonstrate high throughput, which enabled us to detect subtle signal changes in an hts-compatible format. the assays were functionally validated using the dose-dependent response of a natural ligand or known inhibitors/activators.table  <dig> constituents of the pathway profiling database. the types of cellular signals for the reporter gene assays and cell lines of the proliferation assays are shown



through the development of this database, we evaluated  <dig> compounds from  <dig> commercial compound libraries that contained compounds with well-characterized moas and common experimentally used reference compounds. we evaluated these libraries at a single concentration of 3 μg/ml for the natural product library and at 3 μm for the other libraries. after obtaining all data, the database was analyzed using hierarchical clustering of the activities using ward’s method in tibco spotfire software . as a result of the hierarchical clustering analysis, compounds that had similar activities in most assays were classified into the same cluster, enabling us to visually determine that they have similar molecular targets and signaling pathways.fig.  <dig> analysis of the pathway profiling database. a the heat map was visualized with tibco spotfire software for clustering analysis. this figure represents the entire heat map of the pathway profiling database. the activities of each assay are displayed as a gradient from minimum activities  to maximum activities . for details of the assay lists, see table  <dig>  b this cluster contained forskolin derived from each commercial compound library and neca, a potent adenosine receptor agonist. c pma and its structural analogs were grouped in the cluster shown. d the tanimoto structural similarities and pearson’s correlation coefficients  were calculated for pde <dig> inhibitors



forskolin , an adenylate cyclase activator  <cit> , was included in each library, and all were grouped into one cluster . in the cluster, n-ethylcarboxamidoadenosine  , an adenosine receptor agonist  <cit> , was also included. this cluster was shown to gather compounds stimulating camp production via adenylate cyclase activation. this result indicates that the pathway profiling database classifies compounds according to their moa. similarly, phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate   <cit>  and its structural analogs phorbol  <dig> -dibutyrate  <cit> , 13-o-acetylphorbol  <cit> , and 12-deoxyphorbol 13-phenylacetate 20-acetate   <cit>   were classified into the same cluster . in other words, the structural analogs that had the same effect on cellular signaling were categorized into one cluster, as expected.fig.  <dig> chemical structures of the compounds discussed in this study



following these analyses, we investigated structurally diverse compounds that affect the same target proteins. we focused on the phosphodiesterase  inhibitors   contained in our database. to quantitatively compare differences in the structures and activities of each compound in our database, we employed tanimoto structural similarity calculated by daylight’s fingerprints and pearson’s correlation coefficients , respectively. the tanimoto similarities ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , strongly indicating the broad structural diversity between the compounds in our database . in contrast, pearson’s correlation coefficients  in our database ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , showing their high bioactive similarities, despite their low structural similarities. these results indicate that our pathway profiling database based on the biological activities of compounds led to classifications corresponding to not only their structural similarities but also their moas.

wnt-activating small molecule is identified as a cellular senescence inducer
triple-negative breast cancer has been a focus among the various cancer classes because of its lack of response to hormonal therapies, and new drugs with distinct moas are absolutely required to cure breast cancer patients  <cit> . therefore, we employed mda-mb- <dig> cells with triple-negative features to obtain cellular senescence inducers as anticancer agents  <cit> . in this strategy, we performed phenotypic screening on the basis of high-content cellular imaging, which is a very useful method to analyze altered cellular morphology. the cellular senescence morphology was reported to lead to a topologically enlarged appearance  <cit> . sodium butyrate is a well-known senescence inducer  <cit> , and we confirmed that it provoked the reported senescence phenotype in mda-mb- <dig> cells and expanded cell shapes . in our study, this cellular morphology was defined as an indicator of cellular senescence.fig.  <dig> a cell-based assay for a screening campaign of cellular senescence morphology inducers by fluorescence microscopy. a mda-mb <dig> cells were treated with 1 mm sodium butyrate. hoechst  <dig> was used as a nuclear marker  and cmfda was used to mark cytosols . scale bar, 10 μm. b a compound selection scheme for the discovery of senescence inducers. ambmp was obtained as a hit compound through the screening campaign. c hit compound results from the screening campaign. fold changes in the cellular area at 3 μm concentrations were calculated for the compounds with a custom-made image analysis algorithm. d activity of the wnt reporter gene assay with a potent gsk3β inhibitor, sb <dig>  and ambmp is shown. the results are the mean of  <dig> replicate experiments . e mda-mb <dig> cells were treated with 3 μm sb <dig>  3 μm ambmp, and 1 mm sodium butyrate. hoechst  <dig> was used as a nuclear marker  and cmfda was used to mark cytosols . scale bar, 10 μm



for high-content screening  of senescence inducers, we developed a cell-based assay to analyze cellular phenotypic changes in mda-mb- <dig> cells. to determine the activities of compounds in this hcs, the cellular area, which plays a key role in the selection of senescence inducers, was calculated using a custom-made image analysis algorithm. we screened  <dig> compounds in tocriscreen  and stemselect small molecule regulators  at concentrations of 3 μm and obtained  <dig> compounds that induced a ≥2-fold enlargement of the cytosolic area . of these  <dig> compounds identified as senescence inducers , molecular targets of  <dig> compounds have been clarified in past studies, but that of 2-amino-4-benzylamino)-6-pyrimidine   has not been revealed yet. thus, we focused on ambmp to elucidate its molecular target, which is described further in this report.

it is generally considered that wnt signaling pathways play important roles during embryonic development  <cit> . ambmp was first identified as a wnt signal agonist through wnt signal activator screening using a common reporter gene assay  <cit> . to date, the first report of ambmp has been cited in  <dig> papers, and the compound itself and its  <dig> applications have been patented . however, its binding proteins have not yet been identified. we initially measured the activity of ambmp using a wnt reporter gene assay, as reported previously by liu et al.  <cit> . unexpectedly, using the wnt reporter assay, we detected a much lower efficacy of ambmp than that of a widely known wnt signal activator glycogen synthase kinase 3β  inhibitor   <cit>  . in contrast, gsk3β inhibitors were not observed to induce the senescence morphology . these results strongly suggest that wnt signal activation is not directly related to its cellular senescence and that ambmp has binding proteins responsible for inducing cellular senescence.

pathway profiling database identifies tubulin as a target protein of ambmp
to identify an ambmp target molecule, we compared the cellular assays with our pathway profiling database and calculated each pearson’s correlation coefficient  between ambmp and other all compounds in our database. as a result,  <dig> compounds demonstrated values above  <dig> , which indicated high similarities . moreover,  <dig> of the  <dig> compounds involved classical tubulin disruptors such as nocodazole  and were thus known from previous reports to bind to tubulin . of these  <dig> compounds, only  <dig>  kf  <dig> and chromeceptin, had not been reported to induce tubulin depolymerization. the analyzed data allowed us to predict that ambmp would directly interact with tubulin. to test this hypothesis, we measured the tubulin disruption activity of ambmp in a tubulin polymerization assay. consequently, tubulin polymerization was detected by fluorescence enhancement following uptake of a fluorescent reporter molecule into the polymerized tubulin during polymerization  <cit> .fig.  <dig> target identification of ambmp and its binding activity to tubulin. a the tanimoto structural similarities and pearson’s correlation coefficients  were calculated against ambmp. b sb <dig>  ambmp, and nocodazole were evaluated in a tubulin polymerization assay. the results are the mean of  <dig> replicate experiments . c ambmp induced intrinsic tryptophan fluorescence spectra changes of tubulin. the results are the mean of  <dig> replicate experiments 



we observed tubulin polymerization inhibition by ambmp and nocodazole with ic <dig> values of  <dig>  μm and  <dig>  μm, respectively . in this fluorescence-based polymerization assay, ambmp was confirmed not to mediate the fluorescence interference through the observation of its uv–vis and fluorescence spectrum . in addition, intrinsic fluorescence quenching was used to study the potential interaction between ambmp and tubulin. the fluorescence intensity of tubulin was decreased gradually with increasing concentrations of ambmp, confirming its binding to tubulin. . to determine the effects of these  <dig> compounds on the cellular microtubule network, we conducted a cell-based assay using cellular imaging techniques and fluorescent staining of tubulin. in the confocal image analysis, ambmp and nocodazole were observed to clearly disrupt the intracellular microtubule network compared to control and sb216763-treated cells . disturbance of the microtubule network by ambmp and nocodazole was detected with ic <dig> values of  <dig>  μm and  <dig>  μm, respectively . furthermore, ambmp as well as nocodazole was observed to inhibit cell proliferation and induce a cell cycle arrest in mda-mb- <dig> cells . the effect of ambmp on mitotic spindles was also observed with slightly shortening the spindle and astral microtubule at the low concentration of  <dig> nm and with significantly disrupting mitotic spindles at the higher concentrations of  <dig>  and 3 μm , which was consistent with previous reports showing the effect of microtubule disruptors on mitotic spindles  <cit> . these results indicate that ambmp had a strong inhibitory effect on tubulin polymerization, comparable to that of nocodazole. in addition, we had previously observed in our screening campaign that common tubulin disruptors induce cellular senescence   <cit> .fig.  <dig> effect of ambmp on the cellular tubulin network and mitotic spindles.  the cellular tubulin network  was observed by fluorescence microscopy. hoechst  <dig> was used as a nuclear marker .  control.  3 μm sb <dig>   3 μm ambmp.  3 μm nocodazole. scale bar, 10 μm.  control and compounds-treated mda-mb- <dig> cells were stained with α-tubulin , phospho-histone h <dig> , and nuclei . phosphorylation at a highly conserved serine residue  in the histone h <dig> is a key marker during the mitotic phase of the cell cycle.  control.   <dig> nm nocodazole.   <dig>  μm nocodazole.  3 μm nocodazole.   <dig> nm ambmp.   <dig>  μm ambmp.  3 μm ambmp. scale bar, 10 μm



discussion
in our study, the pathway profiling database based on the biological activities of compounds was confirmed to lead to classifications corresponding to both their structural similarities and their moas. through operating the system, we will both maintain and obtain data at a lower cost and in a shorter period than the hts-fp database and biomap™ , in which primary cells were utilized. however, our prediction method is limited to the range of target molecules of the reference compounds; however, to overcome this limitation, we will add various reference data for compounds that affect different types of target proteins other than those of the current compounds. in general, the accuracy of clustering analysis increases with a larger collection of datasets. therefore, we will expand the cellular assays in the pathway profiling database to improve the accuracies of predicting both target molecules and cellular signaling properties. with these improvements in our system, we are attempting to perform target identification of other compounds, including our in-house compounds, with unknown targets.

in addition, we estimated the extent of cellular signaling pathways covered by our database through a computational approach. with reactome pathway database  <cit> , our pathway profiling database has the potential to detect cellular events involved in more than  <dig> canonical biological pathways. moreover, 70 % of the tested compounds with well-characterized moas had detectable activity in at least one assay in our database. consequently, our simple system is a promising and cost-effective tool for profiling phenotypes and for predicting molecular targets of hit compounds from pdd.

by applying our profiling system for target identification of ambmp, we have revealed that ambmp is a tubulin disrupting molecule for the first time since the compound was reported as a wnt agonist. the tanimoto similarities between ambmp and tubulin disruptors ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  , which means that these compounds are apparently not structural analogs of ambmp. because of their low scores, the structural similarities did not lead us to hypothesize whether ambmp could inhibit tubulin polymerization. the achievement of ambmp target identification supports the result that our pathway profiling database was extremely useful for predicting various pharmacological targets of compounds with unknown mechanisms. on the other hand, we consider that it is important to reveal the molecular mechanisms inhibiting tubulin polymerization by ambmp. to address the issue, in future study, we will clarify its binding site on tubulin through a cocrystal structural analysis for ambmp and tubulin complex.

chemical probes are widely used to demonstrate target molecule proof-of-concept in drug discovery  <cit> . to this end, the selectivity of chemical probes against the intended targets is a key factor. if these chemical probes interact with unintentional molecules and induce cellular phenotypes through their off-target effects, then both time and money might be lost in the process of drug discovery research. some past research that used ambmp as a chemical probe for wnt signal activation might have incorrectly generated misleading results due to inhibition of tubulin activity. recently, the met proto-oncogene  inhibitor tivantinib was confirmed to inhibit tubulin polymerization as well as ambmp  <cit> . through our study, kf  <dig> and chromeceptin were also shown to have similar bioactive profiles to tubulin disruptors , generating the possibility that both compounds interact with tubulin. these compounds will be the subject of a future publication. in addition, a previous report revealed that the structural similarities of compounds do not provide sufficient information to speculate on their biological activities  <cit> . for an efficient drug discovery process, it is important to evaluate and profile chemical probes using various types of cellular assays, such as our pathway profiling database.

CONCLUSIONS
our pathway profiling database determined tubulin to be a target of ambmp, which was unknown since the discovery of ambmp, and our simple and efficient system proved to be a powerful method for predicting compound moas. ambmp has been widely used as a chemical probe for wnt signal activation, but the results for studies that used the compound might have been influenced by its modulation of tubulin activity and not wnt signal activity. for proper utilization of chemical probes, it is potentially valuable to investigate their cellular profiles using multiple cellular assays, such our pathway profiling database, which provides beneficial information about representative cellular signaling processes. moreover, in drug discovery, off-target interactions are strongly thought to lead to low efficacy and significant side effects in clinical trials; therefore, the development of target identification and prediction methods is now definitively required to determine not only on-target molecules but also off-target molecules. the system will certainly keep providing us with useful information for various stages of the drug discovery process through target prediction and drug safety research.

