BACKGROUND
meiotic recombination breaks down genotypes that have proven to be successful, and therefore it was thought to evolve only under very limited conditions  <cit> . one hypothesis for the adaptive value of recombination, the red queen hypothesis  <cit> , suggests that parasites play an important role in maintaining non-zero recombination rates in their hosts. parasites are ubiquitous, and parasitism is considered to be one of the most significant selection factors for any organism  <cit> . according to the red queen hypothesis, hosts and parasites engage in sustained and fluctuating antagonistic coevolution, during which the parasite population continuously adapts to the most common genotypes in the host population  <cit> . rare host genotypes, by contrast, enjoy a selective advantage and thus will rise in frequency and become common in turn. the parasite population will continue to adapt to host genotypes that are common, but formerly rare, and thus fuel the sustained, fluctuating coevolutionary process. because rare resistance genotypes are expected to always have a selective advantage under negative frequency-dependent selection, host genotypes will fluctuate over time and genetic diversity is maintained  <cit> . in sexual organisms, rare genotypes are continuously created by meiotic recombination, either via segregation or chromosomal crossovers. as rare recombinants enjoy a selective advantage, recombination should lead to an increase in the mean fitness of host offspring  <cit>  and thus favour the spread of a  recombination modifier in the population. although theoretical analyses show that the detailed evolutionary processes that favour such modifiers are somewhat more complex  <cit> , the essential expectation of the red queen hypothesis still remains that recombination should be selectively favoured under antagonistic host-parasite coevolution.

mathematical models provide theoretical support for the red queen hypothesis  <cit> , even though there is controversy over the general applicability of the hypothesis  <cit> . so far, several empirical studies have tested key assumptions and predictions of the red queen, or have analysed whether observational data is compatible with the hypothesis  <cit> . for example, there is evidence for the predictions that parasites maintain genetic variation in their host populations  <cit> , that parasites track the most common host genotypes  <cit> , and that parasite infectivity for certain host genotypes fluctuates over time  <cit> . by contrast, the evolution and maintenance of recombination rate is rarely directly addressed, as most tests deal with the question of what favours sexual over asexual reproduction  <cit> , without considering how parasitism may change recombination rate within a sexual host population itself. several studies give circumstantial evidence for the red queen hypothesis by demonstrating an association of parasitism with genotypic variation within a host population. such an association has been found in a range of hosts with different reproductive modes. for example, host recombination correlated positively with parasite load in the grasshopper eyprepocnemic plorans  <cit> , and immune genes that directly interact with pathogens cluster in regions of higher recombination frequencies in drosophila melanogaster  <cit> . populations of caenorhabditis elegans exposed to bacillus thuringiensis showed changes, such as increased genetic diversity, compatible with the red queen hypothesis  <cit> . pathogen-induced stress also directly increased somatic recombination in arabidopsis, which could actually lead to more variation in the progeny as well, since plants lack a predetermined germ line  <cit> . similarly, genotypic diversification of offspring by multiple mating led to higher fitness for the mother in bombus terrestris in the face of parasitism in the field  <cit> . the most significant field study to date involving antagonistic coevolution of the freshwater snail, potamopyrgus antipodarium, a species that has both sexual and asexual populations, with its trematode parasites, shows that sexual  snail variants occur more often in environments with high parasite pressure  <cit> . in a recent study, coevolution of c. elegans with a bacterial pathogen selected for higher outcrossing rates in mixed mating experimental populations  <cit> . direct experimental support for a change in recombination rate compatible with the red queen hypothesis in obligatory outcrossing species has so far only been reported in one of our earlier studies using tribolium castaneum as the host and nosema whitei as its parasite  <cit> . this finding could not be confirmed in a follow-up study  <cit> , yet post-hoc checks suggested that the extant genetic variation in the hosts probably was too small to sustain an adaptive response .

the tribolium-nosema system is an ideal test ground for red queen-related questions, since it meets the key assumptions of the hypothesis  <cit> . for example, n. whitei is an obligately killing parasite  <cit> , which means that there is a severe fitness cost for parasites that are not able to infect or kill their host. in fact, strong selection on the parasite can favour higher recombination rates in the host, even if selection on the host is weak  <cit> . furthermore, there is a substantial epistatic component of resistance of t. castaneum to infection with n. whitei  <cit> . epistasis in turn, generates linkage disequilibrium, which can be broken down by recombination, thereby creating fitter genotypes. finally, host genotype versus parasite genotype interactions are found for n. whitei interacting with t. castaneum  <cit> .

here, we compared - relative to uninfected control lines - the recombination rates in four replicate t. castaneum lines that were allowed to coevolve with a mixture of eight n. whitei isolates. more specifically, recombination frequencies were measured in males from both treatments after eleven discrete generations, using microsatellite markers that bordered ten intervals on the genome, which were distributed over four linkage groups. using this method enabled us to measure recombination directly in the individuals under selection, as opposed to earlier studies that measured recombination in the offspring of the selected individuals, and provided us with a better genomic coverage than in any previous study  <cit> . the experimental design was such that control  and coevolution  treatments were paired within each of the eight replicate lines of the host. we chose the conditions of the experiment  based on the experience and results gained in previous experiments with the same study system  <cit> .

earlier findings from the same coevolution experiment showed that coevolved host lines maintained higher genetic diversity than control host lines  <cit> . if genetic diversity in the coevolved lines is maintained because of negative frequency-dependent selection by the parasite, it could be assumed that in every generation rare host genotypes created by recombination enjoy an advantage. when parasite-mediated selection is strong enough, one would thus expect to see higher recombination frequencies evolve in the coevolving beetle lines. such an increase in recombination frequencies, in combination with the observed maintenance of genetic diversity, can therefore be seen as evidence for the red queen hypothesis in an obligatory outcrossing species. here, we show that host recombination did indeed increase during coevolution with a parasite, and that this change is compatible with fluctuating selection exerted by the parasite.

RESULTS
after  <dig> generations of experimental coevolution, the mean difference between observed and expected kosambi's map distance in the control lines  did not relate to the expected map distance and did not significantly deviate from the line of no difference . by contrast, there was a significant logarithmic relationship between the mean difference of observed and expected map distance, and the length of the genomic interval  in the coevolved lines . in addition, the slope of the coevolution regression line was significantly different from the slope of the control regression line . although it appears, at first sight, that only short intervals increased in recombination frequency in the coevolution treatment, the longer intervals  might still be reconciled with an overall increase in recombination. if the true recombination frequency has increased at the same rate all over the genome, across all intervals, then it will be harder to observe this increase in larger intervals . in those relatively large intervals, the observed recombination rate is closer to its maximum of 50%, and therefore a similar increase in actual recombination frequency results in a relatively small increase in observed recombination values. even though we used kosambi's map function to convert observed recombination values to map distances, any such analysis still suffers from this issue, and changes in the real recombination rate in larger intervals are likely to remain undetected. furthermore, negative values at larger intervals for both treatments  suggest that there was a systematic bias towards lower recombination rates in the lines used here relative to the expected map distances. this might simply be due to the fact that the standard genetic map of t. castaneum  <cit> , from which the expected map distances were derived, was based on different beetle populations than the ones used in this experiment. presumably, the real "line of no difference" of our data lies below the zero lines in the graphs.

thirteen direct comparisons could be made between the map distance of the same interval for beetle lines that were paired over control and coevolved treatments . the direct comparison showed essentially the same pattern as described above, since for the short intervals map distances were higher in the coevolved lines than in the control lines. this difference disappeared with increasing interval size , something that can again be explained by the fact that changes in observed recombination frequency in larger intervals are relatively small and therefore harder to detect. the observed pattern might thus indicate an overall increased recombination frequency.

showing that host recombination has increased during coevolution with a parasite does not provide unequivocal evidence for the red queen hypothesis. for example directional selection, in combination with the effects of limited population size  <cit> , might alternatively contribute to this result. however, directional selection for insecticide resistance did not result in higher recombination frequencies in this system  <cit> . instead, there are several findings suggesting that our result is tied to the process of antagonistic coevolution. for example, coevolving populations maintained higher levels of heterozygosity and allelic diversity than control populations in this experiment  <cit> , which is another prediction based on the red queen hypothesis, and which does not match the scenario of directional selection. at the same time we could show that higher levels of heterozygosity is not per se the reason for higher parasite resistance in t. castaneum, as inbreeding does not increase the overall susceptibility of the beetles to parasitic infections  as well as for infections by the rat tapeworm hymenolepis diminuta  <cit> ). in a similar fashion, there was no significant difference in fis-values  between coevolved and control populations in this experiment  <cit> , and outcrossed beetles were not more resistant to n. whitei than their most resistant parent in general . furthermore, parasite-induced mortality was shown to fluctuate during the first generations of the coevolution experiment  <cit> . all these findings combined suggest that genetic diversity is maintained in the host populations not because of heterozygote advantage/overdominance, but likely as a result of fluctuating selection exerted by the parasite.

since the current stock host populations differ from those used in the earlier experiments that produced comparable patterns  <cit> , it seems highly unlikely that our current results are caused by the presence of a particularly favourable initial linkage disequilibrium between a recombination modifier and a locus under selection from the parasites  <cit> . furthermore, the replicate populations were all started from different initial linkage disequilibria. it appears that recombination frequency in populations of t. castaneum responds very quickly to selection  <cit> , which suggests that our result is due to actual, adaptive evolutionary change. indeed, no evidence was found for an infection-induced plastic change in recombination in this system  <cit> .

it is nevertheless conceivable that prolonged exposure to non-coevolving parasites would lead to an increase in host recombination frequencies, too. however, in a previous study with the same experimental paradigm we found that populations of t. castaneum that were exposed to randomly selected, non-evolving, parasites for  <dig> generations did not differ in recombination rate from controls  <cit> . hence, even though we cannot forcefully rule out an effect of simple exposure to parasites in a single all-encompassing experiment, and since there are potentially many other alternative explanations besides fluctuating selection due to the red queen process  to explain the maintenance of genetic diversity and the increase in recombination rate, currently the red queen hypothesis remains the major contender.

we also did observe that host populations became more resistant during coevolution with the parasite  <cit> , contrary to a scenario of pure negative frequency-dependent selection where no such mean change is expected  <cit> . host resistance to infection with n. whitei has been shown to be a complex trait  <cit> , and one could imagine that some components of resistance can be under fluctuating selection, while others are under directional selection. the idea that, in particular during the early phase of the experiment, fluctuating and directional selection were both important fits the observation that parasite-induced mortality was shown to fluctuate during the first generations of the coevolution experiment, while there was a general decrease of parasite-induced mortality  over time, and fluctuations only disappeared in the longer term  <cit> .

the observed decrease in parasite infectivity might indicate that the hosts are ahead in the arms race with their parasites, because a loss in infectivity can only be considered maladaptive for the parasite. we interpret this finding as a possible result of more rapid depletion of genetic variation in the parasite populations than in their coevolving antagonists. as our experimental conditions did not allow for migration between replicate populations, and because n. whitei is asexual  <cit> , the parasite population would indeed lose variation that might not be compensated by mutations. at the same time, under our experimental conditions, the benefit of increased recombination frequencies for the host population might disappear in the long term for the same reason.

CONCLUSIONS
we found that, after  <dig> generations of coevolution, recombination frequency in the host population was increased. based on insights into genotypic  <cit>  and phenotypic  <cit>  changes that occurred during the coevolution experiment, the observed increase in host recombination frequency is likely to be the result of fluctuating selection exerted by the parasite during early stages of coevolution, although we cannot completely exclude alternative explanations. in this study we benefited from a better genomic coverage, direct recombination measurements, and an improved understanding of the mechanisms behind our observations. we can show that host-parasite coevolution affects the evolution of recombination. together with the findings of other recent studies  <cit> , we provide experimental support for the red queen hypothesis as a theory to explain the evolution and maintenance of recombination.

