BACKGROUND
golden moles  are small, burrowing mammals endemic to sub-saharan africa. bronner and jenkins  <cit>  divide the group into nine genera and  <dig> species, most of which are recorded from south africa. they have been dubbed "spectacularly autapomorphic"  <cit>  and are among the most unusual of mammals, showing three long bones in the forearm  <cit> , hypertrophied middle ear ossicles  <cit> , and a hyoid-mandible articulation  <cit> , among other features. they converge in many ways on the phenotype of other subterranean mammals, such as lipotyphlan moles , burrowing rodents , certain armadillos , and marsupial moles , but lack a close phylogenetic relationship with these other groups. rather, chrysochlorids are now understood to be part of afrotheria, a radiation of endemic african mammals, also including hyracoids , proboscideans , sirenians , macroscelidids , tubulidentates , and tenrecids   <cit> .

previous taxonomic treatments of chrysochlorids have differed not only in terms of the implied intra-familial interrelationships, but also in the number of genera used to categorize a roughly similar hypodigm of extant species. in contrast to the nine genera given by bronner and jenkins  <cit> , the number of genera recognized by other authors ranges from five to seven  <cit> . uncertainty surrounding difference among previous taxonomic treatments are likely the result of emphasis on of different types of characters that vary in phylogenetic signal.

the only previous, character-based phylogenies of chrysochlorids were based on hyoid shape  <cit> , chromosome morphology  <cit> , and craniodental anatomy  <cit>  from approximately a dozen species . simonetta  <cit>  also presented an estimate of chrysochlorid interrelationships , but did not base his  on an explicit matrix of morphological or molecular data. these published trees contradict at least some genus-level relationships frequently implied in the literature  <cit> . for example, both simonetta  <cit>  and bronner  <cit>  imply paraphyly of the genus chrysochloris, consisting of the cape golden mole, chrysochloris asiatica, and a tropical congener, c. stuhlmanni . the geographical disparity of chrysochloris populations---with over  <dig> km separating the western cape province of south africa  from the region surrounding lake victoria ---lends itself to the possibility of genus-level paraphyly. similarly, occurrences within what previous authors  <cit>  referred to as calcochloris are separated by at least  <dig> km: c. obtusirostris in southern mozambique and "c." leucorhinus in the democratic republic of the congo and angola. other classifications of leucorhinus  do not improve the geographic cohesiveness of this taxon. hence, the monophyly of some chrysochlorid genera has not been consistently supported  <cit>  and deserves to be tested.

here, we present a phylogenetic analysis of the chrysochloridae based on  <dig> morphological characters from the cranium, dentition, and skeleton, combined with approximately 700- <dig> bases from exon  <dig> of the nuclear growth hormone receptor  gene for  <dig> of the group's currently recognized  <dig> species. this locus has frequently been applied to questions regarding afrotherian systematics , and along with other nuclear sequences supports a sister-group relationship between chrysochlorids and tenrecids . this study attempts to provide an evolutionary basis for chrysochlorid classification and thereby aid the process of understanding chrysochlorid systematics and evolution.

RESULTS
the chrysochloridae and several clades within it are recovered with high support from our bayesian and mp analyses of the combined morphology-ghr dataset , including the genera amblysomus, neamblysomus, chlorotalpa, and chrysospalax. the genus chrysochloris, including both c. stuhlmanni from near lake victoria and c. asiatica from the western cape, is also supported as monophyletic with high bayesian but low mp support . both mp and bayesian analyses support the sister taxon status of cryptochloris and chrysochloris, again with bayesian support higher than that from mp. in agreement with both simonetta  and bronner  <cit> , "calcochloris" leucorhinus does not form a clade with calcochloris obtusirostris in either the bayesian or mp analyses , making calcochloris  paraphyletic. for this reason, we regard huetia  as the appropriate generic name for the species leucorhinus.

the association of carpitalpa arendsi with neamblysomus  is consistent with the recognition of carpitalpa as a distinct genus  <cit> , in contrast to previous classifications which assigned arendsi to either chlorotalpa  <cit>  or amblysomus  <cit> . amblysomus and chlorotalpa comprise successively distant sister taxa to the carpitalpa-neamblysomus clade following our optimal bayesian trees; mp agrees concerning amblysomus but does not consistently resolve the position of chlorotalpa.

bayesian analyses do not resolve the chrysochlorid root, but favor eremitalpa and a huetia-chrysochloris-cryptochloris group as the basal-most taxa . results from mp also show an unresolved root, but differ by reconstructing chrysochlorines as monophyletic . in half of the optimal trees, mp places the root between monophyletic chrysochlorines and amblysomines plus chlorotalpa, or with chlorotalpa itself as the basal-most clade, also with a monophyletic chrysochlorinae and amblysominae. despite this difference, the unrooted topologies supported by bayesian and mp algorithms are mutually consistent .

to further examine the position of the root, and to infer the node potentially most susceptible to long branch attraction  <cit> , we tested the affinities of  <dig> randomly-generated taxa, each of which was used in turn as the outgroup for an mp analysis of our  <dig> chrysochlorid taxa. as depicted in fig.  <dig>   <dig> of these outgroups rooted the chrysochlorid tree at or within chrysospalax,  <dig> at eremitalpa,  <dig> at or within neamblysomus,  <dig> at carpitalpa,  <dig> at calcochloris, and  <dig> at or within chrysochloris. seven random outgroups yielded topologies that lacked a resolved root in a majority rule consensus of the optimal trees for that analysis. the remaining root-positions exhibited by the randomly-generated outgroups occurred at frequencies between 1- <dig> . hence, the equally-weighted mp analysis of ghr, morphology, and indels  does not root the chrysochlorid tree near the branches to which the greatest number of randomly generated outgroups are attracted, but the bayesian analysis does. as previously noted, the optimal mp trees show a root at either chlorotalpa or between chrysochlorines and amblysomines+chlorotalpa. only four of the  <dig> randomly-generated outgroups rooted the chrysochlorid tree adjacent to these nodes . bayesian analyses, in contrast, more frequently rooted the chrysochlorid topology at or near one of the longest branches within the chrysochlorid tree, albeit without strong support values.

overall, both mp and bayesian algorithms agree on the basic branching pattern within chrysochlorids : an amblysomus-neamblysomus-carpitalpa group, a chrysospalax-calcochloris-chrysochloris-cryptochloris-huetia-eremitalpa group, with the two species of chlorotalpa between the two. however, we acknowledge that support indices for most basal nodes remain low, and we cannot yet be certain about the position of the chrysochlorid root.

fig.  <dig> shows the trees supported by the ghr  and morphology  partitions examined separately. aspects of non-chrysochlorid afrotherian phylogeny are discussed elsewhere  <cit> . for chrysochlorids, the molecular and morphological partitions agree on supporting amblysomus, chrysospalax, neamblysomus, and chrysochloridae. morphology alone does not resolve most supra-generic clades, and where resolution exists, support is weak. it does resolve a neamblysomus-amblysomus clade, but without carpitalpa arendsi as portrayed in the combined  and ghr  datasets. morphological data weakly support an eremitalpa-cryptochloris clade and a chlorotalpa-carpitalpa-calcochloris-huetia-amblysomus-neamblysomus clade, groupings which collapse when mp is relaxed by one step. nevertheless, as documented elsewhere  <cit> , the performance of a given partition in isolation should not prevent its combination with other datasets. as shown in the distribution of hidden branch support values , for the  <dig> clades that are present in both the combined  and ghr-only  mp trees,  <dig> show increased branch support with addition of morphology and indels,  <dig> do not change, and  <dig> show decreased branch support.

numbers below each partition name represent optimal treelength for clade in left-most column; column "wo" indicates optimal treelength without that clade; column "bs" indicates branch support for that clade from partition . hidden branch support  represents the difference between combined branch support and the sum of branch support from each partition. positive hbs  indicates more support from combined analysis than from sum of partitions; negative hbs  indicates support for clade lower in combined analysis relative to sum of partitions; zero hbs  indicates additive branch support .

discussion
as noted above, the morphological partition alone does not recover most suprageneric clades of the combined-data analysis, and weakly disagrees with many aspects of the ghr tree . however, it has been demonstrated that a given clade may receive support from a combined dataset even when that clade lacks support from every partition analyzed in isolation  <cit> . for example, at high taxonomic levels within placental mammals, morphology  has been shown to contribute positively to clade support in a combined analysis, whether or not that clade is present in a tree derived from morphological data alone  <cit> . for the present dataset, the addition of the morphological partition improves branch support for the majority of nodes present in both the optimal mp and bayesian topologies of the combined dataset . this observation is consistent with the observation made elsewhere  <cit> , based on independent datasets, in which interaction between partitions can increase support beyond the sum of branch supports obtained from partitions in isolation . hence, we base our discussion on the combined-data tree.

our results are partly congruent with the suggestion of bronner and jenkins  <cit>  that chrysochlorids may be divided into two clades: amblysominae and chrysochlorinae, although their content is different according to our results. we place amblysomus, neamblysomus, and carpitalpa arendsi in amblysominae. the chrysochlorinae of bronner and jenkins  <cit> , excluding carpitalpa and chlorotalpa, is a potentially monophyletic clade , and is weakly supported as such by our mp analyses of the combined data . however, additional data are necessary to address the possibility that the chrysochlorid root falls within this group, possibly near eremitalpa . for ease of discussion, we use the terms amblysomines and chrysochlorines as defined above, but acknowledge that the latter term may be rendered paraphyletic with further phylogenetic scrutiny.

morphological character evolution
as noted previously, chrysochlorids share a number of features  seldom seen elsewhere among living mammals. in the case of ossicular morphology, considerable variation exists across chrysochlorid species  <cit> . amblysomus, neamblysomus, and calcochloris show a relatively small malleus , unlike the elongate, club-shaped ossicle seen in chrysochloris and cryptochloris . the mallear head is enlarged and globular in eremitalpa  and chrysospalax , and is also globular but only slightly enlarged  in chlorotalpa , huetia, and carpitalpa . those taxa with a club-shaped malleus all possess a substantial bulge in the posterior aspect of their orbitotemporal fossa, known as the temporal bulla, which serves as a dorsal continuation of the epitympanic recess for housing the enlarged malleus . the globular malleus of eremitalpa is sufficiently large that it too results in an externally visible temporal bulla . in the other taxa with a globular malleus , the ossicle is smaller and does not result in an externally distinct temporal bulla.

there are a number of other variations on chrysochlorid mallear morphology not accounted for in the current morphological matrix, such as orientation of the manubrium mallei, shared for example in eremitalpa and chrysochloris but not in chrysospalax . here, we focus on size and shape of the mallear head, which has figured prominently in previous classifications. this region guided the classification of simonetta  <cit> , who stated "  morphology pointed to three divergent evolutionary trends, so that the family could be ... divided into three subfamilies" . he further implied the intuitive view that the "normal"  malleus of amblysomus is primitive, and inferred a "morphological sequence" from amblysomus to the taxa with a globular malleus to the "extreme" club-shape observed in chrysochloris.

interestingly, the taxa most frequently inferred as basal by bayesian analyses possess an enlarged, globular malleus , a slightly enlarged malleus , or an elongate malleus . if such a taxon occupies the base of the chrysochlorid tree, then simonetta's intuition about the character evolution of the chysochlorid malleus is wrong: taxa with an unenlarged malleus  occupy relatively nested branches. in contrast, the root supported by four of the eight mp analyses  shows calcochloris obtusirostris  at the base of a monophyletic chrysochlorinae, which forms the sister taxon of a chlorotalpa-amblysomine clade. this scenario is potentially consistent with the view that a small malleus  characterized the basal-most living chrysochlorids, with enlargement occurring independently within each subfamily. most phylogenies of afrotheria support a tenrec-golden mole association  <cit> , and one would expect that the chrysochlorid common ancestor with other afrotherians would have had relatively small ear ossicles. their scant fossil record  <cit>  indicates that miocene chrysochlorids lacked a temporal bulla and therefore would not have had a mallear head of the kind seen in chrysochloris , eremitalpa , or chrysospalax .

previous discussions of mallear evolution in chrysochlorids have also noted the high probability of homoplasy in this region  <cit> . while we cannot yet resolve the position of the chrysochlorid root, all of our optimal trees agree with recent authors that mallear enlargement has not occurred in a simple progression from small, to globular, to elongate. the paraphyly of chrysochlorids with an enlarged, globular malleus indicates the presence of homoplasy in the occurrence and direction of ossicular enlargement.

based on the phylogeny in fig.  <dig>  a few additional morphological characters optimize with relatively low homoplasy across chrysochlorids. the position of the foramen ovale relative to the foramen for the inferior ramus of the stapedial artery  shows relatively little homoplasy in the optimal mp and bayesian trees: the two are confluent in chrysochlorines  and distinct in amblysomines and chlorotalpa. the position of foramen ovale relative to the sphenorbital fissure  also distinguishes most members of the two groups: in amblysomines and chlorotalpa sclateri they are separated in the ventral part of the temporal fossa, whereas in chlorotalpa duthieae and most chrysochlorines  they are situated close together.

dentally, most chrysochlorines  lack talonids on their lower ultimate premolar , whereas these are present in amblysomines  and chlorotalpa. talonids on the molars are similarly lacking in chrysochlorines , but present in amblysomines  and chlorotalpa. the overall number of teeth in each jaw quadrant--- <dig> in those taxa with a full complement of three molars and  <dig> in taxa with just two---has also figured prominently in previous chrysochlorid classifications. however, reduction of molars is restricted to amblysomus, calcochloris, and is variable in neamblysomus. as such, this feature is not diagnostic for the supra-generic clades indicated in this study.

CONCLUSIONS
our data support the validity of carpitalpa arendsi, the removal of the equatorial species leucorhinus from calcochloris, chlorotalpa, and amblysomus, the integrity of most chrysochlorid genera, such as chrysochloris including species from both equatorial africa  and the western cape province of south africa , and the association of cryptochloris with chrysochloris  <cit>  and of amblysomus with the neamblysomus-carpitalpa clade. we amend previous chrysochlorid taxonomies by using huetia as the appropriate genus-level designation for h. leucorhinus. both mp and bayesian analyses support a similar unrooted topology, with amblysomines as defined above and chrysochlorines consisting of chrysochloris, cryptochloris, huetia, chrysospalax, and calcochloris. chlorotalpa is favored as the sister taxon to amblysomines in bayesian analyses; whereas in the consensus of optimal mp trees, chlorotalpa appears in an unresolved trichotomy with monophyletic amblysomines and chrysochlorines . bayesian analyses weakly support a root within chrysochlorinae, near eremitalpa or a chrysochloris-cryptochloris-huetia clade. as noted above, mp yields a trichotomy at the root. the fact that an intra-chrysochlorine placement of the root in some of our analyses corresponds with the region of the tree that frequently attracts randomly generated outgroup taxa leads us to regard the position of the chrysochlorid root as still unresolved and in need of further study.

an incremental, small-to-large evolution of one of the most peculiar chrysochlorid features---the enlarged malleus---is not supported by our analysis. according to topologies supported by bayesian techniques, chrysochlorid species with a small malleus  are nested, not basal, within the chrysochlorid radiation. however, optimal mp topologies cannot rule out a small malleus characterizing the basal-most chrysochlorid branch. furthermore, and regardless of the position of the root, change in mallear size has occurred multiple times during the history of this insectivoran-grade radiation of afrotherian mammals.

