BACKGROUND
ultra-high-throughput second-generation dna sequencing technologies from companies such as roche , illumina  and applied biosystems , are increasingly being used for novel exploratory genomics in small to medium-sized laboratories. "short-read"  technologies such as those of illumina and applied biosystems have proven to be exceptionally successful in a wide variety of whole-transcriptome investigations  <cit> , but most of these studies have relied on prior sequence knowledge such as an annotated genome for qualitative and quantitative transcriptome analyses.

genome assembly of short sequences without any auxiliary knowledge has primarily utilized  <dig> sequencing data, due to the longer individual read lengths of 150- <dig> base pairs . however, short-read sequencing  has been successfully used for de novo assembly of small bacterial genomes , where  <dig> bp reads have been assembled  <cit>  and hybrid approaches, where genomes are de novo assembled using a combination of reads from multiple sequencing platforms to overcome the inherent limitations of each technology, have been used to successfully assemble genomes of up to  <dig> mbp  <cit> . more recently, the sequencing of the giant panda genome was demonstrated  <cit>  using de novo assembly of sequence derived from a single platform , but utilizing a combination of different insert sizes, allowing assembly of an estimated 94% of the genome . de novo assembly of large, highly repetitive and highly heterozygous eukaryotic genomes from short-read data remains a challenge.

in transcriptome studies,  <dig> pyrosequencing has proven very useful for generating ests representing the majority of expressed genes. this has enabled gene discovery in a variety of previously uncharacterized eukaryotic organisms with no or little a priori dna sequence information  <cit> . however, relatively few published studies have attempted de novo assembly of whole-transcriptome sequences from short-read data such as that generated by illumina ga or solid technologies. assembly of short  read data into accurate, contiguous transcript sequences has only recently been reported  <cit>  demonstrating that assembly of long, potentially full-length, transcript assemblies is indeed possible.

eucalyptus tree species and hybrids presently constitute the most widely planted  and commercially important hardwood fibre crop in the world. they are mainly utilized for timber, pulp and paper production  <cit> . their fast growth rates and wide adaptability may in future allow sustainable and cost efficient production of woody biomass for bioenergy generation  <cit> . eucalyptus will soon be only the second forest plantation genus  for which a reference genome sequence will be completed by end  <dig>  <cit> . to support the genome annotation effort, there is much value in having a dataset of genes with strong transcriptional evidence across a range of tissues and developmental stages. until recently, limited amounts of eucalyptus est/unigene data were available in public databases, mainly due to the fact that commercial interests have necessitated private est collections  <cit> . as of march  <dig>  aside from a mixed-species collection of ≈ <dig>  nucleotide sequences on ncbi  and which contain extensive redundancy, the largest effort to date to generate a comprehensive catalogue of expressed genes in a single eucalyptus species was based on  <dig> sequencing of cdna fragments from e. grandis trees  <cit> . while this study provided an excellent representation of expressed genes and gene ontology classes in e. grandis, the relatively short lengths of the assembled contigs  meant that very few complete gene models were represented. there remains therefore a fundamental need for a high-quality expressed gene catalog for eucalyptus, to support genome annotation efforts and discern authentically expressed genes from predicted gene models, as well as for future genomics research, which will include transcriptome, proteome and metabolome profiling.

in the process of producing such a high-quality expressed gene catalog for eucalyptus, we addressed three main questions: first, is it feasible to de novo assemble illumina mrna-seq data into contiguous, near full-length gene model sequences for eucalyptus? second, what genes make up the expressed gene catalog for a fast-growing eucalyptus plantation tree? finally, can we re-use the mrna-seq data to create a tissue and organ-specific digital expression profile for each assembled contig? we addressed these questions by generating a comprehensive set of expressed gene sequences from a commercially grown eucalyptus hybrid  clone using illumina mrna-seq technology and de novo short-read assembly. we report herein the complete annotation of the expressed gene catalog based on comparative analysis with the published arabidopsis thaliana  <cit> , populus trichocarpa  <cit>  and vitis vinifera  <cit>  protein-coding datasets. we describe an interactive database of annotated transcript sequences, coding sequences  and derived protein sequences , which will be continuously updated and curated in association with the eucalyptus genome network  as part of an effort to initiate a publicly accessible database for eucalyptus transcriptomics research similar to that produced for populus  <cit> .

RESULTS
de novo assembly, validation and annotation of contigs
in total,  <dig> million paired-end reads of raw mrna-seq data  representing poly-selected rna from six eucalyptus tissues and varying in lengths from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp, were generated in  <dig> lanes on illumina ga and gaii instruments. following a sequence filtering process to exclude low quality and ribosomal rna-derived reads, we assembled  <dig> million paired-end reads  of non-normalized mrna sequence, using the velvet short-read assembler . in total,  <dig>  rna-derived contigs were assembled  that were greater than  <dig> bp in length , with a median coverage per base  per contig of 37×, ranging from 8×  to  <dig> × .

we performed ab inito cds prediction using genscan  <cit>  and found that  <dig>  contigs  contained a predicted cds . analysis of the predicted coding sequences using anaconda  <cit>  identified  <dig>  contigs that contained putatively full-length cdss ,  <dig>  predicted to contain a start but no stop codon,  <dig>  predicted to contain a stop but no start codon, and only  <dig> with neither. to ascertain the quality of velvet assembly of short reads into long contiguous coding sequences, we compared a subset of  <dig> of our transcript-derived contigs to corresponding sanger-sequenced, full-length, cloned eucalyptus grandis mrna sequences in ncbi . paired reads were independently mapped to each sanger reference sequence, the de novo assembled velvet contig and its corresponding predicted cds. a needleman-wunsch alignment of these three sequences was used for contiguity validation of the assembled contigs. independently, each sequence had 100% coverage validation across the contig, except in cases of low quality assembly , which occurred in regions of coverage lower than 8× per base. of the  <dig> transcript-derived contigs evaluated,  <dig>  assembled completely with a 5' utr, 3' utr, as well as a contiguous coding sequence matching that of the reference mrna sequence. we found several cases where, despite high coverage, our transcript-derived contigs differed from the sanger reference sequence due to indels, but these were generally in the utr regions and likely represent allelic differences between the f <dig> hybrid individual and the reference sequences .

of the  <dig>  assembled contigs,  <dig>   exhibited significant similarity  to the preliminary draft 8x doe-jgi e. grandis genome assembly  consistent with the origin of the mrna contigs . we further characterized the assembled contigs by high stringency blastx analysis  match length) to protein datasets from three reference sequenced angiosperm genera . cumulatively,  <dig>  contigs  exhibited high similarity to arabidopsis , populus  or vitis proteins . of the  <dig>  contigs with high similarity to arabidopsis, populus or vitis proteins,  <dig>   also contained predicted coding sequences , while  <dig>   did not , possibly due to low expression of these transcripts which would have resulted in lower coverage and shorter contigs that represented only a fraction of the open reading frame . predicted codon usage and amino acid frequencies in the proteome represented by the eucalyptus expressed gene catalog were very similar to those of expressed gene catalogs from arabidopsis and populus .

to compare the completeness of our expressed gene catalogue to that of all publicly available gene sequence data for eucalyptus, we generated a separate dataset, termed eucall, containing all publicly available eucalyptus gene sequence data to date . this included all ncbi unigenes and ests, assembled  <dig> est data from e. grandis leaf tissue , assembled  <dig> est data produced by novaes and colleagues  <cit> , and the eucawood contig dataset  <cit> . we compared the representation of arabidopsis genes in the eucall dataset and in our assembled e. grandis × e. urophylla  transcript dataset by blastx at significance levels of < 1e- <dig>  < 1e- <dig> and < 1e- <dig> . while the overall numbers of hits were higher in the eucall dataset, these were mostly in the lower size ranges. for our de novo assembled contigs, a much higher number of significant hits in contigs larger than  <dig> bp in size  suggested that a greater proportion of our contigs represent full-length gene models than the publicly available eucalyptus gene sequence set .

functional annotation of the expressed gene catalog
the transcript-derived contig sequences were annotated according to several functional annotation conventions, including gene ontology , kegg  and interproscan . the numbers and assortment of allocated go categories provides a good indication of the large diversity of expressed genes sampled from the eucalyptus transcriptome . this was also reflected in the diversity of interproscan categories identified , as well as the comprehensive coverage of biochemical processes by kegg annotation, which was similar to that of the entire arabidopsis gene catalog .

digital expression profiling
an accepted method of identifying large scale differences in gene expression is to use est abundance as an indicator of transcript abundance. this method has been implemented and validated in numerous studies using sanger-derived ests  <cit> , as well as 454-pyrosequencing methods  <cit> . quantitative transcriptome analysis using ultra-high-throughput sequencing technologies such as illumina and solid has been shown to be accurate and highly correlated with other quantitative methods such as rt-qpcr and microarray analysis  <cit> . to quantify tissue-specific transcript abundance reflected in our short-read dataset, we combined data  generated from the same tissues and mapped six tissue-specific datasets  to the assembled gene catalog using bowtie  <cit> . following this, we used the cufflinks  <cit>  program , which provides relative abundance values by calculating fragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped  as validated previously  <cit> . this enabled the allocation of a tentative digital expression profile for each transcript-derived contig .

to compare between two general tissue types that are of interest for woody biomass production, we evaluated groups of genes whose fpkm values were greater than two-fold higher in woody  tissues  or leaf  tissues . go categories over-represented in the xylem-upregulated set compared to the leaf set  was representative of developing woody tissues, with significant enrichment  in signalling , carbohydrate metabolism, and genes associated with the golgi, cytoskeleton and the plasma membrane - consistent with an emphasis on delivery of biopolymers to the cell wall. in contrast, gene categories significantly enriched  in leaf tissue compared to woody tissue  were associated with photosynthesis , growth and energy production .

we also interrogated our transcriptome data using the "core xylem gene set" identified in arabidopsis by ko and colleagues  <cit> . of the  <dig> genes identified by the authors as markers of secondary xylem formation in arabidopsis,  <dig> had putative homologues in the eucalyptus transcriptome  and in total  <dig> contigs were identified. of these,  <dig>  showed greater than two-fold "xylem" to "leaf" digital expression profile ratios and six were only detected in xylem tissues . most of the expression profiles were also highly correlated with that of secondary cell wall-specific eucalyptus cellulose synthase genes, similar to the patterns previously observed in arabidopsis. these results are comparable to the 80%  reported recently for the same set of arabidopsis homologs in populus  <cit> , which provided further support for the biological validity of the short-read-based digital expression profiles associated with the eucalyptus expressed gene catalog.

public data resource
we constructed a public data resource, eucspresso , which provides a searchable interface to the assembled contigs. the database can be queried based on closest homologous entry in the arabidopsis thaliana , populus trichocarpa  and vitis vinifera  sequence data sets. simple and compound keyword searches can be performed based on all of the functional annotation terms and the predicted coding and protein sequences can be obtained for all contigs. finally, the tissue-specific  digital expression profile and the location of each contig in the draft 8x e. grandis genome assembly  can be viewed from within eucspresso.

discussion
we have assembled nearly  <dig>  expressed gene sequences from xylogenic and non-xylogenic tissues of an actively growing eucalyptus plantation tree using only illumina mrna-seq technology and de novo short-read assembly. quality control comparisons to full-length, cloned, sanger-derived transcript sequences from eucalyptus, as well as multiple lines of evidence such as cds prediction and pfam prediction showed that the transcript assemblies are robust and that thousands of full-length coding sequences and their respective 5' and/or 3' utr regions were successfully assembled. comparison of assembled gene models to gene catalogs of other angiosperm species by blast analysis and functional annotation  indicate that we have sampled an expansive and diverse expressed gene catalog representing a large proportion of the genes expressed in mature eucalyptus trees across a variety of woody and non-woody tissues. comparison to all publicly available eucalyptus dna sequence suggests that we have sampled a more comprehensive set of genes, which is also more complete in length  from a single eucalypt tree genotype than has been available to date for the entire genus. additionally, using a validated approach to quantify mrna-seq data we have produced an informative database of transcript abundance across six eucalyptus tree tissues, which, due to the depth of sequencing, results in higher sensitivity and wider dynamic range than sanger or 454-derived est counts usually associated with this type of analysis.

a concern associated with de novo assembly of transcript sequences, be it sanger derived  <cit>  or  <dig> sequence derived  <cit>  assemblies, is the contiguity of assembled sequences. this concern intuitively increases as the read length decreases, and may be one of the main reasons why most transcriptome de novo assembly approaches have utilized technologies with longer read lengths to date. we provide several lines of evidence which jointly support the contiguity of transcript sequences assembled in our study using short-read data. first, a high proportion of the contigs exhibited high-confidence blastx similarity to protein sequences from annotated gene catalogs of three angiosperm species arabidopsis, populus and vitis . second, a large proportion of the contigs contained long, near full-length, predicted cdss . third, interproscan analysis predicted  <dig>  protein domains, which is indicative of contiguous, in-frame predicted protein sequences . finally, a random subset of the contigs, which represented a variety of length and read coverage, were validated by direct alignment to previously published, sanger sequenced, full-length eucalyptus genes that were directly cloned from cdna .

assigning biological significance to de novo assembled contigs should be approached with caution. in our study,  <dig>  assembled gene models  were considered high confidence annotations due to the presence of a significant high stringency blast hit in other angiosperm species, as well as a predicted cds. these contigs had relatively high coverage per base  values  as compared to contigs lacking a predicted cds . thus, a lack of cds prediction was generally associated with low gene expression level and low cpb, which resulted in 'n's inserted by velvet in the contig sequences . the assembly quality and annotation of these sequences could be improved in future by even deeper sequencing and the addition of data from new tissue types. another possible source of error is the spurious prediction of cdss in long, non-coding rnas, which has been previously shown to occur  <cit> . it is notable that of the  <dig>  eucalyptus-derived contigs with no significant blast hit to other angiosperms, but containing a predicted cds , only  <dig> contigs had predicted interproscan domains. additionally, the median cds to contig length ratio was  <dig> , as compared to  <dig>  in the  <dig>  high confidence contigs in figure 3a, which suggests that many of these cds predictions may be false positives. de novo assembled transcriptome datasets lack the ability to distinguish and classify the lower confidence annotations, an exercise that is beyond the scope of this study, albeit one that can be resolved once a genome-based predicted set of gene models is available.

validation of the digital expression  profiles using the "core xylem gene set" identified in arabidopsis  <cit>  has precedence in similar investigations in conifers  <cit> , cotton  <cit>  and poplar  <cit> . this analysis, combined with the results shown in figure 5a and figure 5b, lend support to the biological significance of digital expression profiles derived from short-read sequencing technology, which will assist in the discovery and annotation of novel eucalyptus genes - and using the genome sequence, promoters - playing key roles in growth and development, and particularly in woody biomass production. the eucspresso online resource produced from this study, as well as future comparative analysis with other woody species such as vitis and populus, will be valuable for studying the unique biology of woody perennials.

CONCLUSIONS
taking into consideration the number, length, coverage and quality of assembled gene models, as well as their digital expression profiles, this dataset surpasses several previous de novo transcriptome assemblies using illumina  <cit>  or  <dig> technology  <cit> . this can primarily be attributed to the amount of data generated , the diversity of tissues sampled and strategy of paired-end sequencing, as well as read-length . our dataset was generated using several generations of illumina ga technology, but considering the current throughput of illumina sequencing , a gene catalog of this scale can now be produced using a single lane of illumina mrna-seq. finally, non-normalized short-read data will be extremely useful for downstream applications such as digital gene expression profiling and detection of alternative transcript structure, once reference models are available from the genome.

