BACKGROUND
artemia is a species of primitive crustaceans capable of producing diapause encysted embryos  to survive adverse conditions. the cyst, composed of about  <dig> cells and developmentally arrested at the gastrula stage, is remarkably resistant to physiologic stressors  <cit> . diapause embryos remain in dormancy and will not resume development until they are activated by transient exposure to a specific environmental stimulus. activated cysts require only suitable environmental conditions to resume metabolism and development, and eventually emerge as fully formed nauplii  <cit> . the special pattern of the cyst development mades it an ideal system for biological study.

thus far, the sequence of events accompanying the diapause and resumption of development in artemia has been investigated extensively. two proteins, p <dig> and artemin, are present in large amounts in encysted embryos. p <dig> exhibits reversible nuclear-cytoplasmic translocation and plays an important role as a molecular chaperone, while artemin is a rna-binding protein with high thermal stability and may act as a rna chaperone  <cit> . previous studies have also suggested intracellular ph  as a key cellular signal in the metabolic and developmental switching  <cit> . interestingly, post-diapause development takes place in the absence of dna synthesis and cell division  <cit> , and is known to be a very complicated process involving a variety of metabolic events. these events include the catabolism of trehalose, degradation of yolk platelets, protein synthesis, gene transcription, and other events, coupled with a large number of energy changes  <cit> . however, the intrinsic mechanisms of this complicated process remain unclear.

adenosine monophosphate-activated protein kinase  is a cellular energy sensor that is conserved throughout eukaryotes. ampk also plays an important role in the control of the whole body's energy balance  <cit> . ampk homologues exist as heterotrimeric complexes consisting of a catalytic α-subunit and non-catalytic β- and γ-subunits  <cit> . activation of ampk absolutely requires phosphorylation at a specific threonine residue  of the α-subunit by upstream kinases , and allosterically by increases in the amp:atp ratio  <cit> . ampk activation may also be elicited by other cellular signals, such as glycogen  <cit> .

the upstream kinase, lkb <dig>  signals through ampk to regulate multiple metabolic processes. there is also evidence that ampk has a more complex role in the regulation of diverse cellular processes, including the cell cycle, proliferation, and others through the lkb1→ampk pathway  <cit> . the differential tissue-specific and subcellular localization of ampk is critical in investigating its functions. in general, nuclear ampk activation may elicit long-term changes in gene expression, whereas cytosolic ampk may function in the modulation of more immediate metabolic and homeostatic responses  <cit> .

the main objective of this study was to explore the role of ampk in the artemia life cycle. in a previous study, we have identified an artemia ampk gene  which is differentially expressed during the developmental stages  <cit> . herein we report the activation of ampk in artemia post-diapause developmental stages and discuss its possible roles in this process.

RESULTS
ampk activation during the post-diapause developmental stages of artemia
in our previous study, an artemia ampkα gene  was isolated and the pattern of the gene expression was studied  <cit> . the deduced amino acid sequence near threonine  in the t-loop region of this protein is identical with human ampkα. thus, a phospho-ampkα  antibody designed corresponding to the residues surrounding thr <dig> of human ampkα and widely used in detecting activated ampk in various organisms was used in the present study.

the phosphorylation of ampk during artemia developmental stages was analyzed by western blotting. the results showed that ampk is initially phosphorylated in 4-h incubated embryos . subsequently, the phospho-ampk level increased as the post-diapause development proceeded. no signal of phospho-ampk was detected in the free-swimming nauplius or adults . the molecular weight of the detected protein is about  <dig> kda, similar to the predicted molecular weight of afr-ampkalpha <dig>  <cit> .

the kinase activity of ampk was assayed with a gst-fused ampk-specific substrate, gst-sams  <cit> . the sams peptide is based on the sequence surrounding serine  <dig> within rat acetyl-coa carboxylase and has been used most frequently for ampk activity determination. purified gst-sams was incubated with peg extracts from embryos at different developmental stages, and the phosphorylated gst-sams was detected by western blotting. as shown in figure 1b, no signal of phosphorylated gst-sams was detected in 0-h incubated embryos in which phospho-ampk was undetectable. furthermore, the level of phospho-gst-sams increased as the level of phospho-ampk increased . these results suggest that the activity of ampk was elevated when the level of phosphorylated ampk increased , indicating that artemia ampk, like ampk in other organisms, is activated by phosphorylation.

using whole-mount immunohistochemistry, we have examined the distribution of activated ampk in developing embryos . the results also illustrate that ampk is activated in 4-h embryos and embryos at later stages. activated ampk was predominantly located in the ectoderm region of embryos at early stages in a ring shape . as development proceeded, the activated loop enlarged , and in late embryos that have a pear shape, ampk was activated in the head region .

nuclear translocation of ampk
the subcellular location of activated ampk is closely related to its function. thus, we used a cell fraction system to separate pellet and supernatant proteins of embryos  <cit> . the pellet fraction loaded on sds-page contains nuclei and yolk platelets, while the supernatant contains cellular proteins. as shown in figure 3a, activated ampk was detectable on western blots of pellet extracts, but not in supernatant extracts. immunofluorescent staining of nuclei and confocal microscopy further confirmed that activated ampk was localized in the nucleus .

activation of ampk is not associated with the cellular amp:atp ratio
cellular atp, adp, and amp were separated by hplc analysis in embryos at different developmental stages . concentrations of cellular adenylates were calculated by the external standard method . the results showed that diapause embryos contained large amounts of amp, while atp and adp were merely detectable . in contrast, atp remained at a high level in embryos during development . the level of atp increased from initiation of the development until it reached its maximal value at the 8th hour of development . the atp concentration decreased in the next  <dig> hours, but still remained higher than at the initiation of development . during development, the amp:atp ratios were between  <dig>  and  <dig>  . interestingly, ampk was not activated in the first  <dig> hours in which the amp:atp ratio was higher than the later stages.

discussion
ampk is a family of serine/threonine protein kinases playing a central role in energy control, at both the cellular level and the organism as a whole  <cit> . genes encoding the subunits of the ampk complex have been identified in all eukaryotes in whom genomes have been sequenced, covering all taxa from yeast to mammals  <cit> . herein we showed that artemia ampk is specifically activated during the post-diapause developmental stages, and that the spatial and subcellular location of activated ampk provides valuable information for further investigation of its functions.

post-diapause development of artemia is a very complicated process involving a large number of internal events, including rna and protein synthesis restoration, cellular differentiation, and associated morphologic changes  <cit> . all these biochemical reactions occur together with large energy fluctuations. our western blotting results showed that ampkα is specifically activated during this process, but not in other stages of the artemia life cycle . ampk is a central component of a protein kinase cascade that plays a pivotal role in the regulation of the intracellular energy status. it has been established that activation of ampk is associated with increased expression of key metabolic proteins, such as hexokinase ii, glut- <dig>  and mitochondrial enzymes  <cit> . thus, artemia ampk may be a potential candidate for an energy control function during the post-diapause developmental stages. however, the fact that artemia ampk activation was not detected before the 4th hour of development indicates that ampk functions may be development-related.

as a downstream target of lkb <dig>  ampk was shown to be indispensable in embryogenesis. it has been found that ampkα-null mutants of drosophila die before adulthood and are unable to reach the larval stage when both zygotic and maternal ampk contributions are eliminated  <cit> . in c. elegans, orthologues of lkb <dig>  and ampk  cooperate to regulate germline proliferation with somatic development during dauer formation  <cit> . thus, artemia ampk may not only function as an energy regulator, but also plays other roles during post-diapause developmental stages. to further explore the role of ampk in this process, we also conducted a whole-mount immunohistochemistry experiment in developing cysts. interestingly, our results show that activated ampk is predominantly restricted in the ectoderm region of embryos and the position of the activation loop changes as development proceeds . thus, ampk is probably involved in the embryonic development process, such as differentiation of certain cells and morphologic changes.

studies have shown that ampk may regulate gene expression through direct interaction with the nucleus  <cit> . the observation that artemia ampk localizes to the nucleus when activated  suggests that artemia ampk interacts with transcriptional regulators or dna directly to control gene expression. this finding, combined with the results that activated artemia ampk exists in certain cells and then its location changes during development , led to the hypothesis that ampk may participate in regulating the expression of genes that function in development of certain organs or tissues.

thus far, two proteins  have been established as nuclear binders in artemia  <cit> . p <dig> is the first diapauses-related transcription factor to be identified in crustaceans, while p <dig>  making up 10–15% of the total non-yolk protein of artemia diapause embryos, serves primarily as a cell stress chaperone  <cit> . interestingly, nuclear-cytoplasmic translocations of p <dig> are ph-dependent. additionally, previous work by utterback and hand  <cit>  has shown that alteration of phi influences yolk platelet degradation during post-diapause development in artemia embryos. thus, we also examined the ph-dependence of nuclear-cytoplasmic translocations of activated ampk by manipulating buffer ph in vitro . the results showed that the location of activated ampk in the nucleus was not affected by phi.

it is known that ampk is activated by conditions leading to an increase in the intracellular amp:atp ratio  <cit> . however, our studies have shown that artemia ampk is not activated in diapause embryos in which the amp concentration is rather high , but is activated in developing cysts from the 4th hour of post-diapause developmental stages in which the intracellular amp:atp ratio is low . this result seems uncoupled to traditional mechanisms of ampk activation by an elevated amp:atp ratio  <cit> . during the post-diapause developmental stages, however, it was notable that ampk was only activated in certain cells of developing cysts, as revealed by the whole-mount immunohistochemistry results . there are two possible reasons for the activation of ampk in this process: 1) although the amp:atp ratio is low in whole embryos, in the cells in which ampk is activated, the amp:atp ratio is high; if so, ampk activation is consistent with the classic regulatary mechanisms by the amp:atp ratio, and 2) although the amp:atp ratio is a major signal for ampk activation, artemia ampk could also be regulated by other pathways which are independent of the cellular adenosine nucleotide level. this type of ampk activation regulation by other cell signals has been reported in other organisms. in human cells, ampk activity is regulated by two upstream kinases, lkb <dig> and camkk  <cit> . regulation of the ampk activity by cammk is not affected by the amp:atp ratio.

as is known, classic ampk activation stimulates atp-producing, catabolic pathways and inhibits atp-consuming anabolic pathways  <cit> . thus, it could be hypothesized that ampk activation in the whole embryo during the post-diapause development process would inhibit atp-consuming processes, such as protein synthesis and cell growth. however, it is notable that ampk was only activated in certain cells . this fact indicates that even if artemia ampk is activated to switch off the atp-consuming pathways in some cells, it would probably not inhibit the anabolic activity of the whole embryo. furthermore, the fact that ampk enters nuclei suggests that ampk may play more roles in regulating the expression of the development-related genes rather than directly controlling cell energy. considering the inhibition of anabolic metabolism by ampk, it can also be hypothesized that the stimulation of ampk contributes to metabolic depression and the inhibition of proliferation in the diapause embryos in which the amp level is high and the metabolic activity is undetectable. however, ampk was not detectably activated in the diapause state . one possible reason is that ampk is not the key factor that controls or maintains diapause. thus, in the diapause state, as with other key metabolic enzymes, such as s <dig> kinase and hexokinase <cit> , ampk loses its activity in spite of high amp concentrations.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our study focused on ampk activation during the artemia life cycle. the spatial-temporal activation pattern of ampk, as well as its subcellular location, helped to further investigate its functions in artemia post-diapause developmental stages. our findings may thus provide insight into the regulation of energy and gene expression during artemia post-diapause development, and reveal further aspects of ampk function.

