BACKGROUND
somatic cell nuclear transfer  has been used to successfully produce cloned animals from several mammalian species since a sheep was cloned using a differentiated somatic donor cell  <cit> . however, to date widespread application of scnt in agricultural breeding programs has not yet been captured because the technology remains inefficient despite more than  <dig> years of research. irrespective of the species being cloned, there is still a high rate of pregnancy failure throughout gestation  <cit> . the most common scnt foetal phenotypes across species are foetal overgrowth and loss of allometric growth regulation , musculoskeletal defects, and acute, excessive accumulation of allantoic fluid  accompanied by perturbations in the composition of this fluid  <cit> . in cattle, the large offspring syndrome appears to be independent of the donor cell genetics.

many of the developmental defects observed in cloned bovine foetuses suggest the involvement of growth regulating genes, particularly those known to be imprinted. some of these genes play key roles in regulating cellular proliferation, growth and development of the foetus and the placenta . the phenotypes commonly observed in scnt foetuses bear many similarities to some of those seen in experimentally-created imprinting disruptions in mice , or to naturally-occurring human syndromes, such as beckwith-wiedemann syndrome   <cit> . these similarities suggest that the expression of some of these imprinted genes is abnormal and/or that these genes are not appropriately reprogrammed following scnt. furthermore, scnt calves dying shortly after birth were shown to have abnormal expression of imprinted genes in a variety of organs when compared to controls generated by ai  <cit> ; this was not the case in surviving adult clones  <cit> . during the development of multicellular organisms, different cells and tissues acquire different programs of gene expression. it is thought that a substantial part of this gene regulation is mediated through epigenetic modifications such as dna methylation, histone tail modifications and the binding of non-histone proteins to chromatin  <cit>  so that each somatic cell in the organism has its own epigenetic signature  which reflects its genotype, developmental history and environmental influences, which ultimately determines the phenotype of the cell and the organism. this is clearly illustrated in the events following fertilization, where the majority of the genome undergoes active paternal demethylation, then passive maternal demethylation. re-methylation of the genome then occurs during repeated mitosis as cells progress towards lineage commitment and the development of the embryo proper and the placenta  <cit> . how the developmental programs are coordinated and orchestrated from the genomic blueprint is still poorly understood, even in normal development.

in reproductive cloning by scnt, the epigenetic signature of a differentiated somatic cell must be reset to a state resembling totipotency, capable of driving full development after fusion of the cell with an enucleated oocyte cytoplast. incomplete nuclear reprogramming is widely postulated to be a major contributor to the low developmental success rate following scnt. evidence to support this include observed hypo-methylation  <cit> , hyper-methylation  <cit> , or mosaic methylation states  <cit>  in tissue samples collected from abnormal foetuses or cloned calves that died shortly after birth. normal methylation following scnt has also been reported  <cit> , suggesting a degree of stochasticity in nuclear reprogramming. the variable findings from different studies are due to different genes or genomic regions examined, different tissues used and controls that were not gestation- or age-matched. this has made comparisons between previous studies difficult.

cloned animals that reach maturity are able to reproduce normally and give rise to normal offspring without the high rate of pregnancy failure or large offspring syndrome associated with scnt  <cit> , suggesting that underlying cause/s of the abnormalities associated with scnt is/are epigenetic.

in this study, we examined the dna methylation patterns in a panel of candidate genes using tissues from three foetal organs  of similar gestations generated by either scnt or ai. these organs were selected because of the pivotal roles they play in foetal metabolism, nutrient sensing and hematopoiesis , regulation of blood pressure and foetal fluid homeostasis  and foetal endocrinology . as most cases of hydrallantois occur from or just after mid-gestation, the selection of this stage of gestation allowed us to compare samples from foetuses that showed clear physiological and anatomical abnormalities with those that had not yet exhibited these symptoms and thus, had the potential to develop to further.

the genes selected consisted of those known to be imprinted in other species, non-imprinted genes and repeat sequences . the imprinted genes include those associated with bws, such as igf <dig>  kcnq <dig>  cdkn1c, kcnq1ot1; others such as ascl <dig>  hand <dig>  dio3; and snrpn, a gene in the prader-willi and angelman syndrome locus. the non-imprinted genes include colony stimulating factor , stat5a, dkk- <dig>  and gr, which codes for the glucocorticoid receptor, that mediates the action of glucocorticoids and mineralcorticoids, both important in regulation of fluid composition. the cpg islands examined included those located upstream of transcriptional start sites or within the gene itself or in equivalent regions shown in other species to be differentially methylated regions  and normally associated with imprinted genes. the snrpn site is equivalent to the imprinting centre  of the human gene  <cit>  which has been shown to be aberrantly methylated in the prader-willi  and angelman syndromes  <cit> . the kcnq1ot <dig> region is equivalent to the human kcnq1ot <dig> dmr which was found to be hypomethylated at increased frequency in human ivf offspring  <cit> . together, this selection of genomic sequences allowed us to assess how well these different regions were re-programmed after nuclear transfer in embryos that were capable of developing at least to mid-gestation.

RESULTS
pregnancy rates in scnt and ai
from the first ultrasound scan at day  <dig>   <dig> of the  <dig>  scnt recipient dams that received a day  <dig> blastocyst were found to be pregnant. by day  <dig>  just  <dig> days prior to the development of the first scnt hydrops case, only  <dig> were still pregnant . four subsequently developed clinical hydrops and were slaughtered. for the ai group,  <dig> of the  <dig>  recipients inseminated were pregnant at day  <dig>   <dig> of these still pregnant  at day 130; none showed signs of abnormal fluid accumulation.

dna methylation analysis
dna methylation analysis at each of the listed genomic regions was performed from the same genomic dna for each sample. because the cleavage of the transcribed rna is sequence-specific, some fragments may contain only one cpg site whilst others may contain up to  <dig> cpg sites where the cpg dinucleotides were arranged consecutively in the sequence or close together. where multiple cpg sites occurred within a fragment, the methylation level reported by the epityper software was that of the most highly methylated site. where is was not possible to resolve two fragments with the same mass but with different sequences, the methylation level is recorded as an average of the two fragments. the number of cpg sites or group of sites that could be analyzed for each region is given in each figure legend.

imprinted genes
igf <dig> exon 10
the cpg island located in igf <dig> exon  <dig> was highly methylated  at almost all cpg sites in all three tissues examined and in all treatment groups . there was a high level of variation in methylation levels between individual samples, even in normal control tissues. only the adrenal tissues showed a significant difference in mean methylation between ai, scnt and scnt-hydrops groups; scnt-hydrops samples tended to be hypermethylated compared with the ai or scnt samples. at cpg  <dig>  individual scnt and scnt-hydrops adrenal samples were either completely methylated or unmethylated, whereas the ai samples were methylated to between 30-40%. no notable tissue-specific methylation patterns were observed. when averaged over the entire region analyzed, the methylation levels ranged from  <dig> to 85% for all three tissues . a significant difference was detected in the regional mean methylation levels between the ai and scnt  and scnt-hydrops  in the adrenal samples, and in the kidney between ai and scnt  and between scnt and scnt-hydrops . three of the scnt-hydrops samples were almost 100% methylated at every site whilst another was methylated at between 40-50% at almost every site, illustrating the level variation between some individuals in this group.

ascl2
compared with the igf <dig> exon  <dig> region, the dna methylation levels here were low  in all tissue samples . furthermore, the variation between individuals was very small in all three tissues, resulting in a mean percentage methylation at each cpg site that was remarkably similar between the treatment groups. the fragment containing cpg sites 37- <dig> was consistently methylated at higher levels  compared with other fragments/sites  examined in every sample. this difference is likely due to the algorithm used by epityper to determine methylation levels in fragments containing multiple cpg sites  <cit> . despite the apparent similarity in mean methylation levels in the fragments analyzed, significant differences between ai, scnt and scnt-hydrops groups were found in certain fragments in all three tissues . the mean dna methylation level across this region was similar in all groups across all tissues .

hand1
dna methylation levels at this cpg island in the promoter region of hand <dig> were mostly low  in kidney and liver tissues . interestingly, the adrenal tissues from all three groups showed higher methylation levels  and greater variability at most cpg sites across this region when compared with either liver or kidney samples. the only statistically significant difference in the mean methylation levels between treatment groups was in the liver ; however the difference in methylation levels was very small. otherwise, dna methylation levels at individual cpg site/s were not different among the treatment groups. the mean level of dna methylation across the region was similar between the groups in kidney and liver tissues but a significant difference was observed in adrenal tissue  where scnt samples were significantly less methylated compared with either ai or scnt-hydrops samples . for the adrenal tissues, within the scnt-hydrops group, there were two individuals cloned from the same donor somatic cell line: one was consistently methylated to between 30-70% at practically every analyzable cpg site whereas the other was methylated to only about 10% for all but three analyzable cpg sites.

kcnq1
the percentage of dna methylation in the kcnq <dig> region examined varied from 0-45% across individual cpg sites, with most showing less than 20% methylation . overall, the methylation levels of the samples from all three groups were similar at individual cpg sites in all tissues examined, although significant differences among the groups were detected in some fragments . no tissue-specific methylation patterns were observed and the homogeneity of the methylation levels in all the samples was reflected in the lack of difference in the mean regional methylation levels between the tissues and groups examined .

cdkn1c
the methylation pattern in this cpg island, which is within the transcribed region of cdkn1c, was very similar across all groups and in all tissues . there was little variation at practically every cpg site between individual samples within each treatment group; this lack of variation is reflected in the similarity of the regional mean methylation levels . the mean methylation levels at individual cpg sites or groups of cpg sites were between 0-20% with the exception of one cleavage fragment containing cpg13- <dig>  which was methylated to 40-45% in every group and tissue examined. because this fragment contains four cpg sites, it was not possible to determine if certain sites were methylated to a greater extent than others. cpg <dig> and cpg <dig>   <dig> were always completely unmethylated in every sample. due to the limited variation between individual samples in this region, even differences as small as 2-3% showed statistical significance at some sites .

snrpn
the methylation levels at each cpg site/groups of sites in this region showed a high degree of variation between individuals in all three tissues and in every treatment group . although the majority of the sites showed no significant differences in mean methylation levels between the treatment groups, dna from ai samples tended to be more methylated than scnt or scnt-hydrops, particularly for the adrenal and kidney samples. in these two organs, the methylation levels in the ai samples ranged between  <dig> - 100% for most cpg sites whereas in the adrenal samples, three each of the scnt and scnt-hydrops samples were almost unmethylated ; the others were methylated to a similar extent as the ai samples. similarly low levels of methylation in individual scnt and scnt-hydrops kidney samples were also observed. only one scnt and one scnt-hydrops foetus both showed consistent hypomethylation in all three tissues whilst others that were hypomethylated in one tissue showed almost normal methylation levels in other tissues. the regional mean methylation levels were significantly higher  in the ai adrenal and kidney but not liver samples when compared with scnt or scnt-hydrops . only two fragments in kidney tissues showed significant difference in mean methylation levels .

a cleavage fragment containing cpg sites  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> was consistently methylated to ≤10% in every sample analysed. to eliminate the possibility that this was due to unknown snps resulting in a c to t conversion and thus loss of cpg sites, a subset of  <dig> dna samples were amplified across this region and the amplicons sequenced. all samples contained the expected cgcgcg sequence.

kcnq1ot1
the kcnq1ot <dig> region examined corresponds to the kcnq1ot <dig> dmr in the mouse and human genomes. similar to the above snrpn region, the variation in methylation levels between individuals at each cpg site was large for all three tissues . dna from scnt and scnt-hydrops foetuses tended to be less methylated in all three organs when compared with ai samples, resulting in significantly lower regional average methylation  in the scnt and scnt-hydrops groups . there was no significant difference between the scnt and scnt-hydrops groups. where significant differences were detected between treatment groups at individual cpg sites , these differences were large compared with the differences seen in cdkn1c and kcnq <dig> 

dio3
the dio <dig> region examined is a good example of how widely dna methylation levels at individual cpg sites/fragments can vary within a single cpg island . highly methylated cpg sites appeared to be interspersed between cpg sites that were methylated at low levels ; this variation was seen in all three tissues and in all treatment groups. only one cpg site in liver samples showed significant difference among the groups . there were no significant differences among the treatment groups  in regional average dna methylation.

non-imprinted genes
gr
methylation levels in this region were relatively low  at individual cpg sites . significant difference was found only in the kidney at once cpg site . there were no obvious tissue-specific methylation patterns. the mean regional methylation levels were 10-15% with no difference detected among the treatment groups in any of the tissues .

csf-1
mean methylation levels were relatively low across the region analyzed  with little variation between individual cpg sites  and no tissue-specific methylation patterns were evident. although mean regional methylation levels were not different among the groups  there were specific cpg sites where significant differences were detected. these specific cpg sites were different for each tissue type . in all cases, the differences were small.

dkk-1
mean methylation levels were similar to those reported for day  <dig> trophoblast tissue  <cit> , with all cpg sites methylated to ~10%, the exception being cpg <dig>  where mean methylation levels were 40-50%. there were no significant differences among the three groups.

stat5a
dna methylation levels in a cpg island between stat5a and stat5b were mostly below 30% in kidney, adrenal and liver samples . the only difference between treatment groups was at one cpg site in the liver samples . individual methylation profiles of liver samples in the scnt-hydrops group were more variable than those in the ai or scnt groups with some cpg sites in certain individuals almost completely methylated. no differences were noted between the groups in the mean dna methylation levels across the region in any of the tissues .

repeat regions
dna satellites i, ii and alpha
the majority of cpg sites in the satellite i sequence examined were methylated to > 80% in all adrenal, kidney and liver samples . four of the cpg sites  were consistently methylated to ≤ 50% in all tissue types. cpg sites where the mean methylation levels were significantly different among the groups were observed in all three tissues types .

the methylation levels and pattern for satellite ii sequences were remarkably similar between individuals, treatment groups and tissue types . cpg <dig> was invariably 100% methylated, cpg <dig> was methylated to 30-40%. all other cpg sites were 70-80% methylated. only three cleavage fragments in scnt kidney samples showed significantly different mean methylation levels compared with the other two groups .

the satellite alpha sequences also showed similar patterns of methylation in all the treatment groups and tissues  with the only significant difference being found at one cpg site in the kidney . there were no apparent tissue-specific methylation patterns. other than cpg <dig>  which showed a moderate level of variation between individuals, the other cpg sites were consistently methylated to the same degree in every sample, tissue and treatment group. cpg  <dig> was completely methylated in every sample. no significant differences were noted between the three groups in the mean dna methylation levels across any of the satellite regions in any of the tissues .

discussion
in this study, we addressed the question of whether nuclear reprogramming has occurred appropriately after scnt by examining dna methylation patterns in tissue samples collected from three organs from mid-gestation foetuses. being able to sub-divide the scnt group into those that appeared "viable" at slaughter and those that were failing as a result of clinical hydrops  allowed us to determine if the failing foetuses were methylated differently compared with those that had the potential to develop further. as there are no means to determine, with certainty, the outcome from a foetus that looked "viable" at mid-gestation , we can only make the assumption that these scnt foetuses have the potential, like the ai foetuses, to develop further. previous studies have indicated that 50-75% of foetuses surviving to mid-gestation will result in a live calf  <cit> . in the majority of regions examined, the dna from the scnt or scnt-hydrops samples were appropriately methylated when compared with control ai samples. generally, there were no differences in the mean methylation patterns and levels between the scnt and scnt-hydrops groups despite evident phenotypic differences. however, close inspection of individual profiles revealed that within the scnt-hydrops group, there were individuals who showed aberrant hypo- or hypermethylation, particularly in the igf <dig> exon  <dig> dmr, kcnq1ot <dig>  snrpn and hand <dig> regions. aberrant methylation in any of those genes was not always accompanied by aberrant methylation in other regions. furthermore, two individual that are genetically identical could be aberrantly methylated in different ways, demonstrating the stochasticity of the reprogramming defects. at specific cpg sites, significant differences between scnt and ai samples were detected in some genes. it is not possible to say if these sites represent "hot-spots" for methylation variation or whether these methylation aberrations are the cause of some of the abnormal phenotype seen in scnt foetuses.

genes in the bws locus were of particular interest because of the variable overgrowth phenotypes seen in scnt foetuses and how some of the phenotypes resemble bws in humans. the methylation profiles of cpg islands associated with the kcnq <dig> and cdkn1c genes were practically identical between the ai control and both groups of scnt, in liver, kidney and adrenal samples. this suggests that the methylation at these sites is tightly regulated and they were appropriately methylated in these scnt organs, even in those from failing hydrops pregnancies. similarly, no differences were observed for the region associated with ascl <dig>  this tight regulation did not extend to the kcnq1ot <dig> region located close to the cdkn1c gene in this imprinted cluster. cpg sites in the kcnq1ot <dig> region showed substantial variation between individuals and a tendency for scnt samples to be less methylated at almost every analyzable cpg site. taken together, these results suggest that even within the same locus, some cpg islands are methylated appropriately in scnt tissues while others are less so. as it was not possible to distinguish between the maternal and paternal allele in cattle, we were unable to determine if the aberrant methylation was restricted to one allele or if both were aberrantly methylated.

similarly, at the region corresponding to the snrpn imprint control region in humans, the methylation levels were also highly variable between individuals in all groups. mean methylation at the majority of cpg sites in both scnt groups tended to be lower when compared with the ai group, although not as dramatically hypomethylated as in early extraembryonic tissues, . although there was a tendency for this region to be incorrectly methylated following scnt, not all cpg sites in this region were affected in the same way. an example of this is the cleavage fragment containing cpg7- <dig> which was consistently unmethylated for every sample in each of the three tissues in all treatment groups. it is possible that these cpg sites are invariably protected from epigenetic modification.

small but statistically significant differences in methylation levels between scnt and the control group were detected at specific cpg sites in hand <dig>  ascl <dig> and the kcnq <dig> promoter regions in various tissues. these differences were very small and the overall methylation status of the entire region examined was not altered so their biological significance is uncertain. the occurrence of these very small differences is no higher than would be expected purely by chance at the 5% level. only the hand <dig> region showed tissue specific methylation differences as the adrenal tissues have a noticeably different pattern compared with the other two tissues. in these regions, the similarity in methylation pattern between scnt and normal tissues suggests that this region has undergone appropriate reprogramming and that tissue-specific methylation patterns were successfully established in this organ. where there were no tissue-specific methylation differences, the absence of difference in methylation between ai and scnt samples is either an indication of successful reprogramming or that these regions normally escape global demethylation  <cit>  in the pre-implantation embryo and therefore did not require extensive reprogramming after scnt.

for imprinted genes, the imprints that mark the parental origin of each allele are normally established during gametogenesis, leading to differential methylation of the male and female gametic dna in dmrs. the methylation levels in dmrs have previously been reported to be ~50%. this level of methylation was believed to be due to the almost complete methylation of one parental allele versus the non-methylation of the other allele. we found that for the igf <dig> exon  <dig> dmr, the majority of the cpg sites were methylated to between  <dig> to nearly 100% in the three foetal tissues examined, even in the controls. assuming that the paternal allele was completely methylated, this suggests that the maternal allele was progressively methylated during development. one possible explanation for this is that after additional epigenetic marks that dictate allele-specific expression are established during early embryogenesis, there is no longer the requirement to maintain the differential marking at the dmrs so most of the cpg sites in somatic cells then become progressively methylated. alternatively, it may be that only a few cpg sites in the region are required to be differentially methylated to distinguish the parental alleles so the non-essential sites become methylated through methylation spreading.

comparison of the methylation profiles in non-imprinted genes and the repetitive dna satellite regions showed that in general, these regions appeared to be appropriately methylated in the scnt tissue samples examined. although satellite sequences are non-coding and are thought to be kept highly methylated in the genome, not every cpg site was methylated to the same extent across the region. despite significant differences in methylation levels at specific cpg sites between treatment groups, these differences are very small and the significance in unclear.

an intriguing observation from this study is that in some genes, there is a surprisingly large variation in the methylation levels between individuals at practically every cpg site in the region examined, even between individuals in the normal control group. this suggests that there is tolerance for a range of dna methylation levels in some genomic regions; whether this translates to phenotypic variability is unknown. this variability could be in part, explained by the inherent lower fidelity  of the dna maintenance methylation mechanism, which is estimated to be about 95% for methylation of the newly unmethylated strand  <cit> . however, this does not explain why the methylation of certain regions is so tightly regulated. this variability is not due to heterogeneous tissue sampling as the analyses for multiple genes were carried out on the same bisulfite-treated dna sample for each individual. in these same samples, other genomic regions showed very tight invariant methylation at almost all cpg sites in every individual. in general, consistent with previous findings  <cit>  cpg islands upstream of transcriptional start sites or near promoters were less methylated  than the two putative dmrs and satellite sequences, which tended to be methylated to 40-100%.

previous studies assessing the reprogramming of the donor nucleus after scnt have used antibodies raised against methylcytosine residues to compare global methylation in the nuclei of scnt and normal embryos  <cit> . this technique only allows visualization of highly methylated regions which are likely to be repeat sequences that do not code for functional genes. subtle differences in regions present at two copies per genome will be masked by the overall methylation of highly repetitive elements. other techniques which average dna methylation levels over the genomic region analyzed have led to the misconception that dna methylation levels are similar at each cpg site across the entire cpg island. in contrast, the massarray technology is able, in many instances, to calculate dna methylation levels at individual cpg sites reproducibly down to 5% for each informative cpg unit  <cit> . however, because the massarray method depends on sequence-specific cleavage of derived rna products, this technology is unable to analyze the methylation at every cpg site when suitable cleavage sites are unavailable such as in high density cpg regions. bisulfite sequencing will be a useful adjunct when these regions warrant further examination. the success of both techniques however, is dependent on being able to design primers that flank ~ <dig> bp of cpg-rich sequences but the primers themselves must bind to regions which do not contain cpg sites. for some cpg islands that are large , this is not always possible and other methods must be devised to study such regions.

the ability to analyze large numbers of samples and genes and quantify the level of methylation at specific cpg sites allows a more accurate assessment of methylation profiles in the populations of interest. the technology has enabled us to appreciate detail previously unrealized: a) some cpg sites are always protected from methylation whilst others tend to be highly methylated; b) methylation at some cpg site within a region show high variability between individuals whilst others are invariably methylated in every individual; c) some regions, such as the kcnq1ot <dig> site in adrenal tissues and dio <dig> in all tissues show apparent periodicity in the methylation profile, with highly-methylated sites interspersed with lowly-methylated sites; d) tissue-specific methylation patterns were uncommon. it remains for the biological significance of these observations to be determined.

the detail revealed by this method of dna methylation analysis calls into question whether the practice of reporting the average methylation level across all cpg sites within a region and comparing this value between experimental samples is meaningful. this could potentially mask methylation differences between experimental groups at cpg sites that may be important for regulating chromatin structure and hence, gene expression. cpg sites that are invariably protected from methylation, or those which are always methylated are not evident when averaging methylation levels across a region. subtle tissue-specific differences may also be masked. furthermore, the biological significance of averaged methylation levels in a region is unclear.

CONCLUSIONS
we have used the massarray technology to look at multiple regions in the genome and found that for scnt foetuses that survived to mid-gestation, albeit with phenotypic abnormalities in some cases, the methylation patterns were very similar to those of naturally conceived foetuses, at least for the three organs examined. this suggests that in those foetuses, the majority of these sites in the genome have been appropriately "reprogrammed". however, there were two regions located in imprinted gene clusters  where scnt samples tended to be hypomethylated. this implies the importance of these two region in regulating normal foetal development and growth. similar observations of aberrant methylation in the bws locus in children arising from human ivf is further evidence of the susceptibility of this region to external influence. we cannot yet with confidence predict the developmental outcome of a scnt foetus from its epigenetic state at any stage; it is just a snap-shot of the dynamic nature of the epigenetic status of the genome. we are far from understanding how dna methylation patterns relate to phenotypic outcomes in entire organisms.

