BACKGROUND
rhizoctonia foliar blight  caused by rhizoctonia solani anastomosis group   <dig> intraspecific group ia is a serious disease that causes rapid and severe destruction of soybean   <cit> . outbreaks of ag1-ia on soybean in brazil, the southern states of the u.s.a. and china have caused yield losses of 30–60%  <cit> . protection against rfb is difficult as the use of less-susceptible cultivars is limited due to a lack of availability  <cit>  resulting in the use of chemical pesticides. because of the impact of rfb on agriculture, it is important to identify factors that regulate plant resistance; however, no studies have been published examining the molecular responses of soybean due to r. solani ag1-ia infection. understanding the effect of r. solani ag <dig> on soybean defense pathways and their regulation will greatly assist breeding efforts towards the development of cultivars with improved resistance to rfb by applying biomarker-assisted selection.

there is growing interest in linking transcriptomics to metabolomics, which in turn could contribute to the comprehensive biological understanding that gene expression studies alone would otherwise not achieve. a large body of literature exists reporting on metabolic perturbations of plants caused by abiotic or biotic stresses through parallel or comparative analysis of microarray and metabolomics experiments . more extensive analyses of the linkage between gene expression and metabolite biosynthesis is now possible given the recent advancements in tools and platforms to characterize various molecular entities of plant cells providing insights into the linkages between changes in gene expression and metabolite levels .

high-throughput multi-omics methods generate large and complex datasets that must be related to the biological system of interest, in this case soybean responses to rfb. within this context, it is necessary to develop strategies that allow relevant biological processes to be described and easily interpreted in order to efficiently extract biologically significant information from analyses carried out with different omics profiling platforms. the bidirectional orthogonal projections to latent structures  is a new multivariate technique that integrates data from different datasets or “omics” levels , and supports multi-block bidirectional correlations  <cit> . o2pls is an extension of orthogonal projections to latent structures  where as opls analyzes a single dataset, o2pls assesses systemic trends across multiple datasets. this viable statistical method allows data to be integrated with equal weight allocated to each dataset irrespective of whether the number of data points in each dataset differs significantly. by observing the joint systematic variation, one can identify shared responses and utilize the model to predict biological responses between the datasets  <cit> . unlike pairwise correlation analyses that result in potentially hundreds of significant correlations  <cit> , o2pls modelling reduces the number of correlations to those having the most dominant effects on the model  <cit> . additionally, results can be interpreted based on both the predictive  sources as well as on the unique, individual variables from each dataset  <cit> . to date, there are relatively few examples using o2pls to integrate plant transcript and metabolite data  <cit>  and, so far, no studies using o2pls to uncover missing functional links between different “omics” levels for monitoring multi-level responses of plants to disease.

phytopathogen infections lead to changes in secondary metabolism  as well as changes in primary metabolism  that affect growth and development of the plant. while the regulation of defense responses has been intensively studied  <cit> , less is known about the effects of necrotrophic pathogen infection, such as r. solani, on primary metabolism. we have recently demonstrated the effectiveness of metabolomics for the analysis of plant primary metabolism during rhizoctonia root rot and stem canker diseases of soybean hypocotyls and potato sprouts  <cit>  with results indicating that host plants reorganize their primary metabolism to mount defense mechanisms, while, pathogens might simultaneously manipulate plant metabolism to promote infection to support replication and spreading within the plant  <cit> . the increased demands of redirection of primary metabolites involved in photosynthesis, carbohydrate and amino acid metaboism, glycolysis and tca cycles suggest that reprogramming of vital functions in infected tissue occurs and is a necessary defense requirement . taken together, examining alterations in soybean primary metabolism to early and late infection stages of the foliar pathogen r. solani ag <dig> can provide insights on how to develop soybean lines with more resistance to foliar blight disease.

in the present study, we aimed to show that: 1) by integrating multiple omics levels, we were able to assess systemic and functional trends across transcripts and metabolites of soybean primary metabolism in response to a foliar necrotrophic fungal pathogen; 2) there is tight coordination in the context of known regulatory mechanisms and pathway level regulation of metabolism; and 3) the effect of a novel defense modulator can be examined using loss-of-function mutants.

RESULTS
the complexity of plant metabolism necessitates the employment of multi-level approaches and integration of the obtained information for a comprehensive understanding of its regulation in response to stimuli. initially, datasets were analyzed individually to identify substantially altered transcripts and metabolites of soybean responses to r. solani, followed by the discovery of joint variation between the two datasets by applying o2pls, and focusing on the regulation of soybean primary metabolism .fig.  <dig> overview of analytical approaches for integration of soybean metabolites and transcripts. integrative approach applied to study soybean metabolite and transcript fluctuations in response to r. solani disease development. data processing methods allowed for the identification of transcripts and metabolites as single and integrated datasets to find biomarkers within each dataset and trends between them for a global understanding of soybean responses to rfb




previous studies examining soybean responses to fungal pathogens have mainly focused on fluctuations occurring in components of secondary metabolism, such as the phenylpropanoid, flavonoid and isoflavonoid pathways  <cit> . fluctuations in these pathways were observed during the soybean-r. solani interactions of this study ; however as few studies have examined the fluctuations in plant primary metabolism in response to r. solani  <cit> , we focused on primary metabolism for this study. additionally, to the best of our knowledge, no studies exist on soybean primary metabolism regulation in response to fungal attack using integrated omics approaches. studies examining the primary metabolic responses of plants to fungal pathogens have suggested that rapid onset of certain genes or metabolites may be key components of plant resistance , emphasizing the role of primary metabolism in plant defense responses. the current study examined, for the first time, the overall metabolic responses of soybean to r. solani ag1-ia causing rfb disease.

overview of analyses
principal component analysis  was initially performed for the overview of 1h nmr and rnaseq datasets, the detection of outliers and trends, and the evaluation of robustness and reproducibility of the experimental protocol . pca revealed no outliers  and a variable discrimination between the recorded metabolite profiles of mock-inoculated  and rhizoctonia-infected leaves . moderate discrimination between the metabolic profiles of mock-inoculated  and infected leaves was observed 12 h post-inoculation   and is reflected by the early response to infection, signs of disease and development of several infection cushions on the leaf . a strong discrimination however, is observed 12 h later  indicating the general disturbance of soybean metabolism  and establishment of the disease with full-blown symptoms . based on these findings, the second time-point  was selected for integration of nmr and rnaseq datasets. similarly, pca analysis of the rnaseq dataset  revealed no outliers  and a strong discrimination between the mock-inoculated and infected leaves , as supported by disease progression .fig.  <dig> soybean metabolite and transcript pca score plots  <dig> and 24 h.p.i. with r. solani ag1-ia. pca score plots of soybean metabolites from r. solani ag1-ia infected  and control  leaves  <dig>  and  <dig>  hours post-inoculation , and rnaseq transcripts  24 h.p.i. ellipses represent hotelling t <dig> with a 95% confidence interval. six biological replicates were analyzed per treatment per time point. soybean unifoliate leaves infected with r. solani ag1-1a and mock-inoculated controls  <dig>  or  <dig>  h.p.i.  hyphal invasion and spread of r. solani over the soybean leaf and initials of infection cushions were visible at 12 h.p.i. 




metabolite abundance changes in response to rfb
analysis of 1h nmr profiles of r. solani hyphae of similar surface area to that found at the necrotic lesions revealed a negligible impact of fungal metabolites on the total recorded metabolic profiles . however, for accuracy, bins of fungal profiles were subtracted from the corresponding recorded bins of infected leaf profiles. partial least squares-discriminant analysis  has an improved ability for biomarker discovery compared to pca   <cit> . thus, here, biomarker discovery was based on pls-da  to examine the metabolic fluctuations in soybean occurring during the early infection stage  at which infection cushions develop , and during the late infection stage  at which necrotic lesions develop. the tight clustering within the two treatments at both time points  is indicative of the robustness of the method and of the substantial differences between the metabolomes of control and infected leaves. a total of  <dig> bins representing seventeen uniquely identified metabolites of primary metabolism  were mapped onto metabolic pathways to view the temporal fluctuations in response to infection in a more dynamic manner . fluctuations of soybean metabolites within the glycolysis pathway, tca cycle, starch and sucrose metabolism, and amino acid biosynthesis showed similar trends at early  and late  stages of infection  with the exception of gaba, l-asparagine, l-glutamate and proline, which increased and then decreased at 12 h.p.i. and 24 h.p.i. compared to controls, respectively.fig.  <dig> 
1h nmr metabolite partial least squares score and loadings plots  <dig> and 24 h.p.i. partial least squares-discriminant analysis  pc1/pc <dig> score  and loadings  plots of 1h nmr metabolite profiles 12 h.p.i.  and 24 h.p.i.  of r. solani ag1-ia infected  and mock-inoculated control  soybean leaves. ellipses represent hotelling t <dig> with 95% confidence intervals. metabolites to the left increased during r. solani disease progression, while those on the right decreased in response to rfb compared to controls. six biological replicates were analyzed per treatment per time point. q <dig>  cumulative fraction of the total variation of the x’s that can be predicted by the components; r2x and r2y, the fraction of the sum of squares of all x’s and y’s explained by the components, respectively. aln, alanine; d-gluc, d-glucose; etoh, ethanol; for, formate; fum, fumarate; fruc, fructose; gaba, γ-aminobutyrate; gln, glutamine; glu, glutamate; gluc, glucose; phe, phenylalanine; pro, proline; suc, succinate; sucr, sucrose; tyr, tyrosine


fig.  <dig> metabolite and transcript pathway network analysis of soybean responses to r. solani ag1-ia. gene-to-metabolite and metabolite-to-gene network fluctuations in soybean leaves in response to r. solani ag1-ia infection  <dig> and 24 h post-inoculation . metabolite fold changes are represented in bar graphs, and significant changes based on pls-da loading coefficients are indicated by an asterisk . transcripts are represented as arrows connecting metabolites. transcript fold-changes  based on qrt-pcr results are represented by boxes with 12 h.p.i. and 24 h.p.i. time-points represented on the left and right, respectively. red illustrates an increase in transcript abundance in response to r. solani ag1-ia infection, while hatched green represents a decrease . capital lettering beside the boxes indicates gene name abbreviations . black arrows without boxes represent transcripts detected in rnaseq, but not significantly affected by infection. solid arrows represent single-step reactions, while hashed arrows represent multi-step reactions. stars represent transcripts and metabolite bins that were identified as significantly altered using o2pls analytical methods




effect of rfb on soybean transcript abundance
high-throughput sequencing allows for an in-depth analysis of the genome or transcriptome, however limits the number of biological replicates that can be sequenced in similar conditions . barcoding of samples permits pooling of multiple replicates allowing for the use of shallow-end sequencing to study a biological system. due to the diminishment of the number of reads per sample, shallow-end sequencing can effectively be used to determine the fluctuations occurring in differentially expressed  transcripts across a larger array of conditions than typically studied  <cit> . it has been suggested that analyzing the top  <dig> transcripts can in fact cover over 80% of the biological information in an arabidopsis transcriptomic project  <cit> , and as little as  <dig>  reads per samples are required for accurate prediction of mrna fluctuations in human studies  <cit>  suggesting that shallow-end rnaseq can provide substantial information. in this study, shallow-end rnaseq was used to determine soybean responses to r. solani 24 h.p.i. and resulted in 3 m reads per treatment representing a total of  <dig>  expressed genes , with expressed genes defined as the transcript having a minimum of two reads per sample and detected in a minimum of  <dig> out of  <dig> biological replicates in one treatment  <cit> . reads aligning to the r. solani genome represented less than 2% of the total reads and as such were not analyzed further. low read counts is a common occurrence in dual plant-pathogen sequencing projects as typically the number of pathogen cells is much lower than those of the plant  <cit> .

a total of  <dig> de genes were detected between infected and mock-inoculated leaves based on traditional univariate statistical analyses . these results are similar to rnaseq analyses of other plant-pathogen interactions  <cit> . of the  <dig> de genes, 79% were up-regulated in response to infection, out of which 16% could only be detected in infected plants, possibly due to detection limits. enrichment tests of gene ontology  terms  <cit>  among the de genes revealed the functional differences of the de genes upon r. solani ag1-ia infection: a decrease in transcription of soybean genes functioning in photosynthesis was observed, whereas an increase in genes involved in secondary metabolism, redox reactions and carbohydrate metabolism was seen 24 h.p.i. .fig.  <dig> fluctuations in gene ontology terms applying univariate analyses. information on transcript data was obtained from the panther database 




quantitative real time-pcr  validated rnaseq results for genes involved in primary metabolism  and showed similar expression patterns of the transcripts compared to rnaseq. a general trend of up-regulation of transcripts was observed  implying an increased need for their products or downstream products. an exception was beta-glucosidase, whose abundance fluctuated . validation of randomly selected transcripts also confirmed the results of rnaseq data .table  <dig> fold change values of soybean genes affected by r. solani ag1-ia infection and involved in primary metabolism



agene annotations based on the soybase database


brnaseq fold change values based on pairwaise comparisons using the negative binomial test and an fdr correction < <dig>  using benjamini-hochberg multiple corrections  <cit> 


cqrt-pcr fold changes based on  <cit>  efficiencies and p values based on pairwise comparisons using student’s t test comparisons


dinf represents transcripts that were detected in infected samples, and not detected  in control samples

transcript changes were deemed statistically and biologically significant if p <  <dig>  for rnaseq or p <  <dig>  and fold changes were > <dig>  or <− <dig> 




metabolomics and transcriptomics integration
aiming to discover signatory genes and metabolites involved in soybean defense against rfb and to highlight functional links between them, data integration using pairwise correlations and o2pls was performed. pairwise correlation analysis revealed  <dig> very strong correlations  and an additional  <dig> strong correlations  between metabolites and transcripts . this large number of correlations results in challenging interpretation of which are the most biologically significant. as such, o2pls analysis was performed on both datasets to reduce the noise and number of dominant correlations allowing for more confident biological interpretation and predictions. o2pls identified  <dig> latent variables in the predictive dataset, with the transcript-predictive structures accounting for  <dig> % of the total variation in the transcript dataset, the metabolite-predictive structures accounting for  <dig> % of the total variation in the metabolite dataset, and a cumulated predictive power ) of  <dig> % . o2pls score plots of the combined transcriptomics-metabolomics dataset revealed a tight clustering of the two treatments , results similar to those observed when analyzing the datasets alone. with the significance threshold set at a confidence level of 99% or 90% for transcripts and metabolites, respectively, the identified loading coefficients thresholds were lower for the transcriptomics dataset than for the metabolomics dataset . based on loading coefficients, o2pls analysis detected a total of  <dig> significant transcripts in the first two latent variables , double the transcript number that was found in the univariate analysis, while a total of  <dig> substantially altered metabolite bins were observed .fig.  <dig> heatmap of pearson pairwise correlations between metabolites and transcripts. correlations were calculated between the  <dig> metabolite bins and the top  <dig> transcripts based on variable importance  values using o2pls analysis. blue indicates a strong positive correlation between metabolites and transcripts, while red indicates a strong negative correlation. refer to additional file 6: table s <dig> for metabolite and gene names


fig.  <dig> o2pls integration of soybean metabolites and transcripts in response to r. solani ag1-ia. o2pls integration performance overview plot , joint score plot  and loadings plot  of metabolites and transcripts involved in primary metabolism. all  <dig>  transcripts were used for model development and validation . the top  <dig> transcripts from primary metabolism based on o2pls variable importance > <dig> were chosen for correlations between 1h nmr and rnaseq integration for better visualization of trends between the two datasets . a overview of cumulative predictive and orthogonal variation explained by the first two variables for the transcripts ) and metabolites ), and the predictive power of the model ). b joint score plot of the transcript scores . c joint loadings plot from the transcript  and metabolite  loadings blocks of the top  <dig> transcripts and all metabolites. transcripts  and metabolites  represent individual transcript and metabolite loading values . variables located to the left of the y-axis represent transcripts and metabolites that decreased, while those on the right increased, compared to controls in response to r. solani disease progression. metabolite abbreviations: asn, asparagine; etoh, ethanol; fruc, fructose; gaba, γ-aminobutyrate; gln, glutamine; gluc, glucose; phe, phenylalanine; ser, serine; suc, succinate; sucr, sucrose; thr, threonine; tyr, tyrosine. transcript abbreviations: agp, alpha-glucanphosphorylase; bff, beta-fructofuranosidase; chla/b, chlorophyll a/b binding protein; per, peroxidase; pr <dig>  pathogenesis-related protein 4; thi, thiamine biosynthesis




as a proof-of-concept, and in order to better visualize the functional links  between the metabolome and transcriptome, a reduced dataset was created composed of transcripts and metabolites involved in soybean primary metabolism, similar to methods done elsewhere  <cit> . the selection of transcripts was based on their involvement in primary metabolism using go terms and o2pls variable importance  values above  <dig>  in total,  <dig> transcripts were selected , whereas all  <dig> bins of 1h nmr spectra were used. the reduced subset was then subjected to o2pls to improve the visualization of their correlations that were generated in the fully integrated analysis  using variable loadings . strong correlations could be seen between glucose and transcripts involved in photosynthesis , while negative correlations were observed between glucose and transcripts for thiamine biosynthesis  . of particular interest, were the correlations of alpha-glucan phosphorylase , a transcript involved in starch formation, with gaba, phenylalanine and tyrosine, all known for their roles in stress responses  <cit> . moderately strong correlations  between peroxidase  and beta-fructofuranosidase  with ethanol  were detected. their importance may have been over-looked as their pairwise correlation values were below < <dig>  and would not have been deemed significant . the exact biological interpretation of these correlations remains unclear, and whether these metabolites/transcripts can in fact be used as biomarkers for each other requires further validation under various growth and biological conditions.

univariate vs. multivariate comparisons
differences were observed between analyses of the datasets as stand-alone versus integrated with some transcripts or metabolites being identified as significant in one analytical method or both , results similar to those reported elsewhere  <cit> . this can be observed in fig.  <dig> with some differentially expressed transcripts and metabolites that are coordinately modulated in response to rfb using only traditional analyses, or using o2pls analysis . differences between univariate and multivariate analyses are not unexpected due to the methods by which the analyses calculate variation within the data: univariate analyses will calculate the variation between the two treatments, whereas o2pls methods will calculate the direction within the two datasets  that has the largest amount of variability  <cit> . despite the differences, similar trends were observed between the two methods .fig.  <dig> venn diagrams of altered transcripts and metabolites. overlap of differentially altered transcripts  and metabolites  between traditional and o2pls analyses




biological interpretation
metabolite fluctuations
different temporal shifts occurred in the majority of metabolites and de transcripts that were tightly associated suggesting that the metabolites are being utilized faster than they can be synthesized, or that their biosynthetic pathways are being shunted towards other products . exceptions were formate and ethanol whose associated transcripts were expressed, but not differentially in response to r. solani infection. formate is a known fungitoxin  <cit> , and a trending increase in its abundance at both time points may indicate an important role at later stages of infection. ethanol levels, but not transcripts encoding alcohol dehydrogenase , increased before the appearance of necrotic lesions  suggesting that ethanol may be a reliable disease biomarker.

to estimate the degree by which transcript changes and disease development occur, we selected arabidopsis plants with an adh loss-of-function. an increase in overall necrosis was observed in the mutants compared to controls  suggesting that alcohol dehydrogenase and ethanol may have a role in rfb resistance. consistent with our results, woody and herbaceous plants exposed to abiotic stress accumulated substantial levels of ethanol under aerobic conditions  <cit> . on the other hand, transcripts encoding soybean adh were present in the rnaseq data, but were not affected during r. solani ag1-ia infection  despite increases in the amount of ethanol produced during infection, suggesting that post-transcriptional or -translational modifications may play a role in ethanol production in soybean.fig.  <dig> role of alcohol dehydrogenase loss-of-function on r. solani ag1-ia infection in arabidopsis. generalized symptoms of rfb  and average percent infected area of leaves  in arabidopsis wild type  and mutant  plants  <dig> and 96 h post-inoculation. asterisks denote significant differences at p <  <dig>  using student’s t test comparisons




one may argue that ethanol presence in infected soybean leaves signals an anaerobic state or is fungal-derived. in our study, ethanol was also present in mock-inoculated leaf samples  where ample oxygen was available to the leaves. additionally, the levels of pathogen-derived metabolites were below the detection threshold or minimal when analyzing similar amounts of r. solani hyphae to those present on infected soybean leaves using 1h nmr . although the exact origin and mechanism by which ethanol and alcohol dehydrogenase were up-regulated are not fully understood, this study is the first to demonstrate that they may have a role in plant defense against necrotrophic pathogens. while adh activity has been reported to modulate the susceptibility of barely to the biotrophic obligate parasite blumeria graminis and may support biotrophy by maintaining glycolytic metabolism in pathogen-stressed barley  <cit> , this may not be the case with necrotrophic fungal pathogens such as r. solani. supporting evidence shows that plants have differential mechanisms to respond to different necrotrophic and biotrophic pathogens  <cit> . taken together, our study suggests that ethanol may have an important role in plant resistance to the necrotrophic fungal pathogen r. solani and may help modulate plant resistance to rfb.

transcript fluctuations
although a portion of the transcripts can be linked directly with metabolites in primary metabolic pathways, this was not the case for all transcripts. these include some pathogen-responsive genes involved in defense and stress responses , such as glutathione-s-transferase and glutathione-peroxidase, two well-established genes with antioxidant capacity  <cit> . interestingly, no up-regulation of ascorbate-related genes was observed, suggesting that glutathione was acting independently of the glutathione-ascorbate cycle  <cit>  or that increases in ascorbate can occur in the absence of an increase in its transcript abundance  <cit> . several soybean peroxidases were up-regulated in response to rfb. this was expected as plants exposed to stress up-regulate their overall peroxidase activity resulting in plant defense either passively by building up stronger cell walls or actively via production of ros molecules during the oxidative burst  <cit> .

many compounds have ros quenching capabilities in plants, such as thiamine, tocopherol and tocotrienol. thiamine was implicated in arabidopsis resistance to sclerotinia sclerotiorum, possibly by limiting the effects of oxalate suppression on ros signaling  <cit> . thiamine transcripts were up-regulated in response to r. solani infection , and whether this is a result of r. solani oxalate or is a response to the oxidative stress caused by necrosis is not clear and merits further investigation to determine its role in soybean defense and responses to necrotrophic pathogens. transcripts leading to the biosynthesis of tocopherol and tocotrienol  were up-regulated in response to infection . tocopherols have long been speculated to have an essential function in protecting photosynthetic organisms against photo-oxidative stress  <cit> . increased transcript abundance of genes involved in tocopherol and tocotrienol biosynthesis in response to r. solani infection may reflect lipid peroxidation, a common occurrence during plant-pathogen interactions  <cit> .

fluctuations in photosynthesis, glycolysis and the tca cycle in response to rfb
pathogen infection often leads to the development of chlorotic and necrotic areas, and decreases in photosynthesis transcript abundance and photosynthetic assimilate production  <cit> . down-regulation of transcripts involved in photosynthesis at 24 h.p.i.  was observed, implying a decrease in photosynthetic activities. this was paralleled by increases in transcript abundance of genes involved in starch and carbohydrate catabolism, as well as decreased levels of sucrose cleavage products  as early as 12 h.p.i. . this suggests either an increase in soybean energy demands, a typical plant stress response to disease  <cit> , or manipulation of the plant sugars by the pathogen to promote infection.

a common trend is observed for the rapid increase in levels of invertases  after plant infection by bacteria and fungi . similar to other necrotrophic pathogens, r. solani has faster growth on sucrose or other disaccharides as the carbohydrate source than when grown on their cleavage products  <cit> . therefore, from the plant’s point of view, it is advantageous to modulate sugar partitioning and limit sucrose availability, thus limiting r. solani growth. moreover, during infection invertase activity triggers plant defense responses such as induction of defense-related gene expression, callose deposition and reduction of photosynthesis or cell death  <cit> , and increases in invertase transcript abundance are often correlated with the role of hexoses as signaling molecules for defense gene activation  <cit> . beta-glucosidase, which degrades beta-glucan to glucose, and whose transcript abundance increased at the late infection stage, may have had an important role in modulating soybean glucose concentrations; however, we cannot rule out the possibility that it also may have had a role in the degradation of r. solani hyphae, as beta-glucan is a common component of hyphal cell walls  <cit> . how carbohydrates and their presence as mono- or di-saccharides influence soybean resistance to rfb and other pathogens, and how they affect microbial growth, requires further investigation.

during stress responses as a result of pathogen invasion, plant defense mechanisms display coordinated fluctuations of genes and metabolites involved in glycolysis and the tca cycle in an attempt to adapt to stress  <cit> . despite the increases in storage carbohydrate catabolic genes, the majority of genes involved in glycolysis and the tca cycle were not differentially expressed in response to rfb . several factors might help to explain this: 1) the timing of sampling  was not the optimal time point to detect transcriptional changes; 2) other biological factors such as post-transcriptional or post-translational modifications occurred  <cit> ; 3) sufficient energy sinks were available to combat the infection at this time point; or 4) the genes require more time for differential expression to be detected. homeostasis of metabolic pathways, particularly primary metabolic pathways, is essential for survival and the timing of induction or suppression of these pathways is most likely crucial for survival  <cit> .

fluctuations in amino acid biosynthesis in response to rfb
in response to infection, the strong demand to obtain carbon will likely shuttle amino acids into energy generating pathways such as the tca cycle  <cit> . it has been proposed that plants may mobilize some nitrogen sources away from infection sites to deprive pathogens of nutrients. this diversion leads to drastic changes in source-sink relationships  <cit> . shifts in amino acid concentrations with some being up-regulated and others down-regulated during early and late plant responses to r. solani infection are similar to what has been reported in other pathosystems  <cit> . in this study, amino acid fluctuations  could be grouped into: 1) those that were up-regulated  at both time points; 2) those that were down-regulated  at 24 h.p.i.; and 3) those that were up-regulated as early as 12 h.p.i. and then decreased at 24 h.p.i. . fungi derive amino acids from plants by recycling or via proteolysis  <cit> , and the different temporal fluctuations of amino acids observed in this study may indicate differential amino acid requirements for r. solani due to an inability to synthesize certain amino acids, different amino acid requirements during different infection stages , or differential amino acid requirements of the plant during defense responses.

in many higher plants, the nitrogen-rich amino acids asparagine and glutamine represent central intermediates in nitrogen as they contribute to nitrogen transport, and their encoding genes are up-regulated under biotic stresses  <cit> . asparagine along with proline, gaba and its precursor glutamate, and the non-polar amino acids phenylalanine and tyrosine, exhibited slight increases at the onset of fungal infection and decreases at the late infection stage, although levels of transcripts associated with their production  increased in abundance at the late infection stage . this may suggest that early on, the infection sites represent strong local metabolic sinks that drain nutrients from uninfected healthy regions, and as the infection becomes established different scenarios are favored: they are utilized downstream and the biosynthesis rate is slower than the consumption rate  <cit> , they are being utilized by r. solani, or r. solani is capable of manipulating its host’s metabolism for particular amino acid homeostasis  <cit> .

proline and gaba have been shown to be important amino acid signaling molecules during plant stress  <cit> . gaba is known to help support energy requirements via the gaba shunt pathway during times of high-energy requirements  <cit>  and high oxidative stress  <cit> . the decrease in both gaba and its precursor glutamate at the late infection stage coupled with the increase in antioxidant producing genes  discussed earlier indicate a state of high oxidative stress that could be overcome by shifting these resources through the gaba shunt pathway.

similarly, proline is a stress-related metabolite that has been shown to have a role in stabilizing and protecting proteins and membranes from cellular ros during fungal infection  <cit> . the oxidation of proline provides electrons for mitochondrial respiration resulting in increased energy supplies for the tca cycle  <cit> . the decrease in proline observed during the necrotic stage of infection may suggest an increase in energy requirements at this stage causing proline to be shunted towards the tca cycle, or an increased demand for ros signaling, a common response during plant-pathogen interactions  <cit> . glutamine and alanine concentrations increased during r. solani ag1-ia infection. similar findings were reported in rice infected with compatible but not incompatible magnoportha grisea strains  <cit> . alanine has also been linked to induction of programmed cell death in concord grape  cell cultures  <cit> . it is possible that successful penetration of the pathogen triggers an increase in alanine levels to promote cell death of the infected tissue, which r. solani then exploits to facilitate invasion.

regulation of primary metabolic pathways is crucial for soybean to maintain vital functions in addition to regulating soybean defense responses to rfb and possibly altering oxidative stress responses. the integrative analysis of transcript and metabolite profiling using o2pls provided a powerful tool to better understand gene-to-metabolite networks over a time course of r. solani infection of soybean by identifying: 1) significant transcripts and metabolites not deemed significant using traditional analytical approaches; 2) shared regulatory mechanisms through identification of joint systemic variation ; and 3) reducing the number of significant correlations to those with the most significant effect on the biological system of interest . through validation experiments, we demonstrated changes within selected major biochemical pathways during disease establishment, and consequently, the identification of correlative biomarkers for genetic improvement and breeding assisted programs. we strongly believe that one important approach to gain knowledge in plant-microbe interactions is to combine results from different types of analyses, as done here.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, analyses of large multi-omics datasets represent one of the major challenges towards the understanding of the molecular regulation of a biological system  <cit> . as integrated omics studies are expected to expand our understanding on the molecular regulation of biological systems, including cause-and-effect and identification of correlative biomarkers  <cit> , it will be important to compare different datasets using multiple analytical methods in order to avoid overlooking potentially important information.

