BACKGROUND
phosphine is used worldwide as a fumigant to control insect populations in commodities such as stored grains and grain products. phosphine kills insects rapidly at a relatively low cost, leaving minimal residues on treated products. the continued use of phosphine is of critical importance due to the regulated phase-out of the ozone-depleting fumigant methyl bromide. phosphine is toxic to all animals, and the food and agriculture organization of the united nations  <cit>  has established guidelines with recommended times and doses for treatment of stored product pests, depending on environmental conditions. phosphine is a strong reducing agent, and biological redox systems, particularly the mitochondrial electron transport chain, are likely targets in insects  <cit> . phosphine is not absorbed  under anoxic conditions  <cit> , and carbon dioxide can potentiate its toxicity  <cit> , which implies that phosphine targets respiration in insects.

most bulk grain in the united states is fumigated with phosphine because it is more economical than sampling and monitoring  <cit> . therefore, selection pressure for resistance to phosphine is strong in stored product pests. recent studies indicated a substantial increase in phosphine resistance over the past 21 years in major stored-wheat pests in the united states, with levels of resistance approaching those reported for stored-grain pest species in other countries  <cit> .

the first report of phosphine resistance in the red flour beetle, tribolium castaneum, was more than 40 years ago  <cit> . in that study, it was demonstrated that 10-fold resistance to phosphine could be selected in six generations from a population of t. castaneum. other studies have suggested that insects  with low carbon dioxide production display higher resistance to phosphine, suggesting that lower respiration rates reduce fumigant uptake in resistant insects  <cit> . a major phosphine resistance gene, dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase , was found to be mutated in phosphine-resistant t. castaneum and another stored product beetle, the lesser grain borer , as well as phosphine-resistant nematodes caenorhabditis elegans  <cit> . dld is a mitochondrial homodimer enzyme and participates in a number of key energy complexes, and thus is highly conserved among organisms.

in this study, we compared a phosphine-resistant and -susceptible population of t. castaneum, exposed or not to phosphine, by the differential transcript expression method rna-seq, using the sequenced genome of t. castaneum to facilitate data analysis. phosphine-resistant insects also were evaluated for resistance to another insecticide, deltamethrin. we found many statistically-significant differences in gene expression in resistant insects that suggest major changes in the mitochondria. the data indicate that rna-seq can be used to identify differential expression patterns in insecticide resistant insects associated with biological mechanisms, as well as individual variation in potential resistance genes within a population.

RESULTS
rna-seq analysis
to examine differential gene expression associated with phosphine-resistance in t. castaneum, we compared expression levels in a phosphine-resistant population from brazil, reported to have 164-fold resistance to phosphine and a lower respiration rate than susceptible insects  <cit> . interestingly, we found that resistance to phosphine in the brazilian strain had increased nearly 3-fold  since the previous bioassays were performed , possibly due to a genetic bottleneck during subculturing for this study. rna-seq was used to compare gene expression in this phosphine-resistant strain and a laboratory strain that was susceptible to phosphine, before and after exposure to sublethal phosphine doses/exposure times .

pairwise analysis was used to construct scatter plots demonstrating the relative expression of genes in untreated susceptible and resistant t. castaneum adults  and phosphine-treated susceptible and resistant adults . gene expression was also compared in phosphine-treated and untreated resistant insects , and phosphine-treated and untreated susceptible insects . plots of relative transcript expression were linear , and included genes that were statistically significant in the pairwise analysis , although many were below the cutoff threshold of rpkm <  <dig> . differences greater than 8-fold were indicated by white dots in the scatter graphs.

in the comparison of resistant to susceptible insects not exposed to phosphine , a gene encoding a hypothetical protein was significantly increased in expression  in resistant compared to susceptible insects . increased expression also was associated with genes encoding cytochrome p <dig>  9e <dig> . a gene encoding a glycine-rich protein was decreased in resistant insects  <dig> -fold compared to susceptible insects.

when resistant and susceptible insects were exposed to sublethal doses of phosphine, two additional cyp genes  were significantly increased in expression in resistant insects compared to susceptible . decreased expression in phosphine-exposed resistant insects was found in genes encoding an uncharacterized protein, pox-neuro, and anti-diruetic peptide .

in the comparisons of phosphine-exposed/not exposed for either resistant or susceptible insects, while there were significant differences in gene expression, all rpkm values were less than  <dig>  .

anova of differences in gene expression among all four treatment groups yielded  <dig> genes that were significant in the differentially-expressed  dataset . overall, there were a number of cyp and other genes involved in mitochondrial functions, as well as those related to carbohydrate, protease, and cuticle. in the following paragraphs, we examined more closely the most up- and down-regulated genes and possible correlations to responses to phosphine.table  <dig>  results of enrichment analysis  of go terms in the dataset of significantly de genes 


af: molecular function); p: biological process


b <cit> 



unfortunately, the most highly upregulated gene among all groups in the de dataset was the uncharacterized protein  found in the pairwise analysis ; this gene was  <dig> -fold increased in resistant compared to susceptible insects but decreased to 833-fold when exposed to phosphine, and contained a motif similar to duf <dig> transglycosylase . a gene encoding an alanine and glycine-rich protein was up-regulated mostly in phosphine-exposed resistant insects; these proteins are found in mammals and plants but their function is unknown. there were twelve significantly up-regulated cyp genes in phosphine-resistant insects, and phosphine exposure resulted in further increases in the expression of nine cyp genes . several genes encoding ugt were significantly up-regulated in resistant insects, although one encoding ugt-2b <dig> had low rpkm values . ugts serve a major role in the conjugation and subsequent elimination of potentially toxic xenobiotics and endogenous compounds, and ugt-2b <dig> is the isoform most responsible for glucuronidation of clinical drugs  <cit> . ugt enzymes are found in a number of metabolic pathways in t. castaneum, including cytochrome p <dig> systems involved in the metabolism of xenobiotics. some genes encoding enzymes active in mitochondria were increased in expression in resistant insects, and further increased when insects were exposed to phosphine, including one encoding peroxiredoxin- <dig>  which protects against mitochondrial dysfunction in mice  <cit> , and dihydrolipoyllysine-residue succinyltransferase  and associated enzyme dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase, another name for the major phosphine resistance gene dld  <cit> . up-regulated genes in resistant insects also were associated with the cuticle, including one encoding a gene similar to keratin-associated protein 19-3-like, which in arthropods promotes immobilization of invading microbes at injury sites  <cit> . genes encoding solute transporters were both up- and down-regulated in resistant insects .

several severely down-regulated genes in resistant insects encoded adfs, and while phosphine exposure increased adf expression in susceptible insects, expression was decreased further in resistant insects, suggesting increased water secretion . another gene, venom allergen  <dig>  was decreased in resistant insects regardless of phosphine exposure. the down-regulated group also included genes encoding proteins that function in cuticle, sugar transport, and mitochondria. a cathepsin b was downregulated in resistant insects, and this gene is expressed at low levels throughout the life stages of t. castaneum  and is likely a lysosomal enzyme that may activate caspase during mitochondrial stress. a gene encoding enolase, an enzyme involved in the penultimate step of glycolysis, was severely down-regulated in resistant insects. there were a number of genes with uncharacterized functions and without chromosome placement in the latest genome assembly  in the down-regulated group.

enrichment analysis indicated that go terms associated with metabolism  were significantly enriched in the de dataset . others that suggest association with mitochondrial functions, such as oxidation-reduction process , and oxidoreductase activity , were significantly enriched in the de dataset . in conjunction with oxidation/reduction reactions, genes encoding proteins that have iron binding , heme binding , and tetrapyrrole binding  properties also were enriched. as noted earlier, cyp genes were included in the enriched monooxygenase activity  category. genes encoding enzymes were also enriched . all go terms were over-represented in the dataset, and support the differential expression of genes involved in metabolic and respiration functions among resistant and susceptible insects.

dihydrolipoamide dehydrogenase  as a resistance gene
since dld is a phosphine resistance gene in t. castaneum  <cit>  and was increased in expression in resistant insects, we used rnaseq data to examine sequences for dld from phosphine-susceptible and -resistant insects. there was relatively good coverage of reads aligning to dld from qtc <dig>  in all four treatment groups , although depth of coverage was better in transcripts from the resistant insects in some regions. there have been multiple mutations noted in dld genes in phosphine-resistant insects and nematodes, but the only mutation that has been identified in a phosphine-resistant population of t. castaneum was g131s  <cit> . however, we did not find this mutation in predicted dld sequences from susceptible or resistant insects, either exposed or not to phosphine . we did find a difference in the predicted signal peptide region, r28g, in all sequences from susceptible insects compared to that of t. castaneum strain qtc <dig>  whether they were exposed to phosphine or not; this may represent a marker for this population . in the phosphine-resistant population, insects unexposed or exposed to phosphine had the polymorphism p45s in the n-terminal fad binding region of dld, found in 315/ <dig>  transcripts from the unexposed insects, and 352/ <dig>  transcripts from the phosphine-exposed insects . it is possible that this mutation is critical to survival of phosphine exposure, as mutations in this region were also found in other phosphine-resistant insects and nematodes  <cit> . for the remainder of the alignment, sequences from susceptible-exposed insects were orthologous to that of qtc <dig> . snps and indels presented uncertainty in alignments of the c-terminal region from transcripts of the susceptible unexposed, and resistant exposed/unexposed , so we were unable to detail mutations in other regions that may have affected dimerization or nadh binding. we noted a number of indels that resulted in premature stop codons near the beginning of the nadh binding site in transcripts from resistant insects, either exposed or not to phosphine. we also found a few regions in the qtc <dig> dld sequence that were different in the dld transcripts from resistant insects that may be useful in designing a diagnostic assay based on restriction digest analysis for resistance in field populations of t. castaneum .fig.  <dig> blastx of putative n-terminal dld consensus sequences predicted from transcripts from adult t. castaneum strains exposed or not to phosphine, with sequences from a the phosphine-susceptible strain and b phosphine-resistant strain; all were “queries” to qtc <dig> “subject” . differences between the phosphine-susceptible, - resistant, and qtc <dig> sequences are boxed. all letters are standard amino acid abbreviations, except x = unknown . the asterisk denotes the g131s phosphine-resistance mutation described in  <cit> 



increased cyp gene expression
cyps play important roles in the detoxification of xenobiotics, function as monooxygenases, and effectively oxidize organic substrates. since phosphine is a strong reducing agent, cyps may act antagonistically in biological systems. cyps can participate as terminal oxidases in electron transport chains, downstream of dld in the citric acid cycle. overall, the expression of  <dig> genes encoding cyp genes was increased in phosphine-resistant compared to - susceptible t. castaneum , with  <dig> differentially expressed more than 2-fold, and five that were significantly increased  under phosphine exposure . these genes were from clans  <dig>   <dig>  and mitochondrial, and many were cyp <dig> genes, located in a gene expansion group on chromosome  <dig> in t. castaneum, and cyp <dig>  located in another gene expansion group on chromosome  <dig> . cyp <dig> orthologs have been linked to insecticide resistance in anopheles gambiae , myzus persicae , and d. melanogaster , among other insects.fig.  <dig> differential expression of genes  encoding cyps among all four treatment group comparisons , using f-test  with those that are significant  marked with an asterisk



effect of deltamethrin on different t. castaneum populations
resistance to the contact pyrethroid insecticide deltamethrin in t. castaneum strain qtc <dig> was linked to increased cyp expression  <cit> . because of the increase in cyp transcripts in the brazilian phosphine-resistant strain, we predicted that this strain also would be resistant to deltamethrin, especially since this pyrethroid historically has been used heavily in stored grains in brazil. therefore, we exposed adults of qtc <dig> and the phosphine-susceptible and brazilian phosphine-resistant populations to concrete surfaces treated with deltamethrin at the equivalent of the highest label rate  <dig>  mg ai/cm <dig> . for the first three hours, adults from the brazilian phosphine-resistant population were able to withstand the pyrethroid exposure, exhibiting a survival profile intermediate between the susceptible strains and the pyrethroid-resistant qtc <dig>  however, after extended exposure , the brazilian insects were knocked-down and immoblized, whereas the qtc <dig> adults were upright and running in the exposure arena. the susceptible strain was not able to withstand 2 h deltamethrin exposure, reaching 100 % mortality within this period. the deltamethrin formulation currently used in brazil is synergized with pbo to avoid complications of insecticide resistance by increased cyp expression. the data suggest that deltamethrin exposure may have contributed to the retention of resistance genes in this phosphine-resistant population.fig.  <dig> survival of t. castaneum adults exposed to  <dig>  ai/cm <dig> deltamethrin on concrete surfaces. t. castaneum strains included phosphine-susceptible , phosphine-resistant , or qtc- <dig>  the survival curves were significantly different by cox regression analysis  and the median survival time  was estimated and indicated for the strains reaching at least 50 % mortality within the exposure period . the symbols indicate the observed mean values of five replicates 



discussion
phosphine resistance threatens the economical control of storage pests worldwide. it is critical to understand the molecular differences in resistant insect populations so that we can develop effective resistance management strategies. this study represents the first to examine phosphine resistance by gene expression analysis. unfortunately, many insect genes still have undiscovered functions, including some identified in this study as associated with phosphine exposure or resistance. while this limits our interpretation of the results, associations of these genes with phosphine response can help to further delineate their function in future studies.

regardless, we demonstrated significant changes in the expression of genes in a brazilian phosphine-resistant population of t. castaneum, either exposed or not to phosphine, compared to a phosphine-susceptible population. most notably, genes encoding cyps were increased and those encoding anti-diuretics peptides were decreased substantially in the phosphine resistant population, and in most cases the difference was enhanced with phosphine exposure. in addition, many genes associated with mitochondrial functions were differentially expressed, correlated with the likely mode of action of phosphine in insects.

while cyps are involved in many cases of insecticide resistance, they have not been associated with phosphine resistance. cyp6bq <dig>  located on the same linkage group as the most highly upregulated cyp6a1-like in our study , is expressed in the adult brain of t. castaneum and is responsible for deltamethrin resistance in t. castaneum strain qtc <dig>  <cit> . phosphine-stimulated expression of cyp genes has not been documented in other insects, and the functional relevance at this point can only be speculated. increased cyp activity in phosphine environments may be contributing to the detoxification of secondary metabolites due to phosphine exposure , or may be a result of uncoupling oxidase and monooxygenase reactions under increased levels of activated oxygen species.

several genes associated with anti-diuresis functions  were down-regulated in phosphine-resistant insects. adf proteins are anti-diuretic factors involved in osmoregulation; in beetles one adf is extremely potent at nanomolar concentrations and severely inhibits malphigian tubule secretion  <cit> . the data suggest that resistant insects have significantly decreased expression of anti-diuretic peptides compared to susceptible insects, especially when under phosphine stress. decreased expression of adfs when resistant insects are exposed to phosphine suggests that insects are decreasing water absorption. in fact, although controversial, forced diuresis has been indicated in mammals in response to complications associated with phosphine intoxication. it is intriguing to speculate that a similar process may be occurring in phosphine-resistant insects.

based on current information, phosphine likely directly affects the mitochondria and respiration in insects, and genes associated with the mitochondria were both increased and decreased in expression in phosphine-resistant insects. the resistant insect strain in this study has demonstrated a lower respiration rate based on reduced co <dig> production  <cit> . reduced energy metabolism was supported by the fact that the gene encoding enolase, the last enzyme in glycolysis, was severely repressed in resistant insects. the increased expression of ugt, cyps, and peroxiredoxin- <dig> in phosphine-exposed resistant insects may be responding to phosphine damage to the mitochondria through the elimination of reactive oxygen species . the down-regulation of lysosomal cathepsin b in resistant insects may be reducing an apoptotic response to mitochondrial damage through caspases.

dlst binds tightly to dld in the mitochondria, and both were increased in resistant insects, but slightly decreased in response to phosphine. examination of transcripts encoding dld from t. castaneum individuals suggested that snps and/or indels may contribute to mutations that result in phosphine resistance, with the p45s mutation in the n-terminal fad binding region likely linked to phosphine resistance in t. castaneum. dld is thus far the only major phosphine resistance gene reported in insects  <cit> , but it is unknown whether mutations can result in increased expression of the gene and/or other genes in resistant insects, such as observed in this study. good coverage of the dld sequences from transcripts in all four treatment groups suggested additional snps that could be useful in diagnostic assays.

consistent with the increase in cyp expression in the resistant insects, the brazilian phosphine-resistant insects were also resistant to deltamethrin. therefore, caution is warranted in modifying resistance management strategies to control insects in this region. importantly, these data suggest that t. castaneum populations likely have acquired multiple resistance genes in response to field applications of phosphine and pyrethroid insecticide treatments in the past.

CONCLUSIONS
the use of rna-seq is an effective tool to evaluate differences in gene expression in different populations. we have demonstrated that the technique provided statistically significant data regarding differences of gene expression in phosphine-resistant and -susceptible populations of t. castaneum. the data provides new information on the biological response of insects to phosphine, and offer hints toward the functional relevance of these genes in phosphine resistance. in addition to expression data, we were able to more fully characterize a gene that has been associated with resistance to phosphine in different organisms.

