BACKGROUND
living sloths, folivorans , comprise six south american species in the genera bradypus and choloepus . in contrast to the present-day low diversity of sloths, the fossil record reveals that this group was far more diverse in the past, with more than  <dig> known species distributed among eight families see . the pleistocene megafaunal extinction events  reduced sloth generic diversity by approximately 90%  <cit> . recent phylogenetic analyses reconstruct bradypodids and megalonychids as rather distantly related , implying that their superficially similar suspensory posture and locomotion have been derived convergently  <cit> , possibly as a result of constraints imposed by fossorial adaptations in early xenarthrans  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
cladogram of phylogenetic relationships among sloth genera based on recent phylogenetic analyses
[
 <dig> ,10
]. branch lengths are scaled to appearance events in the fossil record for each genus, with dark bars indicating the temporal ranges in the data set . note that most genera contain multiple species and the analyses presented here were performed at the species-level. families are indicated on the right. the topology of this cladogram was used in the compilation of taxonomic groups for the body size analysis presented here. silhouettes are modified from phylopic.org.



accurate reconstructions of character evolution are crucial for proper inference of underlying macroevolutionary processes. yet, extant taxa may not always be adequate proxies for modelling past evolutionary processes . in the case of sloths, the six living species are all folivorous, fully arboreal, with a very narrow range of body sizes; extant species mean body masses are between  <dig>  and  <dig>  kg . in contrast, extinct sloths exhibited a range of ecological diversity, with ground-dwelling, semi-arboreal, aquatic, and bipedal forms, as well as inferred diets that include grazers and even omnivores  <cit> . additionally, extinct sloths exhibited a wide range of body sizes unobserved in the recent, with species in the late paleogene  genus pseudoglyptodon estimated to have been approximately six kg  <cit> , whereas the late pleistocene species megatherium americanum reached as much as 3800 kg  <cit> . indeed, very large body sizes  are observed in at least four different sloth families .figure  <dig> 
body sizes for sloth species plotted at the fae for each species in additional file 1: table s <dig>  species are arranged in plots as a function of the taxonomic grouping used in the analyses. the reconstructed body size distributions, based on the all-taxa, weighted-average model, are presented in the box plot just before the fae of the oldest species in each group .



body mass is of broad significance in evolutionary biology, macroecology, and macroevolution, as it is fundamentally linked to many ecological and life-trait variables . thus, a better understanding of the evolution of this character will enhance our understanding of the evolution of life history and ecology among extant, as well as extinct, taxa . this is particularly important when considering currently depauperate clades that were once species-rich, such as sloths  <cit> , as the fossil record holds unique information that can markedly change and improve reconstructions of character evolution .

here, we reconstruct sloth body size evolution using body mass data for both living and fossil species, demonstrating the impact of fossil data on our understanding of body size evolution for this group. we model the evolution of sloth body size through time using a “family”-level phylogeny and a general time-variable model  <cit>  for analyzing continuous character evolution in clades lacking fully-resolved phylogenies. our model structure estimates ancestral average body mass and the variance of the ancestral body mass distribution, and allows either parameter to increase or decrease as a function of time. in addition, the model can be applied to an entire group, or to constituent subgroups based on phylogenies  <cit> . we calculated the log-likelihood fits of  <dig> models to the body size data for  <dig> species of extinct and extant sloths , and evaluated support among competing models using the finite sample akaike information criterion   <cit>  .

RESULTS
of the  <dig> models examined, eight fell within  <dig> lnl units of the optimal score, forming a well-constrained “credible set” of models . six of these models estimated separate model parameters for each of the four major sloth subgroups, while models # <dig> and # <dig> estimated a single trended random walk  model for a combined clade of megalonychidae, megatheriidae, and nothrotheriidae . the predominant reconstructed evolutionary modes in the credible set were trended random walks , followed by driven trends and brownian motion . stasis was reconstructed in only three cases . reconstructed modes were not evenly distributed across sloth subgroups. all but one of the best-supported models supported a trended walk for the basal group , with the other model supporting a driven trend. the hapalopidae + pelycodontidae grouping returned brownian motion in all but two model structures, with the remaining models supporting trended walks. megatheriidae + nothrotheriidae results were evenly split, with four models supporting a driven trend towards large body sizes, while the other four supported a trended random walk . finally, megalonychidae, which includes the modern two-toed sloths, showed varied results, with the only observed reconstructions of evolutionary stasis occurring in this clade.

we calculated model-averaged parameter estimates  <cit>  for the credible set of  <dig> models . the model-averaged estimates for the mean drift parameter  and the variance inflation term  vary greatly among the four groups, reflecting different inferred modes of body size evolution. the basal group displayed high reconstructed values for the mean drift parameter , emphasizing a pronounced trend to larger body sizes. the inferred mean body size increase over the observed range of this group is approximately  <dig>  kg/million year . the model-averaged estimate of β was also high, indicating a trend to increased variance.table  <dig> 
model-averaged parameter estimates for sloth body size


model-averaged parameter estimates
all taxa included
extant taxa excluded

taxonomic subgroup
μ0
l. 2lnl ci
est.
u. 2lnl ci
σ0
l. 2lnl ci
est.
u. 2lnl ci
α
l. 2lnl ci
est.
u. 2lnl ci
β
l. 2lnl ci
est.
u. 2lnl ci
parameter estimates based on all taxa in the additional file 1: table s <dig> with associated model-averaged 2lnl ci’s are given for each parameter. in addition, model-averaged estimates for parameters from the analysis excluding extant taxa  are given.



both of the linear drift parameters were slightly negative, with ci’s excluding zero, for the hapalopidae + pelycodontidae group in the model-averaged estimates , indicating decrease in mean body size and reduced variance through time for this group, although the absolute value of these terms was quite low. thus, although stasis was not supported for this group, the model-averaged parameters do not indicate large changes in the body size distribution through time for hapalopidae + pelycodontidae .

the model-averaged estimate for α for megatheriidae + nothrotheriidae was strongly positive , indicating a pronounced trend to increased size in this group, with an inferred increase in mean body mass of 129 kg/my  for this clade. estimates for β were generally low, although positive. both α and β were low, but also positive, for the megalonychidae, with an inferred increase in body size of about  <dig>  kg/my  across its range.

despite the coarse phylogenetic resolution currently available for fossil sloths, the combination of fossil and extant taxa into a single analysis has permitted reconstruction of an interesting and surprisingly complex pattern of body size evolution. a single set of rate parameters cannot describe the evolution of body size in this clade, and reconstructing these patterns would not have been possible absent data from the fossil record. our analysis support trended walks as the predominant model of sloth body size evolution, with driven trends and random walks receiving some support as well. all four sloth subgroups were separately parameterized in  <dig> of the  <dig> best-supported models, reflecting distinct body size distributions for each group. moreover, each clade is reconstructed with markedly difference ancestral body masses  that increase from earlier to later diverging groups, demonstrating a general trend towards larger body size through their evolution.

previous studies of mammal body size evolution focusing only on extant taxa have reconstructed small-bodied ancestral body sizes for sloths, with a low variances  <cit> , which is not surprising given the observed body size distribution in extant sloths. the problem is that, in the particular case of sloths, the extant sample represents such a minor fraction of their evolutionary diversity, both taxonomically and morphologically, that inferences drawn from living taxa are unlikely to accurately reflect true evolutionary processes. indeed, inferences based on a depauperate clade of small-bodied folivores would be hard-pressed to reconstruct anything along the lines of giant megatheriid ground sloths  <cit> . this issue is clearly reflected in the ancestral body mass estimates for all of the sub-groups when fossil taxa are incorporated in the analysis .

to estimate the effect of the anomalous extant sloths on reconstructions of evolutionary trends in this clade, we reanalysed the dataset excluding the two genera of extant sloths. here, only two models were strongly supported , and the model-averaged results were largely similar for the two groups with no extant membership . however, model-averaged estimates of α and β for megalonychidae indicated a substantial trended random walk to larger body size with larger variance for this clade. estimates for both parameters were approximately four times greater than those estimated when including extant choloepus and fall outside the estimated cis for both paramters . thus, not only would an analysis of the extant taxa alone provide an oversimplification of sloth body size evolution, but extant sloths appear to actively obscure an otherwise strong signal in the fossil record.

the ability of fossil data to improve inferences of character evolution is a function of the amount of the data the fossil record can bring to bear on the reconstructions. while sloths were more diverse in the past than they are today, sloths have never been a highly speciose clade. the available sample size, even incorporating fossil data is somewhat small . more specifically, it is important to note that the method we employ here is unable to resolve finer scale trends within individual lineages, and more complex processes of body size evolution may be masked by a lack of phylogenetic resolution, low sample size, and the resulting reduction in resolving power, particularly for clades such as megalonychidae. for example, the sole extant megalonychid genus, choloepus, is the smallest megalonychid taxon , nested within a clade with a mean body mass of 236 kg and a reconstructed ancestral body mass of 50 kg. it is therefore almost certain that an isolated shift to smaller body size occurred in within megalonychids, but we currently lack the fossil data to resolve this trend.

another caveat of this method is that it is reliant on a priori groupings. for example, the extant genus bradypus is one of the earliest-diverging lineages in the phylogeny   <cit>  and is not itself nested within a large-bodied clade. it is possible that the bradypodids diverged from other sloths prior to the onset of the trended walk towards larger body size that is reconstructed for the basal group in which it was included, and is therefore not part of this larger pattern. if we were to group bradypodidae and pseudoglyptodontidae in a basal group apart from the mylodontidae, this would result in a partition of six species in two genera: one genus  from > <dig> mya and one recent genus . this very large gap between essentially two data points will almost inevitably resolve as a trended walk, simply as an artefact of the temporal distance between the genera, rather than a real evolutionary trend. in an attempt to bridge the  <dig> million year gap between these families, we included mylodontidae, a speciose family of medium- to large-bodied sloths spanning nearly the entire temporal gap between pseudoglyptodontids and bradypodids. however, it is possible that the reconstruction of a trended body size increase in the basal group is actually a punctuated event across the small-to-large gap between pseudoglyptodontids and bradypodids on the one hand and mylodontids on the other.

if we analyse mylodontidae on its own, we reconstruct a strong positive trend in mean body size, comparable to that reconstructed for the entire basal group: the model-averaged estimate for α was  <dig>  for mylodontidae, as compared to  <dig>  for the basal group in table  <dig>  however, reconstructed β for mylodontidae alone was − <dig> , suggesting a variance decrease through time in this large-bodied clade when analysed separately. similarly, ancestral mass reconstructions for the basal group combine the small-bodied bradypodidae and pseudoglyptodontidae  with the much larger mylodontidae . as such, the reconstructed ancestral mass of approximately 66 kg  for the basal group seems rather large, in light of the branching order of the cladogram . analysing mylodontidae to the exclusion of the small bodied basal clades produces estimates of the ancestral mean body mass more in accord with observed masses in each group . as such, there was likely an increase in body size along the branch between bradypodids + pseudoglyptodontids and mylodontids. whether this was a punctuated event or a trend is ambiguous given the current data, but we can be confident of a trend of increasing body size within the mylodontidae, and that this is not an artefact of our a priori grouping.

CONCLUSIONS
despite these caveats, which stem from long temporal gaps in the fossil record of some sloth groups  and the lack of a fully resolved phylogenetic tree for living and extinct sloths, our analysis greatly expands the reconstructions of the evolutionary processes that led to gigantism in multiple sloths clades. all but two of the top models estimated parameters separately for the maximum number of sloth subgroups, and those that did not combined only two of the sub-groups. this points to the ability of even modest amounts of fossil data to uncover hidden complexity in character evolution for groups such as sloths, see also  <cit> . rather than the long-term stasis reconstructed from extant representatives, sloth body size evolution was governed predominantly by directional trends towards enormous body sizes that are difficult to infer from modern taxa.

a great deal of debate has centred on the importance of fossil data to accurate analysis of macroevolutionary patterns, and recent studies have demonstrated that excluding extinct taxa can result in misleading reconstructions of diversity dynamics  and trait evolution . this issue can be particularly problematic for clades that were previously diverse, but are presently species-poor, such as tuataras, hyaenas, or sloths. one recently-described method  <cit>  for including data from fossil representatives as node priors into analyses that predominantly sample extant taxa presents a promising avenue for circumventing issues of misleading patterns among extant taxa, as well as issues of poor phylogenetic resolution and patchiness in data coverage for many fossil groups. applying such an approach to a clade with as few living relatives as extant sloths will likely prove more challenging than for groups with more balanced distributions of living and extinct species, but future work should expand upon these approaches to take advantage of the strengths of the extant record , as well as the fossil record .

