BACKGROUND
the availability of genome sequences from several model organisms, including humans, and of high-throughput technologies to study gene function is dramatically changing the approach to biological problems. in particular, the consolidated reductionist gene-by-gene strategy is being replaced by a 'modular approach', in which several genes are studied simultaneously to gather a more comprehensive picture of the many different cellular processes  <cit> : in living organisms, the majority of gene products are part of intricate molecular circuits, composed of physical, functional and regulatory interactions. in higher eukaryotes, the study of gene function is further complicated by the alternative use of transcriptional units, frequently resulting in the production of proteins with different or even antagonistic activities from the same genes  <cit> .

it is well recognized that one of the most important and widespread mechanisms used by cells to regulate functional modules is the coordinate transcriptional and/or post-transcriptional modulation of mrna levels of the interacting genes. therefore, dna microarrays represent a fundamental tool to unravel biological complexity on a genome-wide scale. information concerning the expression of thousands of genes, and also of different transcripts from the same gene, can be obtained in a single experiment, and the relationships among gene expression patterns can be studied systematically  <cit> . the extensive use of this technology by hundreds laboratories has resulted in the production of an enormous amount of data, many of which have been deposited in public databases  <cit> .

besides being useful to other researchers to confirm the published results, the deposited datasets can be used as a substrate for new analysis, aimed at discovering functional modules by searching for related expression profiles. recent studies have shown that, if the expression of two or more genes is consistently related throughout many independent microarray datasets, the genes display a significant degree of functional similarity  <cit> . however, if this approach were applied to predict physical and functional relationships, a very high number of false positives would still be expected. a first method that can be used to reduce the number of false positives is to consider only co-expression links that are consistent among many different experimental datasets  <cit> . nevertheless, even when the co-expression of two genes is reproducibly observed under a certain number of experimental conditions, this does not imply necessarily that they are functionally related. for instance, extensive meta analysis of microarray data across different species has revealed that neighboring genes are likely to be co-expressed, even though they are not functionally related in any obvious manner  <cit> .

phylogenetic conservation has been recently proposed as a very strong criterion to identify functionally relevant co-expression links among genes  <cit> . significant co-expression of two or more orthologous genes across many species is very likely due to selective advantages, strongly suggesting a functional relation. in fact, the comparison of data across species as distant as homo sapiens, saccharomyces cerevisiae, drosophila melanogaster and caenorhabditis elegans was very effective in identifying new genes involved in core biological functions  <cit> . although extremely specific, this multi-species approach would be unable to identify the relationships among genes involved in more specialized biological processes.

since regulatory regions diverge much more rapidly than coding sequences  <cit> , a similar approach would be predicted to succeed even when comparing expression patterns in more closely related species, such as mice and humans. in this case, the possible loss of specificity would be strongly compensated by the increased sensitivity in the identification of functional links related to mammalian-specific gene modules. this possibility has not been so far explored.

additionally, when using microarray data to establish significant correlations among gene expression profiles, almost invariably the information obtained with probes covering different gene portions is averaged  <cit> . though useful in many cases to reduce the experimental noise, this procedure could result in a significant loss of information in the case of genes expressing different isoforms with distinct expression patterns  <cit> : on one hand the isoform-specific expression profiles would not be detected; on the other hand, the average expression profile would be artificial and non-informative.

in this study we describe cloe  a new data mining method for the identification of transcripts showing evolutionary conserved co-expression in cdna microarray datasets. this approach is based on the pairwise comparison of data from two species. the predictive capability of the method was proved by comparing human with mouse data. our results show that cloe is a valuable tool for biologists that can be used to identify putative partners for genes of interest and/or to predict some of their functional properties.

RESULTS
the top percentiles of expression similarity ranked lists obtained with human-mouse orthologous ests pairs are strongly enriched of orthologous ests
the aim of our method is to use the available microarray expression data to identify high- confidence putative partners for genes of interest.

the basic assumption is that, if two or more genes are part of a functional module, conserved between two species, they will be likely co-expressed in both species. in contrast, if the co-expression of two genes in one species has no functional meaning, it should not be conserved in the other.

a flow chart of the method is given in figure  <dig>  in summary, after finding representative est clones for the gene of interest in cdna microarray datasets of both species, we order all the ests in each dataset according to similarity of their expression pattern with that of the chosen ests. we then extract the orthologous pairs found in a given top percentage of the ranked lists. moreover, to obtain a functional characterization of the identified putative partners, we analyze the co-expressed orthologous pairs for overrepresentation of gene ontology  keywords  <cit> .

although in principle our method could be applied to every pair of organisms for which cdna microarray data are available, we decided to compare the human and mouse datasets contained in the stanford microarray database   <cit>  . the first reason for doing so is that this comparison is particularly relevant in the perspective of identifying mammalian-specific gene modules. the second is that, considering the widely different number of experiments and the relatively short phylogenetic distance between the two species, this represents a particularly severe test.

as a first proof of the method's effectiveness, and in order to empirically determine a reasonable default cutoff for obtaining the final list of candidates, we analyzed whether genes with the highest ranks in the single organism lists are actually enriched of orthologous sequences. to this aim, we randomly chose  <dig> orthologous gene pairs represented in both the human and mouse datasets and selected, for each one, the most representative est . we then generated the respective ranked lists, subdivided them in 1% rank intervals and analyzed the number of orthologous pairs in corresponding rank intervals. as a control, we performed the same analysis on an equal number of randomly chosen  human-mouse est pairs. the analysis was repeated three times with essentially identical results.

as shown in figure  <dig>  compared to the control, a strong average enrichment of orthologous pairs was observed in the top 1% rank interval . the difference was still very significant in the 2% rank interval, even though with a much higher p value , but was not detectable below that threshold. interestingly, a slight enrichment was also observed in the last rank interval . the latter observation is consistent with the previously noted fact that negative correlations tend to be less common and significant than positive correlations  <cit> . based on these results, we chose a top 1% cutoff for all the following analysis.

predictive value of cloe compared to single organisms and multiple species co-expression analysis
we next investigated the effectiveness of our approach, by comparing it to single and multiple organisms co-expression analysis. to address this point, we analyzed the ability of the three methods to predict known physical and functional interactions among mammalian proteins. protein-protein complexes have begun to be determined on a genome-wide scale only for saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> , drosophila melanogaster  <cit>  and caenorhabditis elegans  <cit> , but no comparable datasets have been so far published for mammalians, making it impossible to perform a systematic comparison. therefore, we focused on three supramolecular structures, which have been analyzed by different proteomic strategies at a high level of detail: the centrosome  <cit>  , the post-synaptic density  <cit>   and the tnf-alpha/nfkb signalosome  <cit>  . for the single organism and cloe approaches, the analysis was restricted to proteins represented in the smd by at least one human and one murine est probe. these corresponded to  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> ests pairs, respectively, covering on average 66% of the proteins found in these complexes. in contrast, only 37% of these genes were represented in the multiple species network, thus confirming that the previous two methods can be applied to a number of genes much higher than the latter.

the average number of candidates produced by cloe for each analyzed protein was approximately  <dig>  which represents a strong reduction if compared to the single organism approach . on the other hand, the average percentage of cloe links that correspond to a documented protein-protein interaction was  <dig>  %, i.e. approximately  <dig> times higher than that obtained with the single organism method . significantly, the predictive value of human-mouse cloe was very similar to that obtained by the multiple species co-expression network .

since considering only the proteomically-identified interactions could lead to a strong underestimation of the positive results, as low affinity and purely functional interactions would be completely excluded, we decided to evaluate the predictive power of the three different methods respect to a less stringent functional index. to this aim, we first determined which go keywords represent the best annotation of the three complexes, by identifying the ones that are significantly overrepresented in the annotation of the respective proteins. then, every predicted candidate partner obtained with the three methods for all analyzed proteins was considered as a true positive if it is annotated to at least one of the overrepresented keywords of the corresponding complex. the results of this analysis are summarized in table  <dig> 

interestingly, even though also in this case our approach and the multiple species comparison gave, on average, a higher percentage of compatible predictions, this was not dramatically different from the single-organism method. these results strongly suggest that, compared to the single organism approach, the highly reduced number of candidate partners produced by multiple organism co-expression analysis and cloe is strongly enriched of genes characterized by more stringent functional relationships.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that cloe represents a very flexible and effective data mining approach to infer a list of putative partners and the potential functions for genes of interest. it can be easily used for meta-analysis of cdna microarray experiments characterized by very heterogeneous coverage, producing significant results even when data from two species as close as mouse and human are analyzed. compared to single organisms co-expression analysis, it strongly reduces the number of potential partners for genes of interest, producing a list of targets that is highly enriched in physically interacting proteins. on the other hand, compared to multiple species co-expression analysis, it retains a comparable specificity, but can find candidate partners for a greater number of genes. since the number of candidate partners obtained by this analysis is, on average, in the range of standard experimental validation techniques, we believe cloe represents a useful tool for the exploration of gene function.

