BACKGROUND
two recent reports  <cit>  characterized the strong association of a number of single nucleotide polymorphisms  in intron  <dig> of the human fto gene with an increased risk of obesity, characterized by an increase in body max index due to fat mass rather than lean mass that is seen in children as early as age seven  <cit> .

however, the mechanisms by which this genetic variability relates to obesity remain obscure. these publications indicate that the function of fto is unknown  <cit>  and that its protein has no identified structural domain or link to other proteins that could be used to predict its function  <cit> . knowledge of the function of fto is crucial to guide the search for a mechanism relating this gene to obesity.

here we report evidence obtained by computational analysis indicating that the protein coded by fto is a member of the non-heme dioxygenase - and 2-oxoglutarate-dependent dioxygenases) superfamily.

RESULTS
in the course of the computational characterization of the fto family  we identified sequences homologous to human fto in different eukaryote groups including vertebrates , green algae  and diatoms  .

1manually assembled ests from ncbi  <cit>  and homologous sequences were used in order to produce accurate gene predictions supported by homology information.

2secondary structure prediction using phd  <cit> .

using sequence profiles of the n-terminal conserved region of the fto family  members of the non-heme dioxygenase family were identified. additionally, the secondary structure predictions of the fto family showed high similarity with the known structures of alkb, a member of the non-heme dioxygenase family  <cit> . we were not able to find significant homology in the c-terminal of the fto family to other genes.

to investigate if fold recognition analysis would generate supporting results, we submitted the fto n-terminal region as a query to an independent fold assignment system based on profile-profile comparisons . the profiles generated for the human and e. coli alkb proteins  matched the fto n-terminal region with an e-value of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> and  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  respectively  despite their low level of sequence identity to the human fto protein . the next match corresponded to the hypothetical protein tm <dig> from thermotoga maritima, however it was considered unreliable given its short length  and high e-value .

given the e-values of the hmmer searches, the reliability of secondary structure predictions, and the fold assignment results, we are confident that the proteins of the fto family  are members of the non-heme dioxygenase superfamily.

proteins of this superfamily catalyze different oxidative reactions on multiple substrates producing varied biological effects  <cit>  and are characterized by a number of conserved amino acids involved in the binding of iron and 2-oxoglutarate . we found these amino acids in human fto and in its homologs , suggesting that 2-oxoglutarate and iron are essential for the normal function of the fto protein.

the fto family is not a unique case as other families of the non-heme dioxygenase superfamily are also very divergent and their detection required non-trivial computational analysis  <cit> . due to the divergence of the fto family from already known non-heme dioxygenases, we were unable to predict the target of the family's catalytic action.

the ubiquitous expression of fto throughout many human tissues  <cit>  indicates that it has an important function. the phylogenetic distribution of fto homologs  suggests that this gene appeared during the evolution of vertebrates. intriguingly, fto homologs can be found in green algae ostreococcus and diatoms, whereas they are apparently absent in insects, worms and fungi . the most parsimonious explanation of this fact is the existence of independent events of horizontal gene transfer from vertebrates to protists. horizontal gene transfer has previously been related to the evolution of several eukaryotic regulatory systems that function in development, differentiation and apoptosis  <cit> . concisely, horizontal transfer of fto indicates that the fto protein has a function that confers a selective advantage but that it is not indispensable, which agrees with a possible regulatory role.

for comparison, the hypoxia-inducible factor , a known member of the non-heme dioxygenase family, also has a wide phylogenetic distribution  and is ubiquitously expressed in all human tissues. hif acts as a sensor of oxygen level and affects the expression of over one hundred genes  <cit> . this molecule performs its activity by shuttling between the cytoplasm in normoxic conditions and the nucleus in hypoxic conditions  <cit> .

to investigate if fto could be acting in a similar manner, we studied its sequence using an algorithm for prediction of protein cellular localization . the results suggested with similar scores a cytoplasmic and a nuclear-cytoplasmic localization for this protein. this is consistent with human fto's possible function as a metabolic sensor and nuclear effector.

the fto human gene product has a predicted molecular mass of  <dig> kda. with that mass it would need a nuclear localization signal   <cit>  in order to act in the nucleus. analysis of fto's sequence using an algorithm that includes the prediction of nls  suggested a  <dig> amino acid long bipartite nls from positions  <dig> to  <dig>  noted previously  <cit>  but not experimentally verified. further analysis of the family indicated that this region stands as a k/r rich region in comparison to the rest of the sequence, and that it is located in an n-terminal extension that is conserved in close human homologs from fish to mammals but not in the other fto homologues we found in algae or diatomea.

in light of these computational results we hypothesize that fto is a sensor of the cell's metabolic state and when dysfunctional can result in an obese phenotype. we identify the n-terminal of human fto as having a high likelihood of determining its cellular localization, which could be verified by mutational analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
here we have provided valuable information about fto by indicating its possible catalytic function, and we have pointed to the amino acids involved in cofactor  and co-substrate  binding in human fto as well as in its homologous proteins in other organisms, which could be used as models for the study of the human disease. this insight should help to guide experiments to clarify the mechanisms by which fto relates to obesity and to accelerate the discovery of novel molecular therapies for this condition.

