BACKGROUND
searching for new therapies against cancer is of great importance to human health. recent therapeutic interventions target various aspects of cancer growth and distant metastasis. the advancement in knowledge of the importance of angiogenesis to tumor progression and metastasis has driven the development of anti-angiogenic therapies for cancer treatment. the concept of anti-angiogenic therapy began more than 30 years ago, when judah folkman demonstrated that factors released by tumors mediate angiogenesis  <cit> . angiogenesis is a necessary step for tumor growth beyond 1–2 mm, as well as for the development of metastasis  <cit> .

vegf, secreted by tumors, was first discovered in  <dig> and was later shown to play a crucial role in cancer initiation, progression and angiogenesis stimulation  <cit> . since then, therapeutic agents that target vegf have been developed and tested. it has been shown that an anti-vegf antibody can reduce the blood vessel density in a given microscopic area in a tumor, termed the microvessel density, and inhibit the growth of some tumors in nude mice  <cit> . also, bevacizumab , which is a humanized monoclonal antibody that binds vegf, has been approved for the treatment of cancer. however, these therapeutic antibodies have serious practical limitations  <cit> , including obstacles in production. in addition, antibiotictherapy is expensive and requires repeated administration over a long period of time.

mimotopes are small peptides that structurally mimic a given antibody-binding site of an epitope and can be recognised by the immune system  <cit> . active immunization using mimotopes induces antibodies to recognize the mimicked epitope. becuase mimotopes can produce ongoing immune responses  <cit> , avoid repeated administration, provide affordable medicines, and lead to broader patient acceptance and compliance, they may be a promising next step in drug development. mimotopes can be isolated from phage display peptide libraries  <cit>  and have been shown to drive active immune responses towards the original antigen, thus leading to effective immunity. they are usually used in the development of vaccines against many kinds of diseases  <cit> . li reported that mimotopes induced the production of protective antibodies, and consequently, became candidates for the development of potential vaccines  <cit> .

in this study, we investigated alternative anti-angiogenic therapies and exploited phage display technology to identify the peptides that can mimic the natural vegf epitope. the phd.-12™ phage display peptide library was immunoscreened and the selected phage plaques were analyzed. the mimotopes were used to immunize mice and the immune responses for the phagotopes were evaluated.

RESULTS
biopanning and screening
a library of random  <dig> mer peptides was screened with avastin. as the first indicator of successful biopanning, an increase of phage titers during rounds of panning was observed. the phage titer increased from  <dig>  ×  <dig> plaque forming units /μl  to  <dig>  ×  <dig> pfu/μl  and finally to  <dig>  ×  <dig> pfu/μl . a total of  <dig> phage plaques were randomly chosen for colony screening after three successive rounds of biopanning. among them,  <dig> phage plaques with the highest affinity with avastin, but not with control or the blocking protein , were found and amplified. all candidates showed comparable binding intensities. the ssdna from these  <dig> phage plaques was sequenced and two mimotope candidates  were specifically recognized by the selecting antibody, avastin. the dhtlytpyhthp insert was the sequence most frequently found, indicating high reactivity of the corresponding peptide with the avastin paratope. the nhfgkfldalag sequence was also deduced from the sequencing result. the positive phage candidates containing these two mimotopes were specifically recognized by avastin, but not by control antibodies or bsa. moreover, avastin did not react with the 12-mer peptide control phage .

binding of avastin to the peptide displayed on phages
to determine whether the peptide still has the ability to bind to avastin upon removal from the phage, dhtlytpyhthp , the most frequently found in positive phage plaques, was chemically synthesized. the mimotope 12p was specifically recognized by avastin only . in addition, a dose-dependent increase in the binding of 12p to avastin was observed viaelisa . further experiments revealed that vegf can compete with 12p to bind to avastin .

association of mimotope conjugates with avastin
dot blot assay was performed to investigate the specific recognition of the synthetic mimotope constructs by avastin. the antigen 12p-klh was associated with avastin , but not control peptide-klh and klh . as shown in figure 2d, dhtlytpyhthp-klh was the only one of the three klh conjugates that was specifically recognized by avastin.

binding of serum from vaccinated mice to vegf protein
in this assay, 12p-klh, control peptide-klh and klh immunogenicity was evaluated in balb/c mice. all 12p-klh-immunized mice developed high anti-mimotope titers , indicating successful immunization in these mice. the pre-immune serum, serum after immunization of  <dig> groups were collected and purified for further experiment. the antiserum and purified antibody from 12p-klh-immunized mice recognized the recombinant vegf protein . furthermore, the purified antibody from 12p-klh immunized mice could block vegf binding with vefgr .

antiserum inhibited the proliferation and migration of human umbilical vein endothelial cells
we further assessed the effect of anti-12p-klh antibodies on the apoptosis of vascular endothelial cells. methyl thiazolyl tetrazolium  analysis showed that the purified antibody from 12p-klh immunized mice inhibited the proliferation of huvecs. this effect was blocked by the 12p peptide . tube formation was also decreased by the purified antibody from 12p-klh immunized mice. consistent with the above result, 12p peptide abolished the inhibition of tube formation effect of anti-12p-klh . migration assay results showed that the migrated cells were 297 ±  <dig>  , 288 ±  <dig>  , 153 ±  <dig>  , 266 ±  <dig>   and 72 ±  <dig>  , respectively . the mobility of the huvecs was significantly lower in the anti-12p-klh and avastin groups compared to the other three groups.

discussion
the phage-displayed technique is a useful tool in selecting small peptides that mimic antigens. peptide mimotopes can bind to antibodies which are raised against native structures. the strategy of using obtained peptide mimics  as low molecular weight substitutes of the natural antigen for active immunization could potentially elicit specific antibodies and result in the induction of long-lasting humoral immune responses. in the case of mimotope immunization, several studies have shown effective responses in vivo  <cit> . importantly, the mimotopes are able to replace the original epitopes for vaccine development  <cit> . furthermore, active immune responses induced by phage-displayed mimotopes have been verified in many diseases  <cit> . mimotopes can potentially serve as lead compounds in the development of low molecular weight substitutes of the template protein for use in drug and vaccine design  <cit> . this may be an effective strategy to overcome the serious practical limitations of the therapeutic monoclonal antibodies, e.g. avastin.

in this study, a library of random  <dig> mer peptides was used to identify the vegf epitope  using avastin as a selector molecule. after three rounds of biopanning, two amino acid sequences were deduced from these phage plaques. we isolated two peptide mimics  of the epitope that were specifically recognized by the avastin mab. we aligned the mimotope sequences and did not observe any homology between the two mimotopes and the known amino acid sequence of vegf. many researchers have demonstrated similar results to ours. one reason for the disparity between the two mimotopes and vegf might be that the epitopes that are recognized by avastin could be a discontinuous amino acid sequence due to the folding of peptides, thus forming a conformational epitope  <cit> . mimopro is a new graph-based mapping method for epitope prediction using affinity-selected peptides derived from phage display experiments and is freely accessible through the mimopro server  <cit> . we used mimopro to analyze the two newly isolated peptide mimics, as well as mimotope m074_d <dig>  <cit> . as shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  the mimotope 12p  had the highest score among the three, suggesting that 12p shares the most similar structure with vegf.

to demonstrate the affinity between the insert sequences displayed on positive phage plaques and avastin, the results of colony screening were confirmed by elisa. 12p was specifically recognized by the selecting antibody avastin, but not by the control antibody or bsa. in addition, the binding of 12p to avastin was observed in a dose-dependent manner. most importantly, vegf could compete with 12p in binding to avastin.

due to immune tolerance, the use of a natural epitope peptide alone is insufficient for inducing an immune reaction  <cit> . therefore, we conjugated the 12p peptide to klh to form the antigen. the conjugate vaccine proteins were then applied for dot blot analysis. we found that 12p-klh was associated with avastin, but not control-klh or klh. this indicated that 12p-klh was the only conjugate vaccine of the three peptides that could be specially recognized by avastin.

titer determination was performed to evaluate the immunogenicity of the conjugations. mice immunized with klh and control-klh only developed antibodies against klh but not vegf. all mice immunized with 12p-klh successfully developed high titers of antibodies against vegf as well as the klh, indicating successful immunization in mice.

it was crucial to determine whether the anti-12p-klh antibodies could bind to the vegf protein. therefore, we performed experiments to demonstrate whether the immunized serum was specific for vegf. our results demonstrated that the conjugated vaccine containing 12p mimicked the natural vegf epitope and was capable of inducing an active, specific antibody response to vegf. altogether, our findings showed that the phage-displayed epitope was able to mimic immunological properties of the native epitope on vegf. furthermore, using 12p-klh as the antigen, we were able to detect the antibody in the serum from immunized animals and the latter could block vegf binding to vegfr <dig> 

without new blood vessels and a functional vasculature, tumors are limited in their ability to grow and tumor cell proliferation would give way to apoptosis. the purpose of our study was to generate mimotope vaccines that could induce the generation of antibodies against vegf. we further assessed the effect of purified anti-12p-klh antibodies on the vascular endothelial cells . decreased proliferation of huvecs after treatment with anti-12p-klh antibodies was observed, compared with equal amounts of anti-control-klh or anti-klh antibodies. tube formation and cell migration were also decreased by anti-12p-klh antibodies. the anti-12p-klh antibody-induced effects were abolished by the 12p peptide. our findings showed that the anti-12p-klh antibodies could remarkably block the tube formation, proliferation and migration induced by vegf on huvecs.

the strategy of generating 12p-klh vaccine constructs for active immunization has many advantages. for example, the mimotopes are easily synthesized and conjugated, and can actively induce continuously available antibodies against vegf. our results suggest that the phagotope 12p provides a convenient and economic approach to preparing antigens, and could be used in anti-angiogenic therapy.

CONCLUSIONS
the commercialized antibody, avastin, is a promising anti-tumor agent that recognizes vegf and suppresses angiogenesis. to overcome its limitations, we generated epitope mimics that bind to avastin and tested whether the peptide mimics could induce the production of similar antibodies upon active immunization of mice with the peptides. we used the ph.d- <dig> phage display peptide library to identify peptides that bind to avastin. two mimotopes  were shown to bind to the mab. the most frequently selected mimotope, dhtlytpyhthp , was conjugated to klh and used to immunize balb/c mice. antiserum from 12p-klh-immunized mice could recognize the recombinant vegf, whereas sera from mice immunized with the control peptide-klh or carrier klh alone failed to show similar reactivity. furthermore, anti-12p-klh antibodies induced the inhibition of tube formation, proliferation and migration of huvecs. our data indicate that the isolated mimotope 12p reported here could potentially elicit specific antibodies against vegf and result in the inhibition of human umbilical vein endothelial cells.

