BACKGROUND
rna polymerases  play a central role in the regulation of gene expression. like the majority of the enzymes involved in fundamental biological information-processing functions , rnaps are probably best viewed as intricate molecular machines. the movement of nucleic acid substrates, coupled with various types of active site chemistries, requires a precisely orchestrated sequence of conformational changes of protein domains during the transcription cycle .

the nanomechanical mechanisms guiding the structural rearrangements of domains within the active site are still very poorly understood. thus far, models of the fundamental reaction catalyzed by rnaps, the nucleotide addition cycle , have predominantly been derived from a series of crystal structures that contain rnaps as apoenzymes , or complexed with various substrates and inhibitors . such structures, revealing  pre- and post-translocation states of rnaps, have provided the basis for various hypotheses concerning the molecular mechanism of the nac  <cit> . there are, however, two potential shortcomings associated with such approaches. first, in order to 'freeze' the rnaps in a crystallizable conformation, substrate analogs or inhibitors need to be chosen that stop the reaction cycle at a specific point. this may result in the adoption of 'off-pathway' conformations that do not represent normal enzyme states. a second, more fundamental, problem is that short-lived intermediate structures cannot be captured in crystals because they are thermodynamically or kinetically unstable. yet, it is likely that an awareness of the existence and functional significance of such intermediates will be required to develop a deeper understanding of the mechanisms operating within molecular machines.

we have designed new experimental tools to complement ongoing structural investigations. based on the ability to assemble an active rnapii-like enzyme from recombinant subunits in vitro, it is possible to modify any residue within an intact rnap to introduce a variety of targeted mutations into any functional domain participating in the nac  <cit> . such a strategy not only allows specific predictions based on available x-ray structures to be tested, but also can be used to explore systematically the functional contributions of individual domains to biochemically detectable activities. new robotic methods that facilitate the labor-intense high-throughput mutagenesis/assembly steps and transcription assays allow this approach to be implemented on a large scale  <cit> . in a recent study we systematically replaced each of  <dig> consecutive residues of the bridge helix domain with all other  <dig> possible amino acid side chains  <cit> . the bridge helix, a  <dig> amino acid α-helix spanning the rnap active site, controls the flow of nucleic acid substrates and nucleotide precursors through the catalytic site . some of the earliest models of the nac were based on the observation that the c-terminal portion of the bridge helix was kinked in some x-ray crystal structures of bacterial rnaps  <cit> , but appeared straight in numerous other crystals of bacterial, archaeal and eukaryotic rnaps. the existence of two alternative bridge helix conformations made it seem likely that a periodic oscillation between straight and kinked conformations would be implicated in translocating rnaps in single base-pair steps along the dna template strand  <cit> . high-throughput mutagenesis of the c-terminal portion of the bridge helix provided unexpectedly clear evidence in support of bridge helix kinking; mutations destabilizing the normal α-helical conformation in certain positions cause a substantial increase in the specific activity of rnaps. this phenomenon, referred to as superactivity, relieves a constraint on the catalytic mechanism by increasing the frequency of bridge helix isomerization between straight and kinked conformations  <cit> .

while the combination of structural observations and mutagenesis data clearly highlights the functional contribution of the c-terminal portion of the bridge helix towards controlling the rate of the nac, the role of the n-terminal portion of the bridge helix has thus far remained enigmatic. the primary sequence of this region is exceptionally highly conserved during evolution; for example, the sequences of the n-terminal  <dig> amino acids are identical between the archaeon methanocaldococcus jannaschii and humans, and differ by only a single residue from yeast . such a high degree of structural conservation over more than two billion years of evolution can be partially accounted for by the fact that the bridge helix n-terminus is tightly surrounded by other domains and may therefore be spatially and evolutionarily constrained due to the need to maintain an extensive network of protein-protein interactions . in apparent agreement with this view, all available x-ray structures of rnaps show the n-terminal portion of the bridge helix in a rigidly α-helical conformation, suggesting the absence of significant conformational changes. for this reason, none of the current models of rnap function consider the bridge helix n-terminus to play any dynamic role during the nac  <cit> .

new evidence presented here, based on a combination of high-throughput mutagenesis studies and molecular dynamics simulations, demonstrates that such a static view of the bridge helix n-terminus is untenable. the results show that this region contains a highly localized molecular hinge, and that the conformation of this site has a substantial influence on the rate of the nac. in combination with the previously identified c-terminal hinge region, the data reinforces the overarching concept that the bridge helix plays a predominantly nanomechanical role during the translocation stage of the nac by coordinating conformational changes in surrounding domains.

RESULTS
high-throughput mutagenesis reveals evidence for an n-terminal hinge
the n-terminus of the bridge helix of the rnap from the euryarchaeon methanocaldococcus jannaschii was dissected by high-throughput mutagenesis  <cit> . in this automated approach, each amino acid within the target region  was replaced with all other  <dig> residues to reveal local structural requirements. the mutants were then assayed in robotic promoter-independent transcription assays, which provide a consistent measure of the synthetic rate of the nac and correlate directly with results obtained from a variety of promoter-dependent, abortive- and elongation transcription assays .

the results reveal unexpected insights into the function of the bridge helix n-terminus . the most eye-catching phenotypes are associated with the mja' m <dig> position, which constitutes - both qualitatively and quantitatively - a hotspot for superactivity caused by a chemically diverse range of substitutions. this suggests that the m <dig> position is structurally very delicately balanced and substitutions with more hydrophilic, bulky hydrophobic, and/or charged residues cause a substantial local disturbance. the degree of superactivity in the strongest n-terminal substitution  greatly exceeds the highest level of superactivity displayed by the strongest c-terminal mutant . the observation that the replacement of m <dig> with proline results in the highest increase in specific activity immediately suggests that the phenotypes are caused predominantly by disruption of the local secondary structure; proline residues destabilize α-helices due to a lack of hydrogen bonding and steric interference with the backbone of the preceding turn  <cit> . in a manner highly reminiscent of the previously characterized mja' s824-p substitution phenotype, proline substitutions of the residues immediately surrounding mja' m <dig> cause a sharp drop in rnap catalytic activity, emphasizing the highly localized effect of such conformationally induced changes . the locations of two functionally acceptable proline substitutions thus mark the presence of two discrete and separate molecular hinges, that will subsequently be referred to as bh-hn  and bh-hc . the shared functional property of m808-p and s824-p substitutions, causing maximal levels of superactivity, emphasizes that increased bridge helix kinking at the two hinges correlates directly with an increased rate of nucleotide addition  <cit> .

extensive database searches, covering completed genome sequences of a large variety of pro- and eukaryotic species, show that naturally occurring proline substitutions in the bridge helix primary sequences are exceptionally rare. the only known instances of proline residues occurring naturally anywhere in the n-terminal part of the bridge helix are found in the bacteria orientia tsutsugamushi  <cit> , and certain isolates of arcobacter butzleri  <cit>  and bacillus subtilis  <cit> . in each case, the substituted position is precisely orthologous to mja' m <dig> . in the c-terminal half of the bridge helix, the highly divergent plant rnapiv and rnapv enzymes display a strong tendency for a proline residue at the position orthologous to archaeal s <dig> .

molecular dynamics reveal a structural basis for the bh-hn hinge mechanism
insights into the conformational changes of the bh-hc are based on certain x-ray structures of bacterial rnaps that were fortuitously crystallized in a kinked bridge helix conformation  <cit> . kinking of bh-hc is stabilized by intramolecular interactions between amino acid side chains flanking each side of the hinge . the location of the bh-hc and its kinking properties are thus pre-determined by the local amino acid sequence. this raises the question as to whether intrinsic structural features could also account for the molecular mechanism underlying bh-hn function. inspection of the primary sequence surrounding bh-hn, coupled with insights obtained from molecular dynamic  simulations  <cit> , provide a plausible explanation for the structural basis of the bh-hn hinge. systematic sampling of conformational states at five picoseconds  intervals in a series of  <dig> independent  <dig> ps semi-quantitative md simulations highlights the presence of distinct areas prone to local unfolding, with the most prominent peak centered around mja' g <dig> . under these simulation conditions, most other regions of the bridge helix, including the n- and c-termini, maintain their α-helical conformations at all stages throughout the simulations. closer inspection of the simulated structures formed by bh-hn kinking reveals a molecular switching mechanism that can be rationalized directly on the basis of the primary amino acid sequence and α-helical geometry . the kinking of bh-hn critically involves the two glycine residues g <dig> and g <dig> that are located immediately c-terminal to m <dig> and are essentially invariant in all archaeal and eukaryotic rnapiis . glycine residues display low helix-forming propensity because their high conformational flexibility is entropically unfavourable within geometrically constrained α-helical structures  <cit> . this increased flexibility allows g <dig> and g <dig> to flip out of the α-helical conformation to create a flexible hinge . the flipped conformation is then stabilized further through a variety of non-covalent interactions of m <dig> with r <dig> and e <dig> . the kinking model is based on elementary structural and thermodynamic principles , but also strongly supported by the phenotypes of the g <dig> and g <dig> mutagenesis series . in both positions, any residue other than glycine causes a severe reduction in the catalytic activity of rnap due to an increased helix propensity, which reduces the likelihood of bh-hn kinking. in contrast, another glycine residue located slightly more c-terminal, g <dig>  is noticeably less sensitive to change . similarly, the stabilization of bh-hn through van der waals contacts between m <dig> and r <dig> and e <dig> appears to be relatively non-specific, so that a chemically diverse group of side chains are either acceptable , or result in enhanced stabilization of the bh-hn kink . the fundamental requirement for a large side-chain in the m <dig> position is particularly evident from the fact that certain amino acids with smaller groups  are not capable of causing the superactivity associated with enhanced bh-hn kinking. it is therefore apparent that the molecular properties of bh-hn, such as its structural stability, are directly determined by the primary amino acid sequence and emerge spontaneously from md simulations as a property inherent in the primary sequence of the bridge helix domain. mutagenesis changes the biophysical properties of bh-hn, which is, in turn, directly reflected in altered nac rates .

bh-hn and bh-hc operate in environments with widely different structural constraints
the presence of two distinct hinges in the bridge helix raises the question whether bh-hn and bh-hc are involved in the same mechanism during the nac. kinking of either of the two hinges will result in considerable local distortions, predicted to include a spatial redeployment of amino acid side chains and changes in the overall length, flexibility and general topology of the bridge helix domain. kinking of bh-hn could result in altered interactions with adjacent domains, such as the βd-ii, link and f-loop domains , whereas hinge movements in bh-hc are expected to affect the position and/or mobility of the dna-rna hybrid and trigger loop conformation .

intriguingly, rnap iv bridge helices also contain an additional two amino acid deletion, which would cause an even more radical change in the bridge helix by creating a local 180° twist of the α-helical structure . this class of mutants combines strictly confined effects  with complex long range effects , which may possibly be coupled with the propagation of stress forces to the n- and c-terminal anchoring points of the bridge helix. the radical nature of such twisting mutations serves as an ideal tool to gain a deeper insight into structural constraints acting on the entire bridge helix. a series of two-amino acid deletions was prepared . the results show that the bh-hc region is indeed remarkably resistant to such major conformational changes . although x-ray structures provide apparently persuasive arguments for certain residues of the bridge helix domain assisting in catalytic functions , the deletion phenotypes described here prove that such contributions are either redundant or non-existent in our archaeal system, which is highly conserved in this region. the results furthermore illustrate that, although bh-hc is located much closer than bh-hn to the substrates involved in the nac, there are surprisingly few topological restraints. in marked contrast, none of the two-amino acid deletions support significant activity in the n-terminal part of the bridge helix , proving that conformational changes are much more restricted in that region . the results from the two amino acid deletion scan thus provide a first indication that the local conformational requirements for bh-hn and bh-hc differ quite radically.

the substitutions mja' m808-p and s824-p provide the strongest pieces of evidence for the existence and functional significance of bh-hn and bh-hc, respectively . work in other systems has shown that the physicochemical properties of residues adjacent to prolines contribute considerably to the prevalence of cis/trans peptide bond isomers and therefore strongly influence kink geometry  <cit> . additional proline substitutions of the positions immediately n- and c-terminal to either m <dig> or s <dig>  revealed examples of further intriguing differences between bh-hn and bh-hc: the double-proline substitution in bh-hn abolished the superactivity caused by m808-p, whereas the presence of an additional proline residue n-terminal to s <dig> continued to support the superactivity of s824-p . the activity of the q823-p/s824-p double mutant proves explicitly that the presence of two proline residues in this particular location of the bridge helix is not only compatible with catalytic function, but also compatible with superactivity. prolyl-proline preferentially adopt an elongated polyproline ii structure , or less frequently  a β-turn . either of the structures would cause a substantial local increase in the flexibility of bh-hc.

in order to investigate this unexpected tolerance to the presence of two adjacent prolines in positions  <dig> and  <dig> in more detail, a complete substitution series of the residues around position mja' s824-p was prepared, generating an assortment of systematic double-mutants . all substitutions n-terminal to s824-p  displayed an almost completely invariant degree of extensive superactivity that was indistinguishable from the original s824-p mutant . this result is remarkable because previous mutagenesis of q <dig> revealed a broad spectrum of activity, ranging from substantial loss of function  to superactivity . it is evident that in the double-mutants the chemical nature of the side-chain residue in position  <dig> exerts no further functional influence, presumably because of the major distortion already caused by the proline substitution in position  <dig>  once such a gross structural alteration has occurred in s824-p, any additional changes in the adjacent n-terminal residue become structurally irrelevant.

because q823-p/s824-p displayed no loss of superactivity, the residue immediately n-terminal to the double-proline substitution was also permutated, resulting in variants containing three adjacent substitutions in the bh-hc hinge region . the majority of these substitutions, including the triple proline mutant a822-p/q823-p/s824-p , still displayed clearly detectable superactivity, albeit at a slightly reduced level. the tolerance of the bh-hc hinge to radical mutagenesis, as previously observed in the two-amino acid deletion screen, is therefore also reflected in the unexpectedly high tolerance to multiple proline substitutions in that region. this geometric freedom is, however, also spatially limited: substitutions in positions c-terminal to s824-p  were mostly inactive, indicating that despite the structural flexibility of the positions n-terminal to s824-p, the c-terminal positions are functionally constrained .

bh-hn and bh-hc control activity of the catalytic site differently
taken together, the extensive body of mutagenesis data leads to the conclusion that the bh-hn and bh-hc structures operate within intramolecular environments that vary widely in their conformational constraints. the chemistry of the nac is typically catalyzed by two magnesium ions, immobilized non-covalently within the active site . a complete substitution of mg2+ by mn2+ reduces the activity of archaeal rnap to approximately 40% ; the reduced activity is probably caused by the slightly larger mn2+ ions causing suboptimal spacing  <cit> , and mn2+-catalyzed reactions being more promiscuous in their requirements for alignment of the reactive groups  <cit> . intriguingly, assays of superactive bh-hn and bh-hc mutants in the presence of mn2+ demonstrated that they fell into distinct categories. mja' m808-d, m808-e and m808-p continued to display superactivity, whereas the activities of s824-p or q823-p/s824-p only reached wildtype levels under these conditions . we can therefore conclude that the superactive substitutions in the bh-hn and bh-hc regions have different consequences because conformational changes in different parts of the bridge helix affect separate stages of the nac. the reduced catalytic activity caused by the presence of mn2+ ions in the active site becomes rate-limiting in q823-d/e or s824-p, whereas m808-p overcomes this limitation to a large extent by stimulating transcription through an independent pathway, most likely involving the β-d ii and link domains.

discussion
an expanded conformational repertoire of the bridge helix domain
the results presented here reveal several new surprising insights, including compelling evidence for the existence of a molecular hinge region in the n-terminal portion of the bridge helix and evidence for an unexpectedly large degree of tolerance to radical structural changes in the c-terminal part of this domain. it is apparent that the bridge helix domain displays a much greater conformational freedom than anticipated from currently available x-ray structures of rnaps. few, if any, of the residues of the bridge helix appear to make any specific contribution to catalysis other than through defining the nanomechanical properties intrinsic to the α-helical structure. the implications for mechanistic models aimed at describing the nac are manifold, ranging from a re-evaluation of the structural basis of the rnap translocation mechanism, to highlighting the hitherto neglected role of highly conserved domains in the catalytic site, and to obtaining a better understanding of the evolutionary diversity of bridge helices in different organisms.

currently, we have only a limited understanding of the forces acting on the bridge helix that could drive localized conformational changes. attempts to model the full nac using molecular dynamics studies are severely limited by the large size of multi-subunit rnaps and the immense computational effort that would be required to simulate the molecular events expected to last from 10s to 100s of milliseconds for the extension of a nascent transcript by a single nucleotide . the study of the intrinsic structural properties of individual domains by fully atomistic computer simulations reveal, however, interesting nanomechanical properties that have functional implications for the rnap translocation mechanism  <cit> . the bridge helix domain contains intrinsically unstable α-helical regions that undergo spontaneous kinking motions, even in the absence of externally applied forces . at least two of these unstable regions correspond precisely to the biochemically-mapped bh-hn and bh-hc regions. strategically-placed glycine residues, such as mja' g <dig>  g <dig>  and g <dig>  provide the structural basis for forming these molecular hinges, with surrounding residues determining additional kinking parameters, such as the likelihood of kinking and/or the half-life of the kink after its isomerization . interestingly, the simulations also highlight a potential third structurally labile region near the center of the bridge helix domain, spanning residues mja' q <dig> to r <dig>  the relative sensitivity of this sequence to proline substitutions  suggests, however, that this area of instability behaves functionally differently to bh-hn and bh-hc. it is possible that structural fluctuations in the central part of the bridge helix play a more dynamic role in supporting short-lived conformational changes that can either compensate for major structural rearrangements due to bh-hn and bh-hc kinking, or act as a store of 'fast' motions to lubricate the kinking of the hinge regions kinetically  <cit> . although such hypotheses are currently beyond experimental proof, it is interesting to note that several, structurally unexplained superactivity mutants map to this central sequence , and that this region is also exceptionally tolerant to radical twisting of the α-helical axis induced by deletions of two-amino acid segments . furthermore, data from anisotropic network mode analysis suggests that rigid body movements of the clamp domain may exert forces onto the center of the bridge helix via the switch domains, potentially linking transcription to a ratchet-like translocation mechanism . the bridge helix thus appears to have evolved specific nanomechanical properties that result in the controlled and highly localized isomerization of its conformation in response to allosteric alterations in the surrounding protein domains and nucleic acid substrates.

the bridge helix n-terminus is tightly surrounded by other domains, such as the β-d loop ii  <cit> , the experimentally uncharacterized link domain  <cit> , and the f-loop  <cit> . as evident from the exceptionally high degree of sequence conservation , each of these domains is likely to play key roles in the nac. the β-d ii domain is a loop-like structure that interacts extensively in a side-way interaction with the central part of the bridge helix, while simultaneously maintaining direct physical contact with the most recently incorporated nucleotide . the interaction between the β-d ii domain and nascent transcript also creates an extended binding pocket for the rntp . similarly, the highly conserved link domain is strategically placed to interact with the bridge helix n-terminus, β-d ii domain, nascent transcript  and the incoming rntp . finally, an n-terminal extension of the bridge helix, the f-loop, forms an extensive cap-like structure that contacts the link domain and the tip of the trigger loop . the differential response of superactive substitutions in bh-hn and bh-hc to the presence of mn2+ in the catalytic site supports the view that conformational changes in these regions cause a distinct effect in the catalytic site of rnap. while the c-terminal bridge helix operates predominantly by influencing trigger loop conformation, kinking of the n-terminus via bh-hn most likely alters the positions and/or conformations of the β-d ii and link domains, which are in direct physical contact with the nucleotide and nucleic acid substrates.

in vivo occurrence of proline-substituted bridge helix hinges
the existence and biological relevance of the experimentally determined hinge positions that tolerate proline substitutions is independently confirmed by a small number of naturally occurring bridge helix variants. considering the large number of genomes sequenced thus far , it can already be stated with confidence that naturally occurring proline substitutions are an exceedingly rare phenomenon. the three bacterial species that contain naturally occurring proline-substitutions in bh-hn represent two diverse bacterial phyla , and each of these phyla contains other closely related species with sequenced genomes, which do not contain any prolines in their bridge helices. proline substitutions in the bh-hn region therefore appear to evolve spontaneously and independently in different bacterial lineages and subsequently remain restricted to individual species or strains. in at least some cases this evolutionary adaptation may be associated with significant simplifications of the transcriptional machinery, such as loss of the ω-rnap subunit and absence of transcription-coupled repair . these proline-containing bridge helix variants do not only provide strong and independent in vivo confirmation of the results identified in the high-throughput mutagenesis screen , but prove that the results obtained in an archaeal model system also apply to the bacterial and eukaryotic domains; bridge helix kinking via two structurally independent molecular hinges is a universal mechanism operating across the entire evolutionary spectrum.

CONCLUSIONS
the application of a high-throughput in vitro mutagenesis approach to the n-terminal portion of the m. jannaschii bridge helix domain has revealed a range of new insights that could not be anticipated from previously available structural and genetic data. the data sets  clearly illustrate that many of the most interesting insights were derived from substitutions that would almost certainly not have been designed using a rational, structure-led approach . furthermore, widely used methods, based predominantly on alanine-scanning mutagenesis  <cit> , are also limited in their capacity to uncover some of the most interesting phenotypes . it is therefore clear that automated high-throughput methods for generating site-directed mutants and assaying their phenotypic consequences will play an increasingly important role in exploratory investigations of protein structure/function relationships as part of a diverse strategy aimed at obtaining new insights into complex biological systems  <cit> .

