BACKGROUND
box jellyfish  produce venoms that are designed to swiftly incapacitate prey and deter predators, but they also cause adverse effects in envenomed humans. cubozoan venoms are stored within complex intracellular structures  that are housed within specialized cells  located mainly in the tentacles of the jellyfish. when triggered to discharge, each nematocyst explosively releases a harpoon-like tubule that injects a toxic cocktail of venom components into the victim or prey.

chironex fleckeri is the largest and most venomous box jellyfish species. it inhabits the tropical coastal waters of australia and is renowned for its ability to inflict extremely painful and potentially life threatening stings to humans. symptoms of c. fleckeri envenoming can include the rapid onset of severe cutaneous pain and inflammation, dermonecrosis, dyspnoea, transient hypertension, hypotension, cardiovascular collapse and cardiac arrest . due to its clinical importance, c. fleckeri has remained one of the most intensively researched box jellyfish species. over five decades of research on whole or fractionated c. fleckeri tentacle extracts and nematocyst-derived venom has established that c. fleckeri toxins elicit a diverse range of bioactivities including nociception, in vitro cytotoxicity in cultured myocytes  and hepatocytes, haemolytic activity and pore formation in mammalian cell membranes, neurotoxicity and myotoxicity in nerve and muscle preparations, and in vivo dermonecrotic, cardiovascular and lethal effects in a variety of experimental animals  <cit> .

in recent studies, the potent in vitro haemolytic and in vivo cardiovascular activities of c. fleckeri venom have been attributed primarily to the action of a subset of c. fleckeri toxins  that are members of a taxonomically restricted family of cnidarian pore-forming toxins  <cit> . a single proteomics study of c. fleckeri venom revealed that several isoforms of the cftxs are highly abundant in the venom proteome  <cit> , but due to the lack of genomic and transcriptomic data for cubozoans, few other potential toxins were identified  <cit> . however, the diversity of biological activities associated with c. fleckeri venom and the complexity of its venom composition, suggest that other biologically important venom components are yet to be identified. these novel cubozoan venoms could represent a source of potentially useful bioactive compounds for the development of novel therapeutics.

advances in computational techniques for the assembly and annotation of sequence data have enabled the rapid characterization of biologically important protein mixtures from a range of organisms  <cit> . in this work we utilized illumina sequencing in concert with tandem mass spectroscopy  to conduct a large-scale exploration of the transcriptome and venom proteome of c. fleckeri. the newly obtained transcriptomic data facilitated the detection of several new cftx isoforms and other putative toxin families, including metalloproteinases, that have not been previously identified in cubozoan venoms. this study not only provides extensive information on the molecular diversity of toxins in c. fleckeri venom, but also provides the first overview of a box jellyfish transcriptome; thus representing a valuable resource for future comparative genomic, transcriptomic and proteomic studies or novel protein/peptide discovery.

RESULTS
the transcriptome of c. fleckeri
total rna, purified from whole c. fleckeri tentacle tissue, was used to generate  <dig> , <dig> paired reads using the illumina platform. these reads were then de novo assembled, using oases  <cit> , into  <dig>  transcripts that are summarized in table  <dig>  approximately 56%  of the raw reads could be mapped back to the final assembly with a mean depth of coverage of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  reads per sequence, although a proportion of assembled transcripts exhibited low read support . due to the limited number of cubozoan sequences available in protein databases, transcripts were searched against four databases using blastx — swissprot, cnidaria protein sequences from the genbank non-redundant protein database and predicted protein sets from the hydra magnipapillata and nematostella vectensis genome projects. approximately 40% of the sequences returned a high-scoring  match to at least one of the databases  and final annotations were assigned based on the match possessing the best bit score. a comparison of bit scores obtained from searches against protein databases from the model cnidarian organisms h. magnipapillata and n. vectensis suggested that, in general, c. fleckeri protein products were more similar to the former than the latter . estscan, using a matrix constructed from annotated cnidarian sequences from the embl and genbank databases, was used to identify  <dig>  transcripts containing  <dig>  predicted protein sequences that were used in ms/ms experiments. of the remaining  <dig>  transcripts not found to contain an open reading frame, only  <dig>  had high scoring blast hits to proteins in one of the five databases used.table  <dig> 
summary of assembly and annotation of nucleotide sequence data from
chironex fleckeri
tentacle tissue



assembly

orfs

nematostella vectensis

hydra magnipapillata

matching cegma core eukaryotic proteins

interproscan

signal sequence and transmembrane domains


the average length of assembled transcripts was 1056 ±  <dig> bases  with an n <dig> of  <dig>  to evaluate whether full-length sequences were present in the assembly, the length of transcripts with significant blast hits  were compared to the length of their top blast hit. at the transcript level, sequences were compared to h. magnipapillata est sequences using blastn and 63% of assembled transcripts were at least 80% the length of the blast hit . at the protein level, the predicted protein set were compared to the swissprot database using blastp and 54% of the proteins were at least 80% the length of the top hit . similarly, to estimate to what extent the actual transcriptome of c. fleckeri was covered by the assembled transcriptome, cegma  <cit>  was used to identify core eukaryotic proteins. approximately, 77% of the core cegma protein set was represented by full length transcripts  and 80% by partial transcripts  . predicted functions for proteins encoded by the assembled transcripts were assigned using interproscan  <cit>  and are summarized in table  <dig>  additional files  <dig> and  <dig>  using signalp  <cit>  and tmhmm  <cit> , approximately 2%  of the estscan predicted proteins contained signal sequences and  <dig>  were predicted to contain two or more transmembrane domains.

toxin-like proteins identified in the transcriptome of c. fleckeri
to identify potential c. fleckeri toxins, assembled transcripts were compared to the uniprot animal toxin database  <cit>  using blastx. four hundred and fifty-five transcripts  provided high-scoring blast hits . these potential toxins were further filtered:  those possessing a higher scoring blast hit  to a protein from a non-toxin protein family from the genbank cnidarian database search  were removed; and  proteins containing two or more transmembrane helices, as predicted by tmhmm, were removed. after filtering,  <dig> transcripts remained as putative c. fleckeri venom proteins , representing  <dig> venom protein families . metalloproteinases, major constituents of spider venoms  <cit> , were the most highly represented grouping with  <dig> different isoforms identified. representatives of other toxin families included various proteases and protease inhibitors, lectins, lipases, crisp venom proteins and two families of snake venom proteins — an alpha-macroglobulin-containing protein family with homologies to human complement protein c <dig> and toxins with homologies to human coagulation factors x and v  <cit> . one hundred and eleven transcripts provided high-scoring blast matches to two other venom protein families; spider venom latrotoxins and snake venom calglandulins. however, in both cases these transcripts also provided high-scoring matches to non-venom proteins in genbank, contained domains that were not specific to toxin proteins and did not contain a signal sequence; all of which suggest a role distinct from envenomation.figure  <dig> potential toxin encoding transcripts identified in the transcriptome of c. fleckeri. a. the ten most abundant  transcripts encoding potential toxin proteins; b. number of different transcripts in the assembly encoding potential toxin proteins from the ten toxin families identified in the transcriptome. in both a. and b. potential toxins were identified after screening against the swissprot animal toxin database.



interproscan was used to compare the domain structure of putative c. fleckeri venom proteins to representative examples identified during blast searches. putative venom proteins from the alpha-2-macroglobulin, crisp and lysosomal acid lipases families exhibited the same domain structure as found in characterized venom proteins . metalloproteinases, and the two examples of coagulation factor-like proteins, exhibited different domain structures. for example, a c. fleckeri coagulation factor v homolog contained a c-terminal coagulation factor 5/ <dig> domain at the n-terminus of the protein with four fibronectin domains whereas the snake venom toxin contained six cupredoxin domains followed by the c-terminal coagulation 5/ <dig> domain . abundance of putative toxin proteins was assessed using the fpkm and a peroxiredoxin isoform  and an astacin-like metalloproteinase isoform  were the two most abundant toxin transcripts. also abundant were other astacin-like metalloproteinases, three alpha-macroglobulin-containing snake venom proteins and four snake venom factors .

molecular studies of jellyfish venom have gradually revealed the existence of a novel, cnidarian toxin family  <cit> . in c. fleckeri characterized members of this family include cftx- <dig>  − <dig>  −a and -b, all of which are abundantly present in the venom of c. fleckeri  <cit> . in this work,  <dig> cftx isoforms were identified, including cftx-a, −b, − <dig> and − <dig>  three novel cftx proteins were identified as full length transcripts, a protein with homologies to tx- <dig> from the scyphozoan jellyfish aurelia aurita , a protein similar to cftx-a  and a truncated protein similar to cftx- <dig> . partial sequences for nine other toxin proteins were identified in the assembly, including two cftx-1-like toxins, five cftx-2-like toxins and two toxins similar to cqtx-a from the box jellyfish chironex yamaguchii . a truncated form of cftx-b has been reported, cftx-bt  <cit> , and although this transcript was not identified in the assembly a similarly truncated form of cftx- <dig> was identified . the latter contained a signal sequence and a domain similar to the n-terminal domain of cftx- <dig> 

proteomic analysis of c. fleckeri venom proteins
to confirm which putative toxin proteins were present in c. fleckeri venom, ms/ms was used to identify proteins from nematocyst-derived protein preparations. total protein from two nematocyst preparations, each containing morphologically distinct classes of nematocyst, were analyzed using ms/ms;  a preparation containing predominantly mastigophores, nematocysts believed to hold the lethal venom components  <cit> ; and  a preparation enriched in isorhizas, thought to have a non-penetrative role in entangling prey  <cit> , and trirhopaloids, penetrative nematocysts with an undetermined role in envenomation. nematocyst preparations were fractionated using sds-page and proteins identified using ms/ms and searches against the predicted protein set from the transcriptome . in addition, existing ms/ms data sets, generated during our previous studies of c. fleckeri venom  <cit> , were reanalyzed using the new transcriptomic data. these data sets included duplicate in-gel digests of sds-page-fractionated venom proteins from total nematocyst preparations and duplicate peptide offgel™ electrophoresis experiments of the same samples .figure  <dig> light microscopy of nematocysts used in proteomic analysis and sds-page gels of venom proteins. two nematocyst preparations were analyzed; a preparation containing predominantly mastigophores  and a preparation enriched in isorhizas and trirhopaloids . different morphological types are indicated . extracts of the nematocyst preparations were fractionated using sds-page  and proteins identified using tandem mass spectrometry. forty-one gel slices were excised from each lane, as indicated by the aligned metal grid . selected gel slices corresponding to major protein bands are indicated on the gel. where a protein band was divided between two gel slices, an asterisk denotes the gel slice containing the majority of that protein.



more than  <dig>  spectra from in-gel digests and offgel™ experiments were used in x! tandem searches of the predicted proteins. across all experiments,  <dig> proteins were identified and these were categorized into eight functional groupings . proteins identified included  <dig> of the putative toxins identified in transcriptomic analysis . in addition to toxins, structural proteins were highly represented  as well as  <dig> proteins from diverse functional families that were grouped into the ’miscellaneous’ category. twenty-three uncharacterized proteins were identified, ten of which were identified by five or more unique peptides and/or were identified in at least two of the four experiments . the relatively high spectral counts and reproducible identification of these proteins suggests that they are jellyfish-specific proteins and thus are potential novel constituents, toxin or otherwise, of the venom proteome. to increase the completeness of the proteomic analysis and to account for deficiencies in the oasis assembly, we conducted x! tandem searches against three other protein databases;  estscan predictions from a transcriptome assembled from the same reads using trinity  <cit> ;  all cnidaria proteins from the genbank non-redundant protein database; and  the complete swissprot database. figure 5b shows the global comparison of peptide identifications from the four databases. each database search added a set of unique protein identifications and, using sequence based comparisons   <dig> additional proteins were added to the proteome;  <dig> from trinity orfs,  <dig> from the cnidaria protein database and  <dig> from the swissprot database, most of which were common contaminants of proteomic experiments ; additional file 6: table s4). apart from one identification of cftx- <dig>  corresponding to the full length sequence of the partial sequence assembled using oases, no additional toxin proteins were identified.

‘molecular function’ and ‘biological process’ go terms highly represented among the identified proteins included, “oxidation-reduction”, “protein binding”, “proteolysis” and “atp binding” . based on signalp and tmhmm analysis,  <dig> proteins were inferred to contain a classical secretory signal peptide, with the ‘toxins’ and ‘uncharacterized’ functional groupings containing the greatest proportion of secreted proteins . only eight proteins were predicted to contain more than two trans-membrane domains. cellular location was further analyzed using psort  <cit> ; approximately 43% of the identified proteins were predicted to be cytoplasmic and 19% extracellular in origin, with the remainder originating from the mitochondria, cytoskeleton, nucleus and endoplasmic reticulum. the ‘toxins’ functional grouping had the highest proportion of extracellular proteins  .

toxin proteins identified in c. fleckeri venom using tandem mass spectrometry
twenty-six putative toxin proteins were identified in the venom of c. fleckeri using ms/ms  and all had been previously identified as putative toxins during analysis of the transcriptome. the majority of these toxins were members of the cftx toxin family with  <dig> of the  <dig> isoforms identified in the transcriptome also identified using ms/ms. five cftx proteins  have been previously characterized and all but one, cftx-bt, were identified here. cftx-bt, which has high sequence homology to cftx-b but is distinguished by c-terminal truncation was not identified, most likely due to its homology to cftx-b, which was identified. of the nine uncharacterized cftx proteins identified in the ms/ms data, seven showed greatest homology  to the characterized c. fleckeri toxin proteins and two showed the greatest similarity to characterized toxins of the same family; catx-a from the cubozoan chironex yamaguchii and tx- <dig> from the scyphozoan a. aurita. the  <dig> other putative toxins identified included seven proteases, four of which were metalloproteinases, an alpha-macroglobulin domain containing protein, two peroxiredoxin toxins, two crisp proteins and a turripeptide-like protease inhibitor . although not annotated as toxins, a further  <dig> proteases, including carboxypeptidases, endothelin-converting enzymes and two collagenases were identified . in total four different nematocyst preparations were analyzed, and toxins were reproducibly identified with 79% of the toxins detected in at least two of the five experiments . the toxin content of the two different nematocyst preparations was similar with  <dig> toxin proteins identified in the mastigophore preparation and  <dig> in the isorhiza and trirhopaloid nematocysts.

comparison of the c. fleckeri venom proteome to those from other cnidarians
the venom proteome of three other cnidarians were recently characterized: the anthozoan sea anenome anemonia viridis, the schyphozoan jellyfish aurelia aurita and the hydrozoan hydra magnipapillata  <cit> . to place the cnidarian venom proteome described here in this context we compared the venom proteome of all four species. using blastp, proteins from these organisms with significant  homology to c. fleckeri venom proteins were identified and functionally categorized. c. fleckeri proteins most commonly found in the venom proteome of the other cnidarians were predominantly structural or were classed as miscellaneous . overall, a. aurita had the most shared proteins, followed by h. magnipapillata and a. viridis . to compare the toxin repertoire of the four cnidarians the same analysis was conducted for putative toxins identified in the c. fleckeri proteome. both h. magnipapillata and a. aurita possessed similar classes of putative toxins as identified in c. fleckeri. this included cftx-like proteins that were well represented in all three organisms . conversely, few toxin proteins were identified in both a. viridis and c. fleckeri and no cftx-like proteins were identified in the former . as previously reported for h. magnipapillata, a. aurita and a. viridis  <cit> , very few proteins  were identified in all four species . a phylogenetic tree of cftx and cftx-like proteins showed three main groupings of the toxin proteins, represented by cftx-a and -b, cftx- <dig> and − <dig>  and a third group represented predominantly by toxins from hydra species .figure  <dig> comparison of cnidarian venom proteomes. a. proteins from the c. fleckeri proteome with corresponding proteins in h. magnipapillata, a. aurita and a. viridis by functional category; b. potential toxins from c. fleckeri with corresponding proteins in the same species; c. venn diagram depicting the overlap in proteins identified in the proteomes of four cnidarian species.



discussion
the primary aim of this study was to identify protein toxins responsible for the severe effects of c. fleckeri stings in humans. it has been previously noted that the great diversity in animal toxin function has evolved from a limited number of protein families  <cit> , thus we used sequence homology to known animal toxins, from the uniprot animal toxin database, as a strategy for the identification of potential toxins from the transcriptome of c. fleckeri. we then confirmed the existence of a subset of these proteins in the venom proteome using ms/ms. in the absence of a reference genome, we generated a de novo assembly using a methodology designed to maximize reference coverage while minimizing redundancy and chimera rate  <cit> . cegma analysis suggested a reasonable coverage of the transcriptome was achieved using this approach, although a proportion of sequences   did not represent at least 80% of their highest scoring blast hit, suggesting that further sequencing is required to fully characterize the transcriptome. despite this caveat, the final assembly provided a sufficient quantity of full- and partial-length transcripts for the identification of major toxin families present in the transcriptome and for the generation of a set of predicted proteins suitable for use in proteomics searches. these searches revealed the presence of proteins with homology to at least ten known toxin families including metalloproteinases, protease inhibitors, alpha-macroglobulins and cftx proteins. although screening for known toxin families will not reveal the presence of novel jellyfish-specific toxins, identification of metalloproteinases, cftx proteins and protease inhibitors in the proteomic analysis suggests that some of the protein toxin families present in c. fleckeri venom have been identified using this strategy.

the de novo assembly of short read illumina data is still a challenge. in this work, 44% of the short reads did not map back to the assembly and, despite a mean coverage of  <dig> reads per transcript, a subset of transcripts had poor read support , suggesting that that a complete description of the assembly has not been achieved. this not only reflects the inherent challenges in the de novo assembly of transcriptomes from short reads, including variations in transcript expression, sequence biases from next generation sequencing, alternative splicing and overlapping genes, but also the quality control strategies employed during assembly, including the methodology adopted from  <cit>  and the clustering of transcripts after assembly. to identify and remedy potential gaps in our assembly we conducted proteomic searches against multiple protein databases, and these searches provided  <dig> additional protein identifications over the searches against the oases assembly alone. these included nematocyst proteins, such as nematogalectins, dickkopf-related proteins and endothelin-converting enzymes , previously shown to be abundant in venom preparations  <cit> , suggesting that this approach provided better proteome coverage than would have been achieved using the oases assembly alone.

our comparison of the c. fleckeri venom proteome with those of h. magnipapillata and a. aurita shows that they have a functionally similar toxin repertoire, dominated by cytolysins and proteases. this is in contrast to the venom of the anthozoan a. viridis, which is rich in low molecular weight neurotoxins that are not typically found in medusozoans  <cit> . the proteomic characterization the venom of another scyphozoan, stomolophus meleagris  <cit> , was broadly similar to the three medusozoans compared in this study. in this organism serine proteases and phospholipases were the most abundant classes of toxins followed by proteins containing a shk toxin domain and a number of other haemolysins. although we did not identify any phospholipases or shk-domain containing proteins in the proteome of c. fleckeri, several types of both proteins were identified in its transcriptome. in both organisms metalloproteinases, lectins and serine protease inhibitors where identified in the venom proteome and are potential toxin proteins.

in c. fleckeri, the cftx proteins have undergone an expansion with fifteen examples identified in the transcriptome and thirteen in the venom proteome. members of this toxin family are potently haemolytic and cause pain, inflammation, dermonecrosis, cardiovascular collapse and death in experimental animals  <cit> , suggesting that these toxins are responsible for many of the symptoms of box jellyfish envenomation. while these toxins are highly abundant in cubozoan venoms  <cit> , their distribution among other medusozoans appears to be less uniform. for example, cftx-like toxins have been identified in the venoms of a. aurita, c. capillata and h. magnipapillata  <cit>  but not in the venoms of s. meleagris  <cit>  or the hydrozoan olindias sambaquiensis  <cit> . their abundance in c. fleckeri, and related cubozoans  <cit>  and the relatively few reports from class scyphozoa could explain why cubozoan stings are generally more severe than those of scyphozoan species. alternatively, phylogenetic analysis of the cftxs shows that the toxins fall into two main groups: a clade of mainly hydrozoan toxins and a clade of predominantly cubozoan toxins that branches into two smaller subclades . examples from the scyphozoan a. aurita are present in the hydra clade and one of the cubozoa subclades. this pattern suggests that the toxins have undergone functional and structural diversification during evolution that could be associated with differences in the toxicity of various jellyfish species  <cit> .

identifying potential toxins from sequence homology is complicated by the evolutionary history of some toxins that evolved from proteins with roles unrelated to envenoming. this is particularly acute when, as in this study, rna from the entire tentacle is used to generate an assembly that includes transcripts from tissue not specifically involved in envenomation. even proteins identified in the venom proteome could be involved in biological processes unrelated to envenomation. for example, in hydractinia echinata, on the basis of phylogenetic and in situ hybridization experiments, astacin metalloproteinases have been implicated in development  <cit> , although a function in digestion has also been proposed  <cit> . similarly, it has been proposed that peroxiredoxins in snake venom eliminate peroxides generated during metabolism and thus maintain redox homeostasis  <cit> . therefore the two peroxiredoxins identified in c. fleckeri could play a similar role, as is the case in the scyphozoan jellyfish cyanea capillata  <cit> . conversely, proteins not designated as potential toxins at the transcript level, were identified in the proteome and could be toxins. this included thirteen additional proteases and a number of uncharacterized proteins with very high spectral support . as members of the venom proteome, all of these proteins are presumably transferred during a sting and could thus contribute to the symptoms of envenoming. however, an exact determination of their biological role in inducing the symptoms of envenomation now awaits further experimental validation.

mastigophores are thought to contain the lethal protein components of c. fleckeri venom  <cit> , while isorhizas are considered non-penetrative with adhesive or entanglement functions and could thus possess a different toxin profile. in this work, however, there was little difference in the toxin content of the two nematocyst preparations. this heterogeneity could be a result of incomplete segregation of the different nematocyst classes during sample preparation , that the penetrative trirhopaloid nematocysts contain similar toxins as the mastigophores or that the toxin proteins are present in all forms of nematocysts, regardless of penetrative ability. a more stringent approach, for example a quantitative proteomics study, would be required to accurately determine the type and relative abundance of toxins that are present in each nematocyst class.

other protein classes highly represented in the proteome of c. fleckeri included structural, ribosomal and oxido-reductive proteins as well as proteins of diverse function that were grouped into a ‘miscellaneous’ category. the identification of structural proteins may reflect the way that the venom was purified from the intact nematocysts. dtt, a strong reducing agent, was used to partially disintegrate the nematocyst capsule and cause venom release, so it is likely that a proportion of capsular components and other structural proteins were also solubilized during this process. on the other hand, the identification of ribosomal, oxido-reductive and the ‘miscellaneous’ proteins are likely a result of the manner in which nematocysts are formed. a nematocyst is formed within a large post-golgi vesicle  <cit>  and some proteins are likely to be incorporated into the venom as a consequence of their presence during nematocyst formation. the relative abundance of these proteins, along with the structural proteins that are liberated from the nematocyst capsule during venom extraction, can mask the presence of lower abundance proteins that may be active at nanomolar concentrations . hence, it is possible that low-abundance toxins, that could contribute to the symptoms of envenoming were not identified in the ms/ms experiments. this is supported by single peptide identifications , which included known nematocyst proteins and potential toxins such as nematoblast-specific protein nb035-sv <dig> and lectoxin. these single peptide identifications suggest that the reliable identification of lower abundance proteins will expand the catalogue of known c. fleckeri toxins. experiments are currently underway to identify these low-abundance toxins by improving methods of venom purification to decrease the proportion of structural proteins in the purified venom and by improving the fractionation of toxins before tandem ms/ms.

CONCLUSIONS
c. fleckeri produces one of the most potent venoms known to man but its protein composition is poorly understood compared to those of other well characterized animals, such as snakes, scorpions and spiders. this work presents the first transcriptome from a cubozoan jellyfish from which the venom proteome has been refined. this work provides the basis for a range of studies aimed at  <dig> ) improving medical responses to envenoming;  <dig> ) exploring the potential of these toxins as a source of novel bioactive compounds; and  <dig> ) conducting comparative proteomic and transcriptomic studies of other cubozoan jellyfish of medical importance, such as the irukandji.

