BACKGROUND
microarray results enable systems biology only to the extent that they have  sensitivity/repeatability to detect low physiological-range regulatory events,  global detectability of spots to reveal broad system behavior, and  flexibility to support multivariate experimental designs. the present paper reports a new technical approach that improves microarray performance in all three of these areas. due to variations in geometry, amount of dna, hybridization efficiency, and background fluorescence at each spot, absolute fluorescence is not a reliable measure of mrna abundance. however, if two samples are labeled with different dyes and co-hybridized to the same microarray, the ratio of their fluorescence intensities is a reliable measure of the differential rna abundances between the samples. there are three typical designs used in two-color microarray experiments: dye swap, loop, and reference designs  <cit>  and their advantages and disadvantages have been discussed in previous literature  <cit> . loop and dye swap designs are useful for small studies  because they reduce variance and make full use of hybridization resources  <cit> . for larger studies, reference designs enable flexibility of  comparing all samples to each other through a single reference sample  expanding the design if more samples are needed  handling multivariate experimental designs such as time series or classification of multiple conditions  <cit> . also, dye bias  intensity dependant and  gene specific) is less of an issue in a reference design because  the dye incorporation effects cancel out in across array calculations in a manner similar to dye swap calculations and  gene-dye interactions are not an issue because the sample of interest is only measured on one dye. the reference design has been used successfully in a number of large microarray experiments  <cit> .

an ideal reference rna should  provide strong signal intensity to every probe on the microarray  be reliably reproducible in large batches  allow for comparison of datasets across laboratories and  mimic the hybridization characteristics of the biological sample it is compared against. researchers typically prepare their own reference from pooled experimental samples or cell lines  <cit> . however these approaches are not easily reliably reproducible between labs and provide detectable signal for only 60–70% of the spots on a typical genomic-scale array. a reference sample derived from a mixture of cell lines is commercially produced by stratagene called universal reference rna™  and is a commonly used reference rna but still only yields detectable signal for 60–70% of the spots on most microarrays  <cit> . other groups have used genomic dna  <cit> , a mixture of clones spotted on the arrays  <cit> , and a short oligomer that is complementary to every spot on the microarray  <cit> . however, a mixture of clones is specific to array design and thus is generally not usable between laboratories and short oligos do not have the same hybridization characteristics as longer rna molecules in biological samples  <cit> . while a genomic dna reference does mimic cdna hybridization characteristics, it represents a heterogeneous sequence distribution and requires a different reference for each species. none of these three methods are widely used and publicly available data is not widely available. therefore we focus our comparison with stratagene universal reference.

in the present approach, we describe a universal rna reference that possesses features 1– <dig> discussed above. this universal reference rna contains a sequence from the vector that is common to all of the cdna spotted on the slides but does not contain any specific gene sequence. we call this reference sample "vector rna"  and its use in a reference design "vector reference design". using vrna provides strong signal for every spot on a microarray. this allows for within-slide quality control of printing errors, large hybridization inefficiencies and within-batch quality control of insufficient concentrations of spotted dna on a per spot basis. finally, use of vrna as a reference assists in spot finding because every spot has a detectable signal.

RESULTS
development of vrna sample
we obtain a homogeneous rna sample from the parental est clone vector as described in methods and outlined in figure  <dig>  this reference rna  contains a  <dig> base pair sequence from the vector that is common to all of the cdna spotted on the slides, but does not contain any specific gene sequence. oligomers larger than  <dig> bases have similar hybridization characteristics as biological rna  <cit> . vrna was tested on  <dig> microarrays and was found to reproducibly yield strong signal for almost every spot on the array.

detectability
we call a spot detectable if it has a signal-to-noise ratio  larger than three  and define percent detectability as the fraction of all spots on an array that are detectable. for comparison to other results  <cit> , we also calculate percent spots with a signal to background ratio  greater than two. we studied cdna and oligonucleotide microarray datasets in the gene expression omnibus   <cit>  that used stratagene's universal reference rna™. a search on geo of "stratagene universal reference" yields  <dig> experiments . the subset of these that contain background signal standard deviation information were analyzed for signal detectability using snr and signal-to-background ratio . the results are presented in table  <dig> . on average in these datasets, only 60% of the genes had detectable spots . vrna empirically is calibrated such that almost all spots are detectable . table  <dig> shows that the vrna dataset has 97% detectable spots on the vrna channel . typically additive background noise corrupts the measurements of one dye more than the other affecting the detectability of the signal  <cit> . therefore, using vrna with the weaker dye can greatly increase the overall detectability of spots.

calibration of vrna sample
we performed a titration experiment using concentrations 1: <dig>  1: <dig>  1: <dig>  and 1: <dig> of vcdna prepared . ideally, signal intensities for all spots should decrease 50% with each dilution. a ratio of less than two suggests either saturation or loss of detectability, and thus the best dilution is the one that yields the highest signal intensity in the linear regime of the dilution curve. figure  <dig> illustrates the intensities of low, medium, and high intensity spots over different vcdna dilutions. the dilution that was the best for the majority of the spots was 1: <dig> 

narrow dynamic range of vrna signal intensity
we compared the dynamic range of datasets using stratagene universal reference rna™ as reference to our vector reference design with respect to the metric of detectability without saturation. the spot intensities obtained from geo datasets  using stratagene's universal reference rna™ ranges from undetectable to saturation. however, spot intensities of vrna are more consistent, never saturated, and undetectable only when the concentration of spotted pcr product is insufficient. figure  <dig> shows histograms of background corrected spot intensities of microarray experiments representative of using stratagene's universal reference rna™  and vrna. we also expect the dynamic range of vrna signal intensity to be smaller than that of genomic dna reference because vrna is homogenous. vrna allows for more flexibility in calibration than a biologically derived reference because the vcdna is homogeneous and the resulting signal intensities have a smaller dynamic range.

comparison of reference designs using biologically derived reference and vrna
stratagene's universal reference rna™  is a commonly used biologically derived reference for use in reference designs  <cit> . we studied cdna and oligonucleotide microarray datasets in geo that used stratagene's universal reference rna™. all  <dig> datasets in table  <dig> showed a statistically significant difference in detectability between dyes. most groups show improved cy <dig> signal detectability over cy <dig> . in typical cases where detectability is significantly different between the dyes, it is clear that vrna can improve the detectability of the weaker channel thus boosting the fraction of genes that produce detectable signal. we have calculated detectability measurements for an arbitrary sample of geo experiments that use pooled biological samples as a reference and obtained similar results .

value of the vector reference design with respect to quality control issues
vrna can be used as a quality control sample. by hybridizing labeled vcdna with saturating concentrations in vast excess of the dna spotted on the slide, all of the spots containing clones should show spot intensities proportional to the amount of dna competent for hybridization in the spot. in the vrna design those spots that do not have signal intensities much higher than background  represent clones that have insufficient concentrations of pcr product possibly due to failed or inefficient pcr reactions, no bacterial growth, or robotic printing errors. rouse et al. describes a reagent derived from synthesized oligonucleotides similar to vrna in order to quantitate the amount of cdna printed in each array element and subsequently determine the molar stoichiometry of the target cdna bound to the probe molecules available for hybridization  <cit> .

in a study of ethanol adaptation using vrna  <cit> , the median fraction of detectable spots using vrna was 86% . about 10% of the spots contained insufficient concentrations of pcr product and were easily distinguishable from other spots using a snr threshold of  <dig> . after rearraying our slides and adding higher concentration pcr product to spots with low signal intensity from the vrna sample, the median cy <dig> detectability was increased to 95% and the cy <dig> detectability was increased to 97% .

vrna can identify printing errors. while insufficient pcr product from printing plates yield undetectable spots on every slide, some slides contain missing spots specific to that slide due to a robotic printing error where the print tip did not touch that microarray and deposit cdna. vrna provides an in-slide control for all printing errors. the data from spots not printed should not be considered in subsequent microarray analysis. figure 4a shows an example of spots not printed as detected by the vrna sample channel.

finally, the vrna can help detect hybridization inconsistencies by showing non-uniformities in the image. figure 4b illustrates an artifact caused by an air bubble as seen on the vrna sample channel. this anomaly is not visually obvious in the image of the biological sample channel  and, by inference, in the image of a biologically derived reference sample . the overall uniformity of signal intensities resulting from using vrna makes it possible for researchers to quickly identify and flag these problem areas of the microarray. as with other reference designs, the reference channel may help to normalize these anomalies from slide to slide, but if the anomaly is visibly clear, we suggest flagging those spots as bad spots and removing these features from downstream analyses.

vrna and spot finding
using vrna yields a bright signal for each spot  and therefore makes spot finding much simpler. by thresholding the image by some large pixel intensity that is well above the background intensity level but within the range of the vrna signal , all contiguous objects with over  <dig> pixels represent a spot or a bright artifact . the spots are uniformly distributed with a grid pattern  and because over 90% of the spots should be bright , detecting the subarrays and the positions of each spot is straightforward. since the channel representing the vrna sample contains the same physical layout as the channel representing the biological sample, the same spot location and segmentation data derived from the reference channel can be applied to the biological sample channel.

discussion
based on our analysis of publicly available datasets from geo, the vector reference design improves on previous approaches to reference design. the vrna results show improved detectability compared to traditional references such as the stratagene universal reference rna™ or pooled biological samples. we measured detectability as a function of signal-to-noise ratio  and signal-to-background ratio . the second measure  is not as statistically rigorous and can be biased by adjusting the mean background signal up or down, but using it allows one to also consider datasets which do not include background intensity standard deviations, which is typical of most datasets publicly available in geo . one dataset  was excluded due to atypical background issues. for all cases evaluated, vrna provides higher detectability than the other references used.

we showed how vrna could be used for spot finding and for quality control of pcr product generation, batch printing, array manufacture, protocol evaluation, and individual hybridizations. the vrna sample channel image can be visually inspected to ensure that there are no artifacts caused by technical problems. spots with low signal detectability should be flagged as bad spots and excluded from downstream analyses. commercial references and pooled sample references do not lend themselves to these quality control features because they contain many genes with low expression and thus produce many spots that are not detectable. therefore anomalies that are apparent using vrna as a reference are hidden when using other reference samples.

reference samples yielding detectable but not saturating signals for all spots have been previously reported. several groups created references from the clones used to make their microarrays. the first approach, outlined by dudley et al  <cit> , uses a  <dig> mer oligomer that matches a small portion of the parental est clone vector that is contained in every pcr product printed on the microarray. specifically, it matched the pcr primer used to make pcr product from the clones. however, the melting point of hybridized oligomers increases with length up to about  <dig> bases  <cit> . therefore, the characteristics of hybridization to the spotted cdna are different between a  <dig> base oligomer and a typical cdna . ideally, a reference should have identical hybridization characteristics to biological cdna to control for hybridization variability.

a second method of creating a universal reference from the characteristics of the clone is described by sterreburg et al.  <cit> . briefly, they suggest pooling all clones together in a single tube, performing a pcr reaction to create in vitro transcription template for all of the cdna inserts, in vitro transcription of the pcr product, dnase treatment, reverse transcription, and labeling. this produces a reference sample representing all of the sequences on the array. each sequence in the reference sample still contains the flanking regions of the parental est clone vector. gorreta et al.  <cit>  simplifies this process by simply labeling the pcr product. both of these reference samples yield over 90% detectability of all spots on the array whereas the stratagene universal reference rna™ sample produces 50% detectability  <cit> . however, reference sample produced by both of these methods cannot be used to compare datasets across laboratories.

we developed a new universal reference combining and extending the advantages of sterrenburg et al.  <cit> , gorreta et al.  <cit> , and dudley et al.  <cit>  show that only the sequence common to all of the pcr products  is needed to provide a strong detectable signal and reliable measure of hybridization and printing variability. we have developed a method to make such a reagent that is quick, cheap, repeatable, and effective. rouse et al. uses a similar reagent, in large molar excess to probe molecules, in a method which attempts to determine a stoichiometric molar ratio between hybridized cdna and available probe molecules spotted on the array  <cit> . our universal reference increases the detectability of spots on an array to an average of 97%. this is comparable to their results  <cit>  while requiring significantly less effort and money and providing a homogeneous rna sample. finally, although the concept of using a vrna reference is universal, one must ensure the appropriate parental sequence is used. a commercially produced vrna sample would allow for comparison of datasets across laboratories using cdna microarrays that use the same parental vector. pt7t3d-pac vectors are commonly used in clone libraries. 50% of all rat clones, 25% of all mouse clones, and 25% of all human clones use the pt7t3d-pac vector.

we have presented a method for creating a vrna sample using clones containing the pt7t3d-pac vector. vrna can be made for clones that use other vectors as well. the t <dig> rna amplification step requires a t <dig> promoter, which is present in many vectors. alternatively, pcr can be used to replace the in vitro transcription  step. multiple vectors  can be mixed together to create a universal reference that can be used on 75% of all rat, mouse, and human clones.

vector reference designs can only be used in microarrays that are spotted with cdna that have common sequence, such as pcr product generated from clones. affymetrix arrays typically use one dye and are not amenable to reference designs because they contain short  gene specific sequences with no common sequence on all array features. spotted oligonucleotide arrays such as operon  or compugen/sigma  do not contain a common sequence in each spot. in the future, such a  <dig> base sequence could be manufactured. currently  <dig> bases can be efficiently synthesized . therefore, a small improvement in oligonucleotide synthesizing techniques could yield  <dig> base oligonucleotides that contain  <dig> bases of a gene of interest and  <dig> bases of a common sequence. in situ oligonucleotide arrays such as agilent arrays could, in principle, be designed in a similar manner. however, current commercially available in situ oligonucleotide synthesis arrays are limited to  <dig> base oligomers .

vrna reference designs increase reproducibility across experiments because the reference signal is detectable for all spots on the array. this increased reproducibility of data across arrays increases the sensitivity of the differential gene expression measurements and enables system-wide detection of small, physiologically relevant changes in gene expression.

CONCLUSIONS
results of this study show that a reference sample  derived from the parental est clone vector of all clones printed on an array provides a useful universal reference that can be used for quality control of microarray printing and pcr product quality, detection of hybridization anomalies, and simplification of spot finding and segmentation tasks. vrna can be made inexpensively in large quantities as a renewable resource that is consistent across experiments. this type of reference allows for detection of small changes in differential expression while reference designs in general allow for large-scale multivariate experimental designs. vrna in combination with reference designs enable systems biology microarray experiments of small physiologically relevant changes.

