BACKGROUND
control, and ultimately eradication of malaria require effective drugs to treat infections. the current most widely-used artemisinin-based combination therapies are being undermined by the emergence of resistance in southeast asia. isolates from different p. falciparum parasite populations displaying slow clearance in patients possess 10– <dig> fold greater tolerance to artemisinin and derivatives with the same pharmacophore  in vitro  <cit> .

following the completion of the p. falciparum genome sequence and the development of microarray technology for interrogating the transcriptome, several studies were published of parasite transcriptomic response to perturbation, including anti-malarial drugs. whereas parasite response to some drugs such as antifolates is modest  <cit> , other drugs, including art provoke a greater response  <cit> . greater understanding of the parasite transcriptional response to art could give insight into the drug’s mode of action and the mechanism of parasite resistance, since art-resistant parasites display altered transcriptional programs during the normal intra-erythrocytic development cycle , as shown by microarray analysis of slow-clearance field isolates  <cit>  and laboratory-induced resistant parasites  <cit> . interpretation of the art transcriptional response is complicated by the fact that sensitivity to this class of drug varies greatly through the idc; trophozoites are the most sensitive, whereas other stages are up to 100-fold less sensitive . this variation could correspond with different transcriptional responses depending on the stage of parasite developmental.

a previous microarray study of artesunate response in p. falciparum trophozoites revealed a major transcriptional response to the drug  <cit> . however, the question of whether other stages of parasite development would respond in a similar fashion was not addressed, and so it was not clear if the parasite could respond in a way to counteract the effect of the drug. some of the artesunate-induced changes in gene expression might reflect a protective response by the parasite, since transgenic over-expression of a tryptophan-rich protein unique to plasmodium parasites  reduces artesunate sensitivity  <cit> .

art therapy is used to treat p. falciparum and p. vivax infections, and various art compounds including dihydroartemisinin  are similarly potent against rodent malaria parasite species such as p. berghei  <cit> . given the similarity of drug action against different plasmodium species, it is plausible that there is a common pattern of transcriptional response against this class of drug. in this study, we explored plasmodium response to art with the aim of identifying patterns of gene expression across developmental stages and species that could give further insight into mechanism of drug action. we performed microarray analysis of the p. falciparum trophozoite dha response, and performed a meta-analysis of these data together with published microarray data for artesunate and artemisinin responses. the profile of plasmodium response to dha was explored further by rna-seq analysis of drug-treated synchronized p. falciparum ring, trophozoite and schizont cultures and mixed stage p. berghei in infected mice.

RESULTS
p. falciparum k <dig> strain response to dha assessed by microarray analysis
we tested the transcriptional response to dha, as this compound is an active metabolite of art compounds in clinical use. the transcriptional response to this compound was tested for in vitro treatment of p. falciparum k <dig> using an experimental design similar to that used previously for artesunate  <cit> . synchronized trophozoite cultures were exposed to therapeutic concentrations of dha  for  <dig>   <dig> and 3 h. the transcriptomic changes induced by the drug were determined by comparing microarray profiles of drug treated with matched vehicle-treated controls. a major transcriptional response was observed after 1 h, as revealed by the  <dig> features showing significant differential expression. after removal of dubious and multiple features mapping to the same gene,  <dig> differentially expressed genes were identified. similar numbers of significant features were found for the other treatment time-points .

the dha responses were compared with those reported for artesunate  <cit>  and artemisinin  <cit> . on the one hand, we were not expecting much correspondence among these datasets since different compounds at different concentrations and treatment regimens were used, parasite strains were different, and microarraydesigns and protocols differed. on the other hand, a reproducible set of genes may be found if drugs with the same pharmacophore provoke a similar response. from meta-analysis of expression changes across different treatments, a set of  <dig> down- and  <dig> up-regulated significant genes were found . gene ontology  analysis showed significant enrichment of the terms go:0043228 ~ non-membrane-bounded organelle and go:0043232 ~ intracellular non-membrane-bounded organelle among down-regulated genes , which primarily relate to the cytoplasmic ribosome. no terms were significant among up-regulated genes. the dha-induced changes positively correlated with changes observed during normal ring and early trophozoite development ), whereas drug-induced changes negatively correlated with mature trophozoite and schizont stages  .fig.  <dig> artemisinin and derivative drug  response from microarray data analysis. a. heatmap of genes with significant changes in expression  by rankproducts meta-analysis of microarray data for artemisinin  <cit> , artesunate  <cit>  and dha  induced changes. rows correspond to genes and columns parasite drug treatments. the values used for clustering are the average of treatment replicates, or the average of multiple probe measurements for the same gene . columns and rows were ordered by hierarchical clustering; the row dendrogram is omitted for clarity. treatments cluster according to drug derivative/microarray study, as shown by side bars. b. correlation of dha-induced transcriptional changes  in p. falciparum k <dig> strain with hb <dig> strain intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle changes over  <dig> time-points of hours post-invasion   <cit> . pearson correlation coefficients  were calculated from  <dig> shared oligo probe features



plasmodium falciparum dha response assessed by rna-seq data analysis
in vitro dha treatments of p. falciparum k <dig> were repeated , but this time on synchronized ring, trophozoite and schizont parasites. the transcriptomes of the untreated parasite populations showed maximal correlation with early , mature  and late  time-points of the idc from published rna-seq studies, respectively . drug treatments had no effect on parasite morphology . the transcriptional responses to dha among the different stage parasites were determined by comparing strand-specific rna-seq read counts of drug-treated with matched vehicle-treated controls.fig.  <dig> correlation of dha drug-induced and developmental transcriptional changes from rna-seq data. rna-seq data from untreated p. falciparum k <dig> ring , trophozoite  and schizont  synchronized parasites were compared with published rna-seq data from time-points taken during the intra-erythrocytic developmental cycle  . pearson correlation coefficients  were calculated from  <dig> genes expressed in all time-points, defined as hours post-invasion . transcriptomic changes in expression induced by 1 h dha treatment for ring , trophozoite  and schizont  parasites were correlated with changes during the idc . the overlap of genes with significant change in expression under dha treatment in ring and trophozoite parasites is shown for down-regulated genes in  and up-regulated genes in 



the global profile of transcriptomic changes induced by dha for rings and trophozoites were almost mirror-image profiles of untreated parasites at the same stages of development . in contrast, the patterns of gene expression in dha-treated schizonts were indistinguishable from normal schizont development . of the three stages, the most dramatic response was observed for the trophozoite stage in which  <dig> genes showed significant change. in contrast,  <dig> genes were differentially expressed in ring, and none in schizont stage parasites . among the differentially expressed genes in rings and trophozoites, there was considerable overlap . go analysis showed that cytosolic ribosome function was strongly represented among down-regulated genes in rings  and trophozoites . significant go terms relating to apicoplast and protein phosphorylation functions were represented among up-regulated genes in trophozoites .table  <dig> gene ontology analysis of genes down-regulated in response to dha in p. falciparum k <dig> rings from rna-seq analysis

enrichment of go terms in  <dig> significantly down-regulated genes  was calculated relative to the total of  <dig> genes detected as expressed in this stage . the go terms listed are those considered significant from david analysis  and non-redundant by revigo filtering

enrichment of go terms in  <dig> significantly down-regulated genes  was calculated relative to the total of  <dig> genes detected as expressed in this stage . the go terms listed are those considered significant from david analysis  and non-redundant by revigo filtering

enrichment of go terms in  <dig> significantly up-regulated genes  was calculated relative to the total of  <dig> genes detected as expressed in this stage . the go terms listed are those considered significant from david analysis  and non-redundant by revigo filtering



rna-seq is a recent, maturing technology which has not yet been used extensively to study transcriptomic responses to drugs. we compared data obtained for the p. falciparum k <dig> strain trophozoite response from the two transcriptomic approaches. although many differentially expressed genes were called as significant, the overlap between microarray and rna-seq was rather low, with only  <dig> down- and  <dig> up-regulated genes in common . to investigate the possible reasons for the discordance between experimental approaches, the distributions of up- and down-regulated genes with respect to the average expression level were determined. for microarray significant genes, the distribution of up-and down-regulated genes is about the same irrespective of the gene expression level . in contrast for rna-seq, a bias towards up-regulation is observed for lowest-expressed genes and a down-regulation bias is apparent for highest expressed genes .fig.  <dig> comparison of p. falciparum k <dig> dha-responsive genes from microarray and rna-seq data. the genes identified as showing significant changes in expression in response to 1 h dha treatment for p. falciparum k <dig> trophozoites from microarray  and rna-seq  experiments were compared. the overlap of down-regulated genes is shown in  and overlap of up-regulated genes in . the distributions of dha-induced change in expression of differentially expressed genes with respect to average level of gene expression are shown for microarray in  and rna-seq in . the log <dig>  values for  <dig> genes from microarray and  <dig> genes from rna-seq were divided equally into  <dig> intervals of average expression. the distributions of log <dig>  values in each interval were determined by beanplot analysis; the mean gene expression change in each interval is shown by a horizontal line and the distributions of gene expression change are indicated by the “bean” shapes. wilcoxon rank sum test of these distributions showed that 3/ <dig> pairwise comparisons in the microarray data are significant , whereas 21/ <dig> pairwise comparisons in the rna-seq data are significant 



plasmodium berghei in vivo dha response assessed by rna-seq data analysis
next, we tested whether the transcriptomic response to dha treatment is conserved among plasmodium parasite species with similar sensitivity to the drug. drug treatments were performed on p. berghei in vivo in infected mice. although p. berghei infections are not synchronous, parasites in the peripheral animal blood are mostly ring and trophozoite stages. given the high degree of overlap in genes showing a significant change in expression in response to dha between synchronous ring and trophozoite p. falciparum , we reasoned that we would find a similar pattern in terms of dha-responsive gene functions in the mixed ring/trophozoite stage p. berghei. the lack of synchronicity and a suitable dataset for comparing with changes throughout the idc prevented us from determining whether p. berghei also shows a global arrest response in ring and trophozoite stages. the strand-specific rna-seq data from dha-treated parasites were compared with vehicle-treated controls.  <dig> genes showed significant changes in expression . some of these genes have no orthologues in p. falciparum, including  <dig> annotated as exported proteins specific to rodent parasite species. of the  <dig> genes remaining that are orthologous in p. falciparum,  <dig> p. falciparum orthologues also showed significant change in response to dha in ring and/or trophozoites . the majority of these dha-responsive genes common between species were down-regulated. moreover, cytosolic ribosome function was significantly represented among these genes by go analysis .fig.  <dig> dha-responsive genes conserved among plasmodium species. the heatmap shows average dha-induced changes relative to vehicle control from two replicates, as determined by limma analysis of rna-seq read count data.  <dig> genes orthologous between p. berghei anka and p. falciparum k <dig> showed significant change in response to dha in both species. the ordering of genes in rows and columns is arbitrary. genes with related functions are grouped, as shown by the side-bars. genes are labeled by the p. falciparum orthologue gene id

go analysis was performed using corresponding p. falciparum orthologous genes. enrichment of go terms in  <dig> differentially expressed genes with p. falciparum orthologues  was calculated relative to the total of  <dig> genes detected as expressed in the p. berghei anka samples with p. falciparum orthologues . the go terms listed are those considered significant from david analysis  and non-redundant by revigo filtering



discussion
plasmodium parasite transcriptional responses to the anti-malarial drug dha were studied. we performed short treatments of drug at high concentration to mimic what the parasite would have to respond to in a typical therapeutic intervention. the transcriptional response to dha for the p. falciparum k <dig> strain was first explored by microarray to permit comparison with other drug responses at the same trophozoite stage in this strain. dha exposure elicits a marked response that is very similar among the three time-points tested . the majority of trophozoites are inviable after 1 h exposure to  <dig> nm dha  <cit> . therefore, the consistent transcriptomic pattern of dha response in trophozoites is a signature of loss of viability. moreover, this pattern is consistent across independent microarray studies measuring response to different artemisinin derivatives . this loss of viability pattern is obscured in the transcriptomic response to slower acting anti-malarial drugs such as pyronaridine and chloroquine  <cit>  and antifolates  <cit> , perhaps because of confounding transcriptomic changes occurring through normal cell cycle progression during the longer drug treatment period needed to observe a significant transcriptional response.

correlation analyses of ring and trophozoite dha treatment profiles with the idc show that these parasite stages respond to the drug by global reprogramming of transcriptomes. this is shown most markedly for trophozoites by the negative correlation between dha treatment profiles and mid-cycle idc time-points corresponding to trophozoite maturation . apart from a brief early ring phase, this is the same period during the idc when parasites are most vulnerable to dha  <cit> . the transcriptome of rings is similarly reprogrammed in that there is negative correlation of dha-induced changes with ring and trophozoite time-points during the idc . moreover, there is extensive overlap of differentially expressed genes induced by dha between rings and trophozoites . the ring and trophozoite transcriptional response to dha may thus be an arrest mechanism to retard metabolic processes essential for maturation, as shown by down-regulation of glycolysis and protein synthesis genes . in contrast, schizonts do not respond to dha . the lack of transcriptional response in schizonts can be explained by their reduced protein synthesis  <cit>  and transcription  <cit> . moreover, schizonts are also less able to down-regulate gene expression because of an overall reduced rate of mrna decay  <cit> .

the maturation and metabolic status of the cell is critical in determining sensitivity to art across other cell types, since actively dividing mammalian cells are more susceptible to art-induced cell death than quiescent cells  <cit> . the arrest transcriptomic pattern in dha-treated rings may be a trigger for a physiological protective change, e.g. dormancy. we did not observe dormant parasites in our experiments  as we harvested parasites immediately after a short treatment period . strains with lower sensitivity to art are better able to enter, or recover from dormancy . a similar trait has been observed in parasite isolates from slow-clearing infections  <cit>  and a rodent malaria model  <cit> , suggesting that in vitro tests of art response correspond well to the situation in vivo. in trophozoites, the transcriptional response to dha does not lead to a protective physiological change, perhaps because parasites at this stage are committed to an anaplerotic metabolic state in which glycolysis, tca cycling and glutamiolysis occur at high rates  <cit> . the commitment to anaplerosis may occur quite early in the idc, since art-resistant strains are significantly more tolerant of  <dig> nm dha than sensitive strains only for early ring stages of development  <cit> . recently, it has been shown that art-resistant clones from slow-clearing infection isolates have elongated ring and shortened trophozoite development stages  <cit> . these adaptations enhance the parasite’s ability to become a dormant ring and minimize the art-vulnerable trophozoite stage.

the arrest response to art in p. falciparum rings and trophozoites, perhaps acting as a trigger to prevent the parasite from maturing, implies that key metabolic functions  may be disrupted by art. plasmodium is exquisitely sensitive to art, in part because of oxidative damage mediated by interaction of art with heme, a major source of molecular iron. although hemoglobin-heme is highly abundant in the parasite’s food vacuole, this may not be the major site for the drug’s killing effect since the ingested content containing red cell cytosolic proteins such as haemoglobin and catalase can help to detoxify artemisinin  <cit> . another site of parasite heme and molecular iron is the mitochondrion, in which these cofactors are essential for the functions of cytochromes and iron-sulfur proteins. although some genes with mitochondrial function are differentially expressed in response to dha, e.g. up-regulation of pf3d7_ <dig>  and pf3d7_ <dig>  genes in trophozoites , there is no concerted regulation of genes with mitochondrial function as shown by the absence of related significant go terms . the lack of a coordinated parasite response regarding mitochondrial function suggests that late rings and trophozoites are committed to mitochondrial biogenesis, which is perhaps linked to commitment to anaplerosis . maturing parasites committed in this manner are vulnerable to art because mitochondrial biogenesis exposes the cell to the oxidative stress effects of art acting in combination with heme and molecular iron. the inability of committed cells to arrest mitochondrial biogenesis imposes a futile energy expenditure, since mitochondrial function is ablated by art . merozoites are less vulnerable to art  <cit> , because they are equipped with poorly developed mitochondria and have low metabolic requirements. schizonts have low metabolic requirement and are less sensitive to art than trophozoites as they have fully developed mitochondria. we therefore postulate that maturing parasites committed to mitochondrial biogenesis are fated to art-induced death, whereas young uncommitted cells can become dormant. our data are thus consistent with the proposal in  <cit>  that plasmodium maintains expression of most mitochondrial genes, which enables rapid recovery of mitochondrial function when exiting from art-induced dormancy.

among genes showing significant down-regulation in response to dha in plasmodium rings and trophozoites, it is notable that cytosolic ribosome function is represented among significant go terms from both microarray and rna-seq data . this coordinated down-regulation is particularly striking for dha-treated rings, since expression of these genes is maximal during the first 20 h of normal development  <cit> . the coordinated down-regulation of plasmodium ribosomal protein genes is not surprising since they possess a common regulatory element in their promoters, the g-box, and putative positive and negative transcription factors to control their expressions have been described  <cit> . it is interesting to note that concerted repression of yeast cytosolic ribosomal protein genes also occurs under hydrogen peroxide stress, and this response is dependent on thiol peroxidase enzymes  <cit> . plasmodium lack catalase and gpx enzymes, and so they rely on thiol peroxidase enzymes and the nadph pathway for maintaining redox balance  <cit> . it is tempting to speculate that thiol peroxidase enzymes become oxidized under art stress similar to hydrogen peroxide stress. the accumulation of these oxidized enzymes could trigger a peroxide-signalling event  <cit>  that activates the observed gross transcriptional response in parasites. one potential regulator of such a peroxide-signalling event is the nuclear thiol peroxidase pfnprx, which is essential and has intimate association with most of the parasite genome  <cit> .

of the significant go terms among up-regulated trophozoite genes in response to dha , apicoplast function was recently shown by qrt-pcr to be up-regulated in p. falciparum recovering from dha treatment; the up-regulation of pyruvate metabolism in the apicoplast is thought to compensate for reduced atp levels caused by down-regulation of glycolysis and tca cycle  <cit> . among the up-regulated genes representing significant protein phosphorylation go terms are  <dig> fikk kinase genes . fikk kinases are exported to the host red cell and play important roles in pathogenesis  <cit> . in accordance with the findings made by natalang et al. for artesunate response  <cit> , many other genes for exported proteins from different families such as hyp, phist, pfmc-2tm, pfemp <dig>  resa, etramp, surfin are significantly up-regulated in dha-treated p. falciparum trophozoites . the expressions of plasmodium translocon of exported proteins  genes recently shown to be essential for protein export  <cit>  are also significantly up-regulated in dha-treated trophozoites . increased protein export may be the final act of dying parasites to restore the energy deficit, since exported proteins are essential for uptake of nutrients  <cit> .

recently, mutations in the pf3d7_ <dig> gene encoding k <dig> protein have been associated with artemisinin resistance in southeast asia  <cit> . interestingly, this gene is significantly up-regulated in response to dha in trophozoites . k <dig> mutations in art resistant parasites appear to reduce ubiquitinylation of proteins, including pfp13k  <cit> . the expression of the pfpi3k encoding gene pf3d7_ <dig> does not change in response to dha . the up-regulation of k <dig> in response to dha could reduce pfp13k protein through the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway, and in turn lead to reduced phosphatidyl inositol-3-phosphate p). reduced pip could lead to interference of protein export from the endoplasmic reticulum , which is dependent on pip  <cit> . interference of protein export would presumably lead to er stress, for which p. falciparum is notably vulnerable  <cit> . among the genes with altered expression during normal development in art resistant parasites, genes encoding proteins in the unfolded protein response  are notably up-regulated  <cit> . the key genes in this pathway, i.e. pf3d7_ <dig> , pf3d7_ <dig> , pf3d7_ <dig> , pf3d7_ <dig> , pf3d7_ <dig>  and pf3d7_ <dig>  are significantly down-regulated in p. falciparum ring and/or trophozoites exposed to dha . furthermore, the p. berghei orthologues of cyp19a and erc  are also significantly down-regulated in response to dha . from these observations, it appears that art resistant parasites have adaptations in the arrest transcriptional response to specifically counteract the er stress induced by art, in particular reversal of expression changes that could actually sensitize the parasite to drug. this trend is also apparent for genes with antioxidant function, which are up-regulated in dha-resistant parasites to counteract the oxidant stress induced by the drug  <cit> . among genes with known antioxidant function, the pf3d7_ <dig> , pf3d7_ <dig> , and pf3d7_ <dig>  genes are down-regulated in response to dha in p. falciparum trophozoites  and the orthologues in p. berghei .

the in vivo dha response in p. berghei was strikingly similar to the ring and trophozoite responses in p. falciparum, as shown by the high correspondence of differentially expressed orthologous genes from rna-seq data  and with the same significant representation of cytosolic ribosome function by go analysis . the transcriptional responses between species were similar despite the fact that the p. berghei were not synchronous and the read depth was much lower for p. berghei owing to contaminating mouse mrna, as shown by the high percentage of reads mapping to mus musculus . this could mean that the transcriptional response in ring and trophozoite stages to dha  is conserved among plasmodium parasite species with similar sensitivity to the drug, although this would need to be investigated further with synchronous parasites.

although similar overall patterns of dha-response in p. falciparum trophozoites were found among microarray and rna-seq data, there was rather poor agreement in terms of specific genes showing significant changes in expression . the p. falciparum microarray data analyzed in this study were generated from two-channel platforms. these data must be normalized using aggressive techniques such as locally weighted linear regression to correct for intensity-dependent dye bias due to differences in physical properties of the two cyanine fluorescent dyes. data normalization in this fashion can be inaccurate though when central assumptions are violated, for example when a high proportion of genes are differentially expressed, and/or there is a skewed direction of change in gene expression. in this situation, external rna controls may be required  <cit> . this approach is rarely used though as it depends crucially on the quality of the external controls, and appropriate probes for the controls designed on the array. normalization of rna-seq data is simpler than microarray as it involves re-scaling of global read counts. in some cases where mrna content varies greatly among cell types, external controls may be required for normalization, as proposed in microarray experiments  <cit> . however, the standard trimmed mean of m-values  normalization method, as we have used in our rna-seq experiments, is robust to skewed changes provided mrna contents are similar  <cit> . for the dha-responsive genes found by rna-seq, we found a clear bias in that highly expressed genes were skewed towards down-regulation, and the opposite skew for low-expressed genes. in contrast, there was no marked bias from normalized microarray data . we think that the microarray normalization procedure removes the skew, which leads to inaccurate normalization, and consequently inaccuracy in identification of differentially expressed genes. in contrast, rna-seq data normalization is more accurate, as shown by greater statistical support for differentially expressed genes and high reproducibility, even among different species.

CONCLUSIONS
our data show that rna-seq is a powerful tool for identifying the malaria parasite’s response to anti-malarial drugs. in particular, the arrest response at ring and trophozoite stages to dha is clearly evident from rna-seq data, but is less obvious from microarray data. as sequencing costs continue to fall, a far more detailed study than we have done of the transcriptional response to anti-malarial drug could be undertaken. in particular, more extensive sampling of drug treatment including parasite starting age, drug dose and time-point of treatment may reveal the full complexity of the arrest response employed by the parasite. this knowledge could lead to more effective use of existing drugs as we would be able to deploy drugs in combinations and therapies to circumvent the protective response by the parasite, and possibly forestall drug resistance.

