BACKGROUND
β-lactamase is one of the major mechanisms of antibiotic resistance in bacteria. enzymes of this family deactivate β-lactam antibiotics by hydrolyzing the conserved β-lactam moiety in the antibiotics and rendering them ineffective to bind to their target proteins, the penicillin-binding proteins , which are essential for bacterial cell wall synthesis and survival  <cit> . detailed mechanistic studies of these enzymes over the past decades have revealed a conserved mechanism of β-lactam hydrolysis that consists of two steps, the acylation step in which the β-lactam ring is "opened" and acylated to the side chain hydroxyl group of ser <dig> through nucleophilic attack to form the enzyme-substrate acyl adduct es*; followed by the deacylation step in which the es* intermediate is hydrolyzed and released as e + p facilitated by glu <dig>   <cit> .

the substrate profile of a β-lactamase in hydrolyzing diverse β-lactam antibiotics is strongly influenced by a structural element termed Ω-loop, a short stretch of residues on the surface of the β-lactamase structure that forms part of the outer part of the antibiotic binding site  <cit> . for narrow-spectrum β-lactamases such as the penp used in this study and the clinically significant tem- <dig> or shv- <dig> enzymes, Ω-loop is tightly packed onto the enzyme active site through hydrophobic and electrostatic interactions with residues lining the catalytic site, posing as steric hindrance for binding of second- or third-generation antibiotics with bulky side chains attached onto the β-lactam nucleus. many mutant strains of tem- and shv-like β-lactamases overcome this inefficiency and broaden their hydrolytic profile by acquiring mutations in the Ω-loop region to render this region more flexible to accommodate large-sized antibiotics  <cit> . many extended-spectrum β-lactamases have significantly extended Ω-loop, resulting in an enlarged active site that readily binds to and hydrolyzes almost all antibiotics  <cit> .

exploiting the proximity of Ω-loop to the antibiotic binding site and its structural flexibility, we have successfully converted a β-lactamase penpc from bacillus cereus 569/h into a biosensor for β-lactam antibiotics by mutating the catalytically critical residue glu <dig> on the Ω-loop to cysteine and conjugating an environment-sensitive fluorescein molecule to its reactive side chain thiol group to form penpc-e166cf as reported in previous studies  <cit> . fluorescein is an environment-sensitive fluorophore with suppressed fluorescence in a hydrophobic environment but fluoresces strongly in a polar aqueous environment  <cit> . the mutation of glu <dig> to cysteine severely reduces the efficiency of the deacylation step of β-lactamase catalysis, rendering the enzyme to stall at the acylation step and form a stable es* acyl adduct that enhances the fluorescence emission of the conjugated fluorescein  <cit> . we have speculated that the fluorescein molecule is positioned near the catalytic site so that the binding and subsequent acylation of β-lactam antibiotics would displace it to a more polar environment, enhancing its fluorescence intensity  <cit> .

here we report structural studies of fluorescein-conjugated penp β-lactamase from bacillus licheniformis 749/c to validate our proposed biosensing mechanism. the structural findings suggest an important role of Ω-loop in the biosensing process, which will help the rational design of improved biosensors for β-lactam detection as well as for novel antibiotics discovery.

RESULTS
the biosensing profile of penp-e166cf
the biosensing profile of fluorescein conjugated penp  for detecting β-lactam antibiotics have never been reported before. in our previous study, a highly similar enzyme, penpc from bacillus cereus 569/h with 58% amino acid sequence identity to penp, was successfully engineered into a biosensor using the same design scheme   <cit> . we chose to work with penp in this study for the advantage of its easy propensity for crystallization, which would enable structural studies to understand its biosensing mechanism at atomic resolution. penpc, on the other hand, has poor thermal stability and is difficult to crystallize. because of the high sequence similarity between these two proteins, as well as the general sequence conservation among all class a β-lactamase enzymes we expect that penp can serve as a good model system to understand the biosensing mechanism of fluorescein-based biosensing.

indeed the biosensing profile of penp-e166cf is highly similar to that of penpc-e166cf. the conjugation of fluorescein to the mutated cys <dig> residue through thiol linkage is highly efficient for penp. the esi-ms profile confirmed that over 90% of penp was labelled by the fluorophore and converted to penp-e166cf, with little unlabelled penp remaining . the fluorescence scanning spectrum of penp-e166cf shows an increase of ~25% in emitted intensity when the antibiotic cefotaxime is present at  <dig> μm concentration . a variety of β-lactam antibiotics, including the first-, second- and third-generation compounds with diverse chemical structures in addition to the conserved β-lactam core, induce significant fluorescence enhancement in penp-e166cf at concentration as low as  <dig> μm . lastly the time-dependent spectra of penp-e166cf in the presence of cefotaxime at different concentrations ranging from  <dig>  μm to  <dig> μm shows that penp-e166cf can detect cefotaxime at concentration as low as  <dig>  μm and the fluorescence response is saturated at  <dig> μm .

the structure of penp-e166cf in apo form
penp-e166cf readily crystallized in the form of clustered needles. these crystals were tinted in bright yellow colour, indicating the presence of fluorescein . to confirm that fluorescein remaining conjugated to the protein in the crystal form we harvested and thoroughly washed these yellow-coloured crystals and analyzed the dissolved crystals on sds-page gel under both visible and uv light. a band corresponding to penp  is clearly visible under both conditions, confirming that the crystals are indeed of penp-e166cf .

the structure of penp-e166cf was solved by molecular replacement using the known structure of penp  as search model. two molecules of penp-e166cf are found in each asymmetric unit. structure rebuilding and refinement were done in ccp <dig> program  <cit> . the overall structure of penp-e166cf is largely identical to that of the wild-type unlabeled penp. the rmsd of all  <dig> protein atoms between the labeled and wild-type structures is just ~ <dig>  Å. for main chain atoms, the rmsd is only  <dig>  Å. key residues lining the catalytic site, including ser <dig> and mutated cys <dig> are virtually identical between the labeled and wild-type structures . in summary the conjugation of fluorescein to penp does not alter its overall structural folding.

the fluorescein molecule was modeled onto the penp structure after careful inspection of the fo-fc and 2fo-fc electron density map. these maps are not of high quality at regions around the fluorescein conjugation site, with only pieces of discontinuous density visible at  <dig>  σ contour level in the fo-fc map . we tried our best to fit fluorescein into these pieces of electron density, particularly matching the melaimide group to a piece of electron density near the thiol side chain of cys <dig>  as well as matching the xanthene group at the end of the fluorescein molecule to a large piece of electron density near the catalytic site . this modeled structure is stable after rounds of structural refinement, showing good electron density for the Ω-loop residues and the fluorescein molecule at  <dig>  σ contour level in the 2fo-fc map, suggesting that our fitting is reasonable . however, no electron density was visible for the benzoic group in the mid-region of the fluorophore molecule, indicating that this region is more disordered as compared to other parts of the fluorophore molecule.

in our penp-e166cf structure the fluorescein molecule partially occupies the outer edge of the antibiotic binding region and is in close contact with several residues at the catalytic site. the maleimide moiety near the thiol linkage site is inserted into the catalytic core, located within  <dig>  Å from the side chain of ser <dig> on one side and  <dig>  Å away from Ω-loop on the other side. the xanthene group near the other end of the fluorescein molecule extends toward the solvent , loosely packed against β-strand b <dig> that forms part of the extended substrate binding area involved in coordinating antibiotics as shown in the extended-spectrum class a β-lactamase, toho- <dig>  in complex with cefotaxime, cephalothin, and benzylpenicillin  <cit> . no specific interactions were observed between fluorescein and the protein. total solvent accessible area is  <dig> Å <dig>  33% of the total surface area, indicating that fluorescein is partially packed against the penp molecule and not fully solvent exposed. the fluorescein molecule is highly dynamic, as reflected by the poor electron density map as well as high average temperature factor . in contrast, the rest of the structure shows excellent electron density and low average temperature factor  that is typical of the  <dig>  Å data set. the Ω-loop, on which the fluorescein molecule is conjugated, was little affected by the dynamic fluorophore and adopts the same conformation as that of the unlabelled penp .

the structure of penp-e166cf in complex with cefotaxime
we chose to determine the penp-e166cf-cefotaxime structure, using cefotaxime as a representative of the many β-lactam antibiotics because of its positive fluorescence response induced in penp-e166cf as well as its chemical structure that contains functional groups typical of both second- and third-generation antibiotics. cefotaxime was soaked into the penp-e166cf crystals by incubating the crystals in the reservoir solution with  <dig>  m cefotaxime added for  <dig> minutes. the penp-e166c structure, without the conjugated fluorescein molecule, was used as the starting model for structure determination. after initial rounds of refinement both the fo-fc and 2fo-fc electron density maps were carefully inspected for evidence of cefotaxime and fluorescein, as well as for any structural changes on penp.

the cefotaxime was clearly visible in fo-fc electron density map as covalently bonded through its carbonyl carbon atom c <dig> to the oγ atom of ser <dig>  which represents the acylated es* adduct . but we could not identify any electron density in either fo-fc or 2fo-fc map that would be accountable for fluorescein molecule around the location seen in penp-e166cf or anywhere nearby. furthermore, the fo-fc map showed strong negative signal for a large segment of Ω-loop  and the 2fo-fc map showed no electron density for this region at all, indicating this region became highly disordered upon acylation of cefotaxime . based on these observations we did not include fluorescein molecule or the disordered region of Ω-loop in our final refined structure of penp-e166cf-cefotaxime.

the overall structure folding of fluorescein-labeled and cefotaxime-bound penp is nearly identical to that of the wild-type unlabeled penp and the fluorescein-labeled penp-e166cf. from the calculation result by the ccp <dig> program, it was found that the b factor of glu <dig>  gly <dig>  glu <dig> on Ω-loop, which are next to the disordered region, is significantly higher  than other parts of the protein . the refinement statistic for this set of crystal structure has different values from that of the apo penp-e166cf structure due to the cefotaxime and the difference in Ω-loop.

to investigate why the binding and acylation of cefotaxime causes the Ω-loop and the conjugated fluorescein molecule to become highly flexible and structural disordered, we superposed the penp-e166cf structure onto the penp-e166cf-cefotaxime complex structure. fluorescein is seen as occupying a site that partially overlaps with the acylated cefotaxime; particularly the benzoic group of fluorescein molecule is in direct steric clash with the 7-amino substituent of cefotaxime . thus the binding and acylation of cefotaxime to penp would displace fluorescein from its original position to avoid steric clash. it is likely that the Ω-loop, in order to accommodate such displacement, loses its well-folded structure and becomes highly flexible. as a consequence the fluorescein molecule conjugated to the flexible Ω-loop becomes fully exposed to the polar aqueous environment, leading to enhanced fluorescence. thus our structural findings confirmed our initial proposal of a biosensing mechanism based on displacement of fluorescein  <cit> .

to understand the impact of conjugated fluorescein molecule on the substrate binding kinetics of penp we compared the penp-e166cf-cefotaxime structure to two other β-lactamase structures in complex with cefotaxime, including the narrow-spectrum toho- <dig> and the extended-spectrum gc <dig>  <cit> . in toho- <dig> structure the methoxyimino side chain points away from the active site and is solvent-exposed . such an orientation packs the methoxyimino side chain tightly against the thiozolyl ring, leading to a distorted configuration of the cephem nucleus that is catalytically incompetent for deacylation  <cit> . in gc <dig> structure the transition analog of cefotaxime binds to gc <dig> in a fully extended conformation, with oxyimino group inserted to active site and extended away from the thiozolyl ring . this conformation is regarded as catalytically competent to facilitate deacylation because the distortion on the cephem nucleus is released  <cit> . importantly, the binding mode of cefotaxime in our penp-e166cf-cefotaxime structure closely resembles that of gc <dig> , suggesting that with its Ω-loop fully flexible the naturally narrow-spectrum penp can accommodate cefotaxime in a manner that resembles the extended-spectrum gc <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
our structural studies indicate the molecular mechanism how fluorescein-labeled β-lactamase detects β-lactam antibiotics. the conjugated fluorescein molecule is located near the catalytic site and partially occupies the antibiotic binding region. the binding and acylation of β-lactam antibiotics such as cefotaxime would expel the fluorescein molecule from its original position and leads to increased flexibility of the Ω-loop, to which the fluorophore is linked. as a result, the fluorophore is relocated from its original position with partial solvent exposure to become fully solvent exposed, leading to enhanced fluorescence emission. these findings confirm our previous proposal based on structural modeling.

furthermore the Ω-loop demonstrates the propensity of becoming highly flexible and unstructured if its tight packing against the catalytic site is disturbed. such increased flexibility enables penp to bind and acylate cefotaxime, a naturally poor substrate, in a manner that resembles the extended-spectrum cefotaxime-resistant β-lactamases. this finding could be valuable in the future design of novel antibiotics that resist the binding or hydrolysis by β-lactamases.

