BACKGROUND
the number of follicles in the ovarian reserve of mammals is established during fetal life or early in neonatal life  <cit> . from this reserve a number of follicles are recruited each day, the majority of which become atretic while a very few develop to the point of ovulation in each oestrous cycle  <cit> . the biological norm is therefore to show a steady loss of small follicles throughout life with the resulting depletion of the follicle reserve  <cit> . this dogma has been challenged in recent years and the debate on neo-oogenesis and the existence of post-natal oogonial stem cells  which can transform into meiotic, fertile oocytes continues  <cit> .

the follicle reserve in the african elephant has been found to be composed of early primary follicles  and true primary follicles . true primordial follicles ; an oocyte surrounded by a single layer of pregranulosa cells, all of which are flat and none cuboidal) form <2% of the follicle reserve  <cit> . the oocytes are larger in tpf than in epf follicles  <cit> , suggesting that follicle activation  <cit>  may have taken place and that tpf do not belong to the ovarian reserve but form part of the sf pool in the african elephant.

female elephants, along with whales, show an extended reproductive lifespan which, apart from the absence of menopause, is remarkably similar to that of women; namely, puberty at age 10–12 years, full cyclicity and fertility to age  <dig> and a slow decline in fertility thereafter followed by senescence and death at age 65–70 years  <cit> . it is therefore of interest to study reproductive strategies and mechanisms in female elephants and, in particular, to examine the reserves of follicles in their ovaries throughout life.

considerable growth and enlargement of the fetal gonads occurs during the second half of gestation in the elephant  <cit>  and numerous antral follicles grow and subsequently undergo atresia during this period  <cit> .

interstitial cells are found in the fetal gonads of many mammalian species including the elephant  <cit> ; human  <cit> , spotted hyena  <cit> , guinea pig  <cit> , rock hyrax  <cit>  and in some—for example the horse  <cit>  and the common and grey seals  <cit> —they cause a significant increase in fetal gonadal volume. in the female fetus in most of these species, the interstitial cells develop independent of follicles within the presumptive ovarian medulla. in the elephant  <cit>  and the giraffe  <cit>  however, the interstitial cell hyperplasia and hypertrophy not only takes place independently but also occurs in association with antral follicle development during the second half of gestation. in the elephant, where these cells have been studied in fetuses up to the age of approximately 21 months, have been shown to be steroidogenically active, with the potential to synthesise progestagens from cholestorol and pregnenelone  <cit> . their fate after birth is unknown.

the present study aimed to describe the development of the elephant ovary and its pools of small follicles and medullary interstitial cells during the second half of fetal life and the first nine years of postnatal life.

RESULTS
fetal ovarian morphology 
the combined mass and volumes of the ovaries of each elephant fetus and calf are shown in figure 1a. a description of the ovaries from the  <dig>  month old fetus is given below in order to describe the basic morphology of the gonad before the enlargement associated with the second half of gestation has commenced. in this fetus at mid-gestation the left ovary weighed  <dig>  g and the right  <dig>  g. the cortex and medulla were well defined , the cortex being approximately 450 μm in depth and composed of remnants of ovigerous cords, small follicles and cortical stroma consisting of fibrocytes and mesenchymal cells . the ovarian surface epithelium consisted of a monolayer of cuboidal cells with occasional oogonia visible juxtaposed to these epithelial cells . in some sections the tunica albuginea formed a narrow layer of constituent cells running parallel to and just beneath the ovarian surface. follicles present in the cortex were predominantly early primary in development  and measured  <dig> – <dig>  μm, . a vascular network was clearly visible deep in the cortex. the presumptive medulla was strongly demarcated by the presence of dark staining interstitial cells which had no particular association with follicles . large blood vessels and rete ovarii were also observed within the medulla. growing small follicles up to the stage of small antral follicles with a diameter of  <dig>  x  <dig>  mm were present within the medulla but these were spread more sparsely than follicles in the cortex .

in the fetus at  <dig>  months of gestation the left ovary weighed  <dig>  g and the right  <dig>  g and antral follicles were present within the medulla and along the cortico-medullary border . the medulla appeared more highly vascularised and now contained prominent accumulations of darkly staining interstitial cells . these were polyhedral in shape with dark staining nuclei and eosinophylic cytoplasm  and were appreciably larger than those of the granulosa cells or other stromal cells. the medullary interstitial cells appeared to be continuous with the theca interna cells of growing and atretic antral follicles which now reached diameters of 1–2 mm. within this presumptive medulla were patches of undifferentiated light-staining adipose-rich mesenchymal cells. the cortical region of the fetus at  <dig>  months  contained oocytes that typically showed a prolate association of granulosa cells similar to those shown in figure 2d in early primary follicles. these formed a narrow band beneath the surface epithelium. early primary follicles measured  <dig> – <dig>  μm, the oocytes  <dig> – <dig>  μm and their nuclei  <dig> – <dig>  μm. the left ovary weighed  <dig>  g and the right  <dig>  g.

maximum follicle growth within the specimens studied was observed around  <dig>  months  when antral follicles of 3–5 mm diameter were present in the medulla to give a total antral volume of around  <dig>  ml in both ovaries combined. the well vascularised cortex had a depth of 400–500 μm and the ovarian surface remained smooth. the combined cortical volume of the two ovaries of the 20-month fetus was  <dig>  ml, which was about  <dig>  times larger than that of the 15-month fetus , although the proportional contribution to ovarian volume was the same  because the ovarian volume of the 20-month fetus was much larger than that of the 15-month fetus.

at 17 months of gestation  distinctly fewer antral follicles were visible in the central medulla where highly vascularised groups of interstitial cells now predominated throughout the stroma of the medulla and these contributed up to 54% of the volume of the ovary . patches of dense interstitial cells or theca cells marked atretic antral follicles and glassy remnants of basal membranes could also be seen. the cortex was typically 375–875 μm deep.

at 19 months of gestation distinctly fewer and smaller antral follicles were observed in the medulla compared to ovaries from younger individuals, with those present being confined to the cortical border, the cortex being typically 375–1125 μm in width. the bundles of interstitial cells appeared less densely crowded together than in previous samples .

blood oozed from the cut surface of each purple coloured ovary from fetuses observed at  <dig> and  <dig>  months of gestation, illustrating the intense vascularization of particularly the medulla at these later stages . many fewer antral follicles were present and these were smaller than in the ovaries of younger fetuses, and they were now distributed only along the medullary-cortical border . interstitial cell bundles were widely spread throughout the medulla and in the fetus at  <dig>  months occupied approximately  <dig>  ml which was about 60%  of the total volume  of the two ovaries .

prepubertal calf ovarian morphology
in the youngest female calf, examined at 2 months of age, ovarian weight  and volume were dramatically lower than those of late fetal life , predominantly because of a significant reduction in the volume of interstitial cells and the organisation of extravasated blood . the cortical tissue appeared to have a higher density of cells per unit volume than in fetal life, fewer blood vessels were observed and the cortical depth ranged from  <dig> to 1000 μm . the distinctly fewer and smaller  antral follicles along the cortico-medullary border occupied <2% of the ovarian volume. by two months after birth the islands of interstitial tissue which, with blood vessels and remnants of atretic follicles, occurred throughout the medulla were smaller than those observed during late fetal life and occupied only 14 ml per animal compared to 93 ml in a 20-month old fetus. furthermore, more stromal cells were observed among the interstitial cells than was the case in younger animals. at  <dig>  years of age interstitial tissue had reduced to 3% of ovarian volume . cortical depth varied from  <dig> to 3 mm and became further extended by the presence of antral follicles.

during the early months after birth scattered deposits of haemosiderin were observed throughout the ovary reflecting the previously mentioned intense vascularisation of the tissue in late fetal life. the distribution of tissues within the postnatal ovary is detailed in figure 1b. by 6 years of age interstitial tissue occupied <1% of ovarian volume and the general morphology of the ovary had settled into its “adult” form .

immunohistochemical staining of interstitial cells
the whorls of interstitial cells in the fetal ovary stained with increasing intensity  during the second half of gestation for 3β-hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase , the steroidogenic enzyme necessary to convert pregnenelone to progesterone and other progestagens, as described previously by allen et al. <cit> . 

initially, from around 11 months of gestation the cytoplasm of the 3β–hsd positive cells stained evenly and diffusely but, again as gestation advanced, groups of interstitial cells were observed in which the staining pattern within the cytoplasm became very intense and granular . the thecal cells of the growing preantral and antral follicles  also stained positively but less intensely. of great interest was the finding that the interstitial cells continued to stain strongly for 3β–hsd activity after birth . the incidence and intensity of staining declined steadily during the first 2 years of postnatal life although there were still small patches of 3β–hsd positive interstitial cells visible at  <dig>  years of age . of interest also was the 3β–hsd positive staining of the cytoplasm of the granulosa cells surrounding the small follicles  which began around 16 months of gestation. prior to this only the oocyte cytoplasm had stained lightly. this cyctoplasmic staining of the granulosa cells continued in the sf present in the cortex, and those in the medulla, during fetal life and up to at least 5 years after birth. with progression to the secondary stage of follicle development and onward, the granulosa cells no longer stained positively.

ovarian weight
figure  <dig> demonstrates the change in ovarian size with age. ovarian mass differed by age group , such that the ovaries of fetuses at 15–20 months of gestation were appreciably larger than those of calves between  <dig> months and  <dig>  years in age.

follicle number
figure 1c shows the numbers of small follicles per elephant for fetuses and calves of different ages. no primordial follicles  were seen. early primary follicles  were abundant and constituted between  <dig> and 99% of all small follicles. true primary follicles  were less abundant; the maximum observed was  <dig>  <dig> per individual animal . the number of early primary follicles as well as the total number of small follicles depended upon age . table  <dig> shows that the numbers of early primary follicles and small follicles were higher in fetuses than in calves aged  <dig> – <dig>  years. table  <dig> further shows that the numbers of early primary follicles and small follicles were higher in calves aged  <dig> –9 years than in the younger calves, aged  <dig> – <dig>  years. the number of true primary follicles was lower in calves aged  <dig> –2 years than in calves aged  <dig>  years or older . cortical volume increased with age in prepubertal calves .

a ages below zero refer to fetuses and indicate the fractions of a year before birth.

b,c,d,e within a column, medians marked with b differ from those marked with c and those marked with d differ from those marked with e .

discussion
late fetal and prepubertal ovarian morphology
the foregoing described the morphological development and differentiation of the ovaries of the african elephant and the numbers of small follicles they contain, from 11 months of gestation to a prepubertal age of 9 years. although each measurement and description of the ovaries were independent observations made in different individuals, the pattern of change over time is suggestive of development and in the absence of longitudinal studies provides the only currently available data.

at 11 months gestation very few naked oogonia remain identifiable within the cortex of the fetal ovary and nearly all the germ cells are present as meiotic oocytes arrested at the dictyate stage of prophase i  <cit>  and surrounded by a single layer of granulosa cells which vary in shape from flat to cuboidal. these follicles within the cortex appear to form the follicle reserve for future reproductive life. the many follicles observed within the medulla of the elephant fetal ovary do not share this future and are destined for growth, beginning around 12 months gestation, to small antral stages before the onset of atresia which may occur at any developmental stage thereafter up to mid antral size. fetal ovarian weight and volume increase from 11 months with the onset of interstitial cell hyperplasia and the growth of medullary antral follicles. by 15 months, as described previously by allen et al. , the increase is significant. the maximum number of antral follicles is observed around 16 months following which they decline to occupy <2% of ovarian volume at birth. meanwhile, the volume of interstitial tissue continues to grow toward a maximum point thought to occur just prior to birth , although this could not be confirmed in the present study as the oldest set of fetal ovaries collected was at  <dig>  months of gestation. loss of small follicles and pre-antral follicles has been observed in other mammalian species during fetal life  <cit> . the reasons for this loss are speculated upon  <cit>  and are now generally referred to as natural wastage. the present findings suggest, however, that the elephant fetus may employ its medullary follicles for a useful purpose; ie the production of greater amounts of interstitial tissue as discussed below. in turn, the rising steroid production within the fetal ovary may halt the further development of antral follicles.

how and why the small follicles within the cortex are protected from recruitment to pre-antral growth and the fate of atresia is not known, nor is it known in other species what causes activation of some primordial follicles and not others during fetal and post natal life  <cit> . there is, however, evidence that either primordial follicles  <cit>  or the local environment  <cit>  may be involved. what seems likely from this elephant study is that recruitment is intimately related to local environment, this being stimulative in the medulla and restrictive in the cortex during the second half of fetal life.

during postnatal life a remarkable feature of the elephant ovary is the persistence of interstitial tissue within the medulla, otherwise it develops in a manner similar to the bovine  <cit>  and other mammals.

interstitial cells
interstitial cells within the mammalian ovary are not static components  <cit> . they differentiate from stromal fibroblasts, either independently  or when they become associated with growing follicles  <cit>  and they revert to this cell type, either independently or following follicle atresia  <cit> .

in equids, interstitial cells in both the fetal testis and fetal ovary begin to multiply rapidly in the absence of any follicle or seminiferous tubule growth from around day  <dig> of gestation. this interstitial cell hyperplasia and hypertrophy continues unabated to days 220– <dig> of gestation when the fetal ovaries weighing 50–100 g each are considerably heavier than the now-inactive maternal ovaries  <cit> . the tightly packed epithelioid interstitial cells secrete large quantities of 19-carbon androgen precursors, including androstenedione and dehydroepiandrosterone ,  <cit>  and the very unusual 3-ß hydroxy- <dig>  pregnanedien-20-one and 3-ß hydroxy- <dig>  androstadien-17-one  <cit>  which are then aromatised by the placenta to produce the relatively enormous  quantities of both phenolic  and ring b unsaturated  oestrogens that are present in the blood and urine of pregnant mares during the second half of gestation  <cit>  and which appear to be important for growth and development of the very precocious equine fetus at birth  <cit> . similar interstitial tissue development results in ovarian hypertrophy in the grey and common seals, also without antral follicle formation  <cit> . in both horses and seals the interstitial tissue declines rapidly in late gestation so that the gonads have shrunk to their normal prepubertal size at birth  <cit> .

as described by hanks  <cit>  and allen et al. <cit> , and confirmed in the present study, gonadal enlargement also occurs in the elephant fetus during the second half of gestation due to a similar hyperplasia and hypertrophy of primary interstitial cells augmented by secondary interstitial tissue that persists following atresia of antral follicles. and as also demonstrated in the present study, these hypertrophied primary interstitial cells stain for the steroidogenic enzyme, 3-β hydroxysteroid dehydrogenase  which indicates that they are capable of synthesising progestagens. indeed, allen et al. <cit>  demonstrated that slices of elephant fetal gonad incubated with tritium-labelled cholesterol or pregnenelone secreted appreciable quantitites of 5-∂ dihydroprogesterone  and other 5-∂ pregnane derivatives into the culture medium. more recently, yamamoto et al. <cit>  demonstrated the secretion of placental lactogen  by elephant trophoblast tissue and speculated that this chorionic hormone may be the essential luteotrophic stimulus for the enlargement of the fetal gonads and their synthesis of progestagens to assist the accessory corpora lutea in the maternal ovaries to maintain the pregnancy state. the highly vascularised nature of the fetal ovary from 18 months of gestation to term would help to transport the progestagens being synthesized by the interstitial tissue to the fetal, and hence to the maternal circulation to boost the supply of progestagens for pregnancy maintenance  <cit> .

an unexpected and interesting finding in the present study was the persistence of 3β–hsd positive nests of interstitial cells in the ovaries of female elephant calves after birth. such steroid-secreting tissue accounted for some  of the total volume of the ovary during the first 6 months of life and it declined slowly thereafter to disappear completely only at around  <dig>  years of age. it seems reasonable to speculate that continued secretion of progestagens by these interstitial cells during early post natal life may act locally to suppress any significant growth of antral follicles during the period, and indeed, very little antral follicle development occurs in the first 1–2 years of life in the elephant calf. a few antral follicles develop later in the second year of life, coincidentally with the disappearance of the interstitial tissue and the rate of antral follicle growth increases markedly from  <dig>  to  <dig>  years onwards when the whole ovary begins to increase in size. further research is planned to explore the steroid output of these post-natal cells.

also of interest was the 3β–hsd positive staining of the granulosa cells of small follicles from 16 months of gestation till the oldest studied sample at 5 years of age  as indeed do the sertoli cells of the testis at the same ages . light staining for 3β–hsd has also been described in pig  <cit> , sheep  <cit>  and human  <cit>  fetal ovaries. it is highly irregular to obtain such a precise and specific staining for 3β–hsd in the granulosa cells of sf during what is considered to be a gonadotrophin independent stage of follicle development  <cit> ). in the current study, the granulosa cells of follicles beyond the secondary stage of development did not stain positively. it is normal in mammalian ovaries for the production of androgens to take place exclusively in the theca cells of the developing follicle  <cit>  and theca cells are usually first observed when the follicle has > <dig> rows of granulosa cells. in the rat these theca cells are capable of producing steroids just prior to antrum formation  <cit> . in this study 3β–hsd stained theca cells of small antral follicles starting around 400 μm in diameter were observed from 16 months of gestation to 5 years of age.

follicle numbers
the stereological measurement of the numbers of small follicles in the ovaries of  <dig> prepubertal elephant calves and  <dig> late gestation fetuses revealed a wide between-animal variation in numbers  during the period; the close agreement in follicle numbers between the two ovaries of each animal gave great confidence as to the validity of the counting method  <cit> . natural variation in small follicle numbers between animals of similar age is commonly observed in many mammalian species. for example, schmidt et al. <cit>  revealed variations of more than two orders of magnitude following cortical biopsies of human ovaries and hansen  <cit>  showed similar results in a review of small follicle numbers in  <dig> women from birth to 51 years of age.

the number of small follicles fell during late fetal life, as observed in many mammalian species  <cit> . these follicles were evenly distributed between the left and right ovaries as observed previously  <cit>  and follicle density decreased coincidentally with the age-associated increase in cortical volume of the ovary . no true primordial follicles were observed so, as in the previous studies  <cit> , the small follicle pool was taken as being composed basically of early primary and true primary follicles.

the unexpected finding that the numbers of early primary follicles and the numbers of small follicles in calves aged  <dig> –9 years was higher than those in younger calves raises a number of interesting questions as to how such an unusual situation might occur. firstly, it should be acknowledged that, given the small number of calves included in the study and the large variation in follicle numbers among individuals, the difference, although statistically significant, may have been due to a type  <dig> statistical error, brought about by coincidentally using a group of younger calves with lower numbers of follicles and  coincidentally using a group of older calves with higher numbers of follicles. other possible explanations include genetic diversity and post-natal oogenesis. the additional possibility of error in calculating volume was also examined closely.

relatively few animals could be included in the study  and biological variation may indeed have accounted for the apparent increase in numbers of follicles counted after birth  <cit> . the selection of the family group to be shot was based on their presence in the culling area on the day, there was no prior knowledge of the group and all members of the group were killed. the chosen culling area was based on high elephant numbers and was deemed to be a random selection of the female family groups within svc. it is also noteworthy that nearly all of the original  <dig> elephant which constituted the founding population of the svc were introduced during  <dig> and  <dig> from a closed population in nearby gonarezhou national park and no further translocations have been made during the ensuing 20 years while population size has increased by natural breeding alone to an estimated  <dig>  <dig> animals. predominantly family groups were introduced originally to the conservancy so the population is biased towards females with few mature mating bulls. knowing that in women the age of menopause, brought on by exhaustion of the follicle reserve is highly heritable  <cit> , the degree of genetic diversity of the elephant population sampled could be less than that of a truly wild population.

with regard to the experimental protocol, the calculation of the volume of the cortex may be suspected as a source of error to produce the increasing small follicle numbers. in mammals, the division between the cortex and the medulla of the ovary is fluid  <cit>  and the line of differentiation is set halfway between the occurrence of follicles in the cortex and the blood vessels in the medulla  <cit> . the volume calculations for the cortex and other compartments within the ovary in the present study of fetal and calf ovaries to  <dig>  years of age were made using cavalieri’s principle as discussed by gundersen  <cit>  and have been described previously  <cit> . these calculations were made on the same slides from which the follicle densities were obtained.

the division between the medulla and cortex is particularly blurred during fetal life. in the youngest fetal ovaries in which follicle counts were made in the present study  the cortex formed a very narrow and distinct band just under the surface epithelium of the ovary, which then contained only small follicles. the medulla was composed predominantly of interstitial tissue and growing small follicles and antral follicles; all follicles would normally be included in the cortical region of the ovary of a calf or adult. the percentage volume of the cortical region containing the small follicles was similar in the fetal and calf ovaries  despite the very considerable fall in ovarian weight and volume during the neonatal period. this suggests strongly that the cortical volume measurements were accurate in both developmental stages. post-natally, it is generally accepted  <cit>  that there is no further development of new antral follicles in the medulla and all subsequent follicles are derived from the cortical reserve.

the third possibility of some form of post natal oogenesis occurring in the elephant is particularly intriguing. as mentioned in the introduction, the localization of oogonial stem cells  of adult mouse and human ovaries  <cit>  and the birth of pups following transplantation of female germ-line stem cells to the ovaries of irradiated mice  <cit>  has raised significant, although still controversial, doubts about the finality of meiotic arrest in the ovaries of all mammals during fetal life. it remains possible that osc may persist in, or migrate to, the epithelium covering the outermost surface of the cortex of the elephant ovary during early post natal life which could, due to some hitherto unknown stimulus, multiply mitotically within the cortex before entering meiotic arrest as in fetal life prior to acquiring an outer layer of persisting granulosa cells to form new sf and so boost the reserve of these structures.

CONCLUSIONS
the small follicle populations of the late-fetal and prepubertal ovaries of the african elephant were described along with the changing morphology of these organs. the changes noted represent a series of events that have been recorded only in the elephant and the giraffe species to date  <cit> . the expansion of the interstitial tissue of the fetal ovary and its continued presence in early post natal life may well contribute to the control of follicle development in these early years. further research is required to determine the reasons behind the 3β–hsd staining of the granulosa cells of small follicles of the specimens in this study, and also the variation of numbers of small follicles in the ovaries of prepubertal calves.

