BACKGROUND
the amyloid precursor protein  is a single-pass transmembrane protein that gives rise to the small peptides  that form amyloid deposits in the brains of patients with alzheimer's disease   <cit> . aβ peptides are generated by the successive cleavage of app by proteases known respectively as β- and γ-secretases. alternatively, app may be cleaved within the aβ domain by α-secretases, now believed to be members of the disintegrin and metalloprotease  family  <cit> . this latter process precludes the formation of aβ, and results in the shedding of a large soluble n-terminal fragment of app  into the extracellular or intra-luminal space. cleavage of app by α-secretases may occur in a late compartment of the secretory pathway, or at the cell surface  <cit> .

app ectodomain shedding occurs in both a constitutive and a regulated fashion. a key mediator of regulated shedding is protein kinase c , whether it is stimulated directly by phorbol esters, or as a consequence of the activation of receptors coupled to phosphoinositide turnover. although the stimulation of app shedding by pkc activators has been extensively documented  <cit> , the mechanism is still unclear. direct phosphorylation of the app intracellular domain is not required, since phorbol esters are still able to increase shedding of a c-terminally truncated form of app, or of app constructs in which serine or threonine residues in the cytoplasmic domain have been replaced with alanine  <cit> . likewise, c-terminal truncation of the putative α-secretase adam17/tace  did not prevent up-regulation of its activity toward its substrate tumor necrosis factor-α  by phorbol 12-myristate 13-acetate   <cit> . on the other hand, phorbol ester-regulated cleavage of trka by tace was found to be dependent, in part, on phosphorylation of threonine  <dig> within the tace cytoplasmic domain  <cit> . thus, phosphorylation of adam proteases may modulate their activity, at least toward certain substrates.

pkc-mediated effects on vesicular trafficking might also affect app processing. a study showing that pkc activation increases the formation of app-containing secretory vesicles from the trans-golgi network  <cit> , suggested that accelerated trafficking of app to the cell surface might underlie the increase in sappα release induced by pkc. alternatively, inhibition of endocytosis could increase sappα release by prolonging the interaction of app with secretases on the cell surface. app is found within clathrin-coated vesicles  <cit> , which mediate the internalization of many cell surface proteins. clathrin-dependent endocytosis is regulated by the high-molecular weight gtpase dynamin, which forms oligomeric rings around the neck of the forming vesicle, and severs it from the plasma membrane  <cit> . dynamin activity, in turn, is reportedly governed by pkc  <cit> , raising the possibility that pkc might modulate internalization, and therefore secretory cleavage, of app, via an effect on endocytosis.

the aims of the present study were two-fold: to examine the effects of an inhibitor of dynamin function on app processing, and to determine if pkc activation stimulates app shedding via inhibition of endocytosis. overexpression of a dominant negative dynamin mutant in hek cells co-transfected with app <dig> increased surface expression of app and release of sappα, while inhibiting the internalization of full-length app. the dynamin mutant also increased formation of c <dig>  the c-terminal stub generated by α-secretase-mediated cleavage of app, and reduced the release of aβ peptides. these results contrast with a recent study, in which induction of dominant negative dynamin  increased both sappα release and aβ formation  <cit> . although activation of pkc by treatment with the phorbol ester pma stimulates shedding of the app ectodomain, pma had no effect on the internalization of surface-biotinylated app. our observations provide direct evidence that app internalization is a dynamin-dependent process. moreover, the results indicate that activators of pkc do not promote sappα release via inhibition of endocytosis.

RESULTS
ectodomain shedding of app is increased in cells transfected with dyn i k44a
the gtpase dynamin is an important mediator of clathrin-dependent endocytosis and synaptic vesicle recycling, and is required for the internalization of many cell surface proteins, including growth factor and g-protein coupled receptors  <cit> . to determine if dynamin regulates the internalization of app, hek-m <dig> cells were transiently transfected with app <dig> and either an empty vector or a plasmid encoding the dominant-negative dynamin mutant dyn i k44a, which is deficient in gtp binding and gtpase activity  <cit> . the app <dig> isoform was used for these transfection studies, since it is not expressed by hek cells; and can be distinguished on western blots from the longer endogenous app isoforms. cells transfected with empty vectors alone were used as additional controls. levels of sappα in the medium, and cellular full-length app, were detected by western blotting using 6e <dig> antibodies, and antibodies to the app c-terminus , respectively. the expression of endogenous dynamin, assessed using an antibody that recognizes both dynamin i and dynamin ii isoforms, was low in cells transfected with app <dig> or empty vector, and robust overexpression of the mutant protein was observed in cells transfected with the plasmid encoding dyn i k44a . dynamin i is neuron-specific, whereas dynamin ii is widely expressed. the immunoreactive band present in cells that were not transfected with the dynamin plasmid presumably represents dynamin ii, since no signal was detectable when lysates from these cells were immunoblotted with antibodies specific for dynamin i . an increase of approximately five-fold in the release of endogenous and transfected sappα from cells transfected with dyn i k44a was observed . levels of cellular full-length app were also increased in cells expressing the dynamin mutant . quantitation of the band comprising mature cellular app <dig> and immature endogenous app  showed that levels in the presence of the mutant dynamin increased to  <dig>  ±  <dig> -fold control levels . overnight treatment of app <dig> transfectants with the lysosomal protease inhibitor chloroquine  increased levels of this band to a similar extent .

inhibition of dynamin function increases surface expression of app
the effect of the dynamin mutant on surface expression of app was next examined by surface biotinylation of transiently transfected hek-m <dig> cells. in cells transfected with empty vector alone, one diffuse band of biotinylated app representing mature endogenous app was visible on western blots . cells transfected with app <dig> expressed an additional, more rapidly migrating band, representing mature cell surface app <dig> . surface expression of both endogenous and transfected app <dig> was greatly increased in cells overexpressing dyn i k44a . as shown in fig.  <dig>  both mature isoforms of app were released into the medium of app <dig> transfectants, and release of both isoforms was markedly increased in cells overexpressing dyn i k44a.

expression of dyn i k44a increases formation of the app c-terminal fragment c83
cleavage of app by α-secretase results in the release of the soluble ectodomain fragment sappα, and leaves a c-terminal stub, known as c <dig>  in the cell membrane. in hek cells stably overexpressing app <dig>  a protein corresponding in size to c <dig> was detected by western blotting of cell lysates with antibodies to the app c-terminus . the corresponding β-secretase product c <dig> was not detectable under these conditions. levels of c <dig> were significantly increased in cells transfected with dyn i k44a, relative to levels in cells transfected with empty vector alone , consistent with the increase in ectodomain shedding observed in cells expressing the dynamin mutant.

internalization of app is inhibited in cells transfected with dyn i k44a
our results can be interpreted to suggest that overexpression of dyn i k44a inhibits endocytosis of app. the increase in cellular levels of app observed in cells expressing the mutant dynamin, accordingly, could be the result of decreased internalization and degradation of full-length app , and indeed, the lysosomal protease inhibitor chloroquine exerted a similar effect. however, it could also be argued that the increases in app surface expression and shedding caused by the dynamin mutant were secondary to elevations in app expression. therefore, in order to directly examine the effect of dynamin on app endocytosis, app internalization in living cells was assessed using an immuno-labeling assay. live hek cells stably overexpressing app <dig> were incubated at 4°c with 6e <dig> antibodies, in order to label cell surface app. the cells were washed and warmed to 37°c for various intervals, and then fixed, permeabilized, and stained with alexa 488-conjugated secondary antibodies. in cells that were labeled on ice and then fixed and stained prior to warming, app was largely confined to the plasma membrane . after  <dig> minutes at 37°c, most of the immunofluorescence was contained within intracellular punctuate structures distributed throughout the cytoplasm, indicating that surface app had moved into an endosomal compartment. by  <dig> minutes, the immunofluorescent signal representing internalized app had for the most part coalesced at a perinuclear site . only background fluorescence was observed in cells that were incubated with antibodies to paxillin, an intracellular protein . app internalization was next determined in these cells  <dig> hours after the cultures were transiently transfected with dyn i k44a. the cells were surface-labeled with 6e <dig> antibodies, and incubated at 37°c for  <dig> minutes. they were then fixed, permeabilized, and stained with alexa 488-conjugated anti-mouse igg to detect app. dynamin i expression was assessed by co-staining cells with goat anti-dynamin i antibodies followed by alexa 594-conjugated anti-goat igg. immunoblot analysis of cell lysates confirmed that this antibody, which is specific for dynamin i, does not detect endogenous dynamin in non-transfected cells . in cells expressing the mutant dynamin i , app immunoreactivity was restricted to the cell surface , whereas untransfected cells within the same culture exhibited a punctate pattern of app immunofluorescence indicative of internalization . these results provide direct evidence that dyn i k44a inhibits endocytosis of app.

overexpression of dyn i k44a inhibits the formation of aβ peptides
in order to determine if dynamin inhibition affects the formation of aβ peptides, levels of aβ1– <dig> in the medium of hek- <dig> cells transiently transfected with either an empty vector or dyn i k44a were measured by elisa. overexpression of the dynamin i mutant caused a significant reduction in aβ release , suggesting that app internalization is necessary for generation of aβ in hek cells.

activation of pkc does not affect internalization of app
activation of pkc by administration of phorbol esters, or via stimulation of receptors coupled to pkc, increases app ectodomain shedding, but the mechanism remains unclear  <cit> . it is known that inhibiting app endocytosis via mutation of internalization motifs, or truncation of the cytoplasmic domain, also increases ectodomain shedding  <cit> , raising the possibility that physiological mechanisms that regulate shedding might act by targeting the endocytic machinery. to address this question, the effect of the pkc activator pma on app internalization in hek cells stably overexpressing app <dig> was determined using reversible surface biotinylation. shedding was inhibited by incubating cells with the α-secretase inhibitor tapi- <dig> for  <dig> hour prior to biotinylation. cells were surface-biotinylated while on ice, then incubated at 37°c in dmem containing tapi- <dig> and either pma  or the vehicle dimethylsulfoxide  for varying periods of time. media and cell lysates were collected and processed as described . as a control for stripping efficiency, some cultures were biotinylated and stripped while remaining on ice . despite the presence of tapi- <dig>  there was a slight, but detectable, time-dependent increase of biotinylated sappα <dig> in the medium. this was not affected by pma, indicating that tapi- <dig> effectively blocked the signal-dependent release of app . levels of internalized biotinylated app declined over the  <dig> minute incubation period, consistent with the degradation of internalized app, or the removal of the biotin label in an endocytic compartment. app internalization was not significantly altered by the presence of pma . in the absence of tapi- <dig>  pma caused a marked increase in secretion of endogenous and transfected sappα from hek- <dig> cells, as expected .

discussion
cleavage of app within the aβ domain by α-secretases is of great physiological interest, not only because it precludes the formation of aβ, but also because it generates a soluble n-terminal fragment, sappα, that exhibits neuroprotective properties  <cit> . moreover, shedding of the ectodomain is a prerequisite for cleavage of the intracellular domain by γ-secretases; a process that liberates a c-terminal fragment with transcriptional activity  <cit> . although the up-regulation of app shedding by activation of pkc-dependent signaling pathways has been well-documented  <cit> , the mechanism mediating this response is still obscure.

the present study was undertaken to determine if inhibitors of dynamin function would affect ectodomain shedding of app. we first showed that app internalization is dependent on the activity of dynamin, a large molecular weight gtpase that mediates both clathrin-dependent endocytosis, and internalization of caveolae, by promoting the separation of endocytic vesicles from the plasma membrane  <cit> . in confirmation of a recent study  <cit> , we found that overexpression of a dominant negative dynamin mutant protein in hek cells increased surface expression of full-length app, and release of sappα. thus, although cleavage of app by α-secretases occurs largely in an intracellular compartment in many cell types , our results suggest that inhibition of dynamin function, by preventing internalization of app, increases its dwell-time on the cell surface, and prolongs its interaction with α-secretases at the plasma membrane. similar elevations in app secretion are induced by mutations of the app cytoplasmic domain that inhibit internalization  <cit> . consistent with the observed increase in α-secretase mediated cleavage, expression of the dynamin mutant increased cellular levels of c <dig>  the c-terminal stub remaining after α-secretase-mediated cleavage of app .

the increase in sappα release in hek cells overexpressing dyn i k44a was associated with a reduction in the release of aβ1– <dig>  , a result in keeping with reports that aβ is generated in an endocytic compartment  <cit> . our results are also in agreement with a study by ehehalt et al.  <cit>  who found that overexpression of a dyn k44a mutant protein reduced formation of the aβ peptide in mouse neuroblastoma n2a cells. in contrast, chyung and selkoe reported that aβ generation was increased in hela cells following induction of dyn k44a expression  <cit> . the increased aβ formation observed in the latter study occurred in the absence of any alteration in the synthesis or maturation of app, and suggested that, in hela cells, processing of app by β- and γ-secretases occurs at the plasma membrane  <cit> . indeed, an active γ-secretase complex was subsequently isolated from the plasma membrane of hela cells  <cit> . as a possible explanation for the reduction in aβ observed by ehehalt et al.  <cit>  in cells overexpressing dyn k44a, chyung and selkoe pointed out that those workers measured formation of radiolabeled aβ in cells labeled for  <dig> hour with methionine, and surmised that the mutant dynamin reduced generation of labeled aβ by increasing the amount of unlabeled app at the cell surface, and diluting the concentration of labeled precursor available for cleavage by β- and γ-secretases. in support of the notion that aβ can be generated at the cell surface, ehehalt et al  <cit>  showed that when endocytosis was blocked by transfection with dyn k44a, the reduction in aβ could be partially rescued by antibody cross-linking of app and the β-secretase, β-site app-cleaving enzyme . the decrease in total aβ1– <dig> generation in hek cells overexpressing dyn i k44a described in the present report might simply reflect reductions in the precursor pool due to increased cleavage of app by α-secretase. this result is consistent with earlier studies showing that upregulation of α-secretase cleavage by pkc activation in hek cells  <cit> , or via mutations of the app cytoplasmic domain in stably transfected hek or chinese hamster ovary  cells  <cit> , is associated with decreased aβ formation. the discrepancies among these studies might be due at least in part to cell-specific differences in the compartments where app comes into contact with α- and β/γ-secretases, or in the relative capacities of the different secretases to cleave app within a specific compartment.

modulation of endocytosis might represent a mechanism for physiological regulation of app processing by pkc-dependent signaling pathways. pkc phosphorylates dynamin, thereby activating its gtpase activity  <cit> , and inhibiting its association with phospholipids in vitro  <cit> . in nerve terminals, dynamin must be dephosphorylated in order to promote retrieval of synaptic vesicles following exocytosis, and re-phosphorylation is required for the next round of endocytosis that follows a second stimulus  <cit> . persistent phosphorylation of dynamin might therefore be predicted to interfere with endocytosis. contrary to expectation, the pkc activator pma did not affect the rate of app internalization, as determined by reversible biotinylation in the presence of the α-secretase inhibitor tapi- <dig> . thus, although pkc activation can modulate endocytosis of a variety of transmembrane proteins, either positively, in the case of β <dig> integrin, gaba receptors, and the dopamine transporter  <cit> , or negatively, as is the case with μ-opioid receptors  <cit> , we could not find evidence for a modulatory effect of phorbol esters on app internalization. others have shown that pkc activation increases app ectodomain shedding in pc <dig> cells by stimulating trafficking of app through the secretory pathway  <cit> . in contrast, surface expression of app was reduced in cho cells that were surface biotinylated following treatment with pma and tapi, suggesting that in these cells, pma did not increase trafficking of app to the plasma membrane, but possibly stimulated α-secretase-mediated cleavage within an intracellular compartment that was partially resistant to tapi  <cit> . interestingly, the motor neuron-derived trophic factor neuregulin- <dig>  a ligand for the tyrosine kinase receptors erbb <dig> and erbb <dig>  was found to increase the rate of internalization and degradation of app in cultured myotubes, while decreasing release of the ectodomain  <cit> . this report lends credence to the hypothesis that modulation of app internalization may represent a physiological mechanism for regulation of sappα release.

CONCLUSIONS
our results show that experimental manipulations that interfere with the function of the endocytic machinery can inhibit app internalization, and shift app proteolysis to a non-amyloidogenic pathway, in hek cells. in hela cells, in contrast, an interfering dynamin mutant increased both α-secretase cleavage of app and aβ formation  <cit> , suggesting that cell-specific differences in app metabolism may influence the consequences of altered endocytosis. the levels of a number of proteins important for clathrin-mediated recycling of synaptic vesicles, including dynamin, and the clathrin assembly-mediating adapter proteins ap <dig> and ap <dig>  are reduced in the brains of ad patients  <cit> . moreover, exposure of neurons to aβ in vitro was recently reported to reduce dynamin levels  <cit> . it is therefore possible that alterations in clathrin-mediated endocytosis play a role in the abnormal metabolism of app that is characteristic of ad. finally, given the putative role of app as a cell surface signaling molecule in the brain  <cit> , it is important to consider the possibility that alterations in app endocytosis may contribute to the pathologic process by disrupting the normal signaling function of app.

