BACKGROUND
the human genome project  <cit>  was driven by the hope that characterization of the human genome would elucidate the molecular etiology of human disease. this resulted into an abundant amount of data regarding the genetic variation across the human genome as amended by the hapmap project  <cit> , which catalogs the location and linkage information for many human genetic variants. the most common variations are single nucleotide polymorphisms , single base pair positions in the genome at which different sequence alternatives  exist. they occur approximately once every  <dig>  bases unevenly distributed across the human genome, principally in non-coding regions presumably due to higher selection pressure in coding regions  <cit> . while approximately half of the snps in coding regions are silent  <cit> , the other half result in missense mutations  that may be neutral or involved in a disease or phenotype.

snps like other genetic variations may be indicators of susceptibility to polygenic diseases  <cit>  and could provide a basis for diagnostic and optimal therapeutic choices. a major challenge in realizing these expectations is to identify variants likely to be disease related. while the characterization of all snps through disease association studies is economically and practically unrealistic, computational methods to rank snps based on their potential impact would help to select and focus on those base positions predicted to be strongly associated with disease. to this end, a variety of approaches with different philosophies have been proposed. some are purely based on sequence information including conservation in inter-species homologous proteins , natural selective pressure at the residue level and the nature of the residue change  <cit> . other methods combine protein sequence with other physico-chemical properties including protein thermodynamic stability and structure, adding more functionally-relevant knowledge but restricting the applicability of those algorithms to particular cases   <cit> . an interesting example has been proposed by fleming et al.  <cit>  where the authors categorize missense mutations in the exon  <dig> of the brac <dig> gene by assigning a probabilistic score representing their likelihood to disrupt the gene function, potentially resulting in breast cancer. the authors used the sift  method, considered a gold standard for the prediction of functional effects of mutations  <cit> . however, this effort has limitations. for instance, sift is based on amino acid substitutions and cannot be directly applied to sequences that are transcribed but not translated also called non-coding rna . these ncrnas, have been shown to play diverse functions  and represent the majority of the transcriptional output in higher eukaryotes  <cit> . futhermore, most methods including sift, predict effects of non-synonymous substitutions while recent studies have shown that synonymous substitutions, although not resulting in a change in the encoded transcripts may none-the-less cause a measurable phenotypic change and sometimes disease  <cit> .

in this study we propose a predictive method primarily based on sequence and phylogenic information with the aim to apply it to the entire human genome. this method like others hinges on the assertion that evolutionarily conserved nucleotide bases are important for gene function and that single base mutations at these conserved positions are likely to represent disease alleles  <cit> . our goal is to predict the impact of a mutation appearing in any gene and at any position, including transcribed but not translated genes, and provide the disease likelihood associated with such a change. along with the level of interspecies conservation and residue change, we also investigated several factors known or suspected to be disease markers in other published studies such as the location in the protein and nucleotide position in the triplet type of substitution. we have incorporated all these factors into the design of a support vector machine  classifier that was trained on disease related mutations as found in human gene mutation database   <cit>  and mutations found in dbsnp  <cit>  for the vast majority of which no disease linkage has been established and are likely to be neutral or of minor phenotypic impact. the svm classifier appropriately scales these factors relative to their importance and quantifies probable disease-causing substitutions within the human genome regardless of whether they have been previously observed and annotated as such.

RESULTS
inter-species conservation as a measure of disease susceptibility
using the process detailed in figure  <dig>  we have exhaustively confirmed that known disease mutations in hgmd are disproportionately distributed in the most conserved nucleotide positions within genes . the average normalized conservation score calculated for hgmd mutations is  <dig>  ±  <dig> . importantly, 87% of hgmd mutations score higher than the gene  in which they occur. conversely, and as anticipated, dbsnps mutations tend to occur in the least conserved positions . only half of the mutations in dbsnp score higher than the gene in which they occur . the conservation score distribution for randomly selected positions is similar to dbsnps mutations: the average score is  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and the fraction of positions scoring higher than the gene is 56%. since dbsnp and hgmd databases are not cross referenced, it is unknown if the mutations in dbsnp are entirely unique or were co-deposited in both databases. while it seems counter-intuitive that random position have a slightly higher score than dbsnp mutations, the difference is minor compared to what is seen with hgmd mutations or the common set of mutations. the average conservation score calculated for the  <dig> mutations that were found in both sets  confirms the relationship between conservation and sensitivity of a position.

as an interesting aside, we discovered by inspection that the conservation score decreased in the base positions on either side of the nucleotides that were annotated as disease-causing in hmgd. this trend was observed for 83% of hmgd snps for up to  <dig> bases  on either side of the disease-causing base. this suggests that disease-causing alleles have stronger selection pressure relative to the surrounding sequence space.

finally and as a limitation, under the scoring scheme used, we do not take into account positions in distant species that appear to be conserved, but were in fact mutated multiple times to ultimately revert back to the same nucleotide base. in this particular case, our scoring method doesn't factor in such 'back and forth' mutations.

translation information as a measure of disease susceptibility
this study was predominantly aimed at identifying genome-wide factors that could be used to predict disease-like mutations across all genes. factors associated with mutation position in the codon, residue-change effects, such as alteration of the shape, size or charge of the residue were found to be very weak predictors. however these factors may be of interest in certain subsets of genes. for instance, hydrophobic to hydrophilic substitutions captured in the phat matrix  <cit>  constructed specifically to study membrane proteins would presumably be more appropriate to study genes coding for membrane proteins  <cit> .

the blosum and pam matrices computed from genome-wide alignments of different families of proteins were also found to be useful to segregate sensitive from insensitive base positions. the blosum <dig> matrix was found to be the most efficient at identifying disease-causing mutations. 94% of hgmd mutations had a non-favorable substitution versus only 45% for dbsnp. this is consistent with the assumption that non-favorable changes may significantly impact the protein function.

important predictors and svm performance
inter-species conservation information was found to be the strongest predictor among the ones that were selected to identify disease allele. this information was provided to the svm via  <dig> different metrics . we evaluated the relative importance of these factors using the "leave one factor out technique" . removal of these factors individually did not significantly affect the classifier performance due to redundant information in the factors. however, removing all of them resulted in a significant decrease in performance. despite their redundancy, the use of these factors in concert produced the strongest svm classifier, confirming that inter-species conservation is a crucial parameter for identifying single base mutations that correlate with phenotype alteration.

the other factors found to be good predictors are the blosum  <dig> substitution matrix, the number of orthologs found for a gene, and the position of the base within the codon . several random factors were incorporated into the design of the svm as control parameters . the insignificance of these random factors was confirmed when their removal from the svm model did not impact its performance.

the final classifier yielded 83% sensitivity and 84% specificity in segregating the hgmd-like mutations from the dbsnp-like mutations. if parameters not related to translation information are removed  the classifier still achieves 64% sensitivity and 72% specificity. for the majority of misclassified hgmd mutations, we observed that although they had high normalized conservation scores, they were located in genes with few orthologs . the classifier is likely to achieve better performance as the number of sequenced genomes and identified orthologs increase. another set of misclassified hgmd mutations was the  <dig> synonymous mutations, presumably due to the low number of such mutations in the hgmd training sets. classification of synonymous mutations will likely improve as more become available in the hgmd.

unfortunately and although hgmd has now doubled to over  <dig>  mutations, it is no longer openly available  limiting us to the last edition publicly available . finally, when applied to dbsnp, 16% of the snps  were found to have hgmd-like signatures. while these are technically misclassified, they nonetheless remain potential candidates for further investigation. due to the absence of disease linkage information in dbsnp, we have assumed that most mutations in dbsnps may not have a significant phenotypic impact. however absence of evidence is not evidence of absence and dbsnp very likely contains a number of disease causing mutations that have as yet to be identified. identifying them and refining the training sets could also significantly improve the algorithm effectiveness.

comparison with sift
to assess the performance of the svm classifier, we compared it with sift, a popular method to predict mutations impacts. the last public version of sift predictions on dbsnp mutations was downloaded and predictions compared with ours. out of the  <dig>  mutations present in sift, only  <dig>  were common between the two versions of the database. we also compared the predictions of sift for the subset of snps present in hgmd, to evaluate the sensitivity and specificity of both methods.

our svm, complete and with conservation only were compared to sift. mutations used for testing were different from those used to train our svms . on these sets, the complete svm achieves the highest sensitivity , at the expense of a lower specificity . overall the best balance of specificity and specificity as measured with the f-measure appears to be achieved when using our svm, although under these experimental conditions, sift achieves the best accuracy . a combination of the svm-complete and the sift method may represent the best alternative. the svm with conservation only performs at the lowest level.

                              testing set created using random mutations not used for training
                              testing set created to allow comparison with sift
abbreviations: tp = true positives; fp false positives; tn = true negatives; fn = false negatives.

reasons for the diminished performance for our svm when applied to the specific subset of mutations present in both our data set and that used in the sift study is unclear. one contributing factor is the very small overlap in the data for the disease causing mutations, i.e. those found in hgmd, common to both sift and our svm. since sift is computed only on dbsnp mutations, only that small subset of mutations  that appear in both databases can be used for testing and comparison. we specifically excluded these common mutations while training our svm so that we could best differentiate between and classify mutations that are disease causing  and those presumed to be non-disease causing . when compared to the results obtained during the testing of our svm, the svm complete achieves an accuracy of  <dig> %, with a testing set that contained many more mutations and presumably more illustrative of the actual performance of our svm .

genome wide application and validation
in its present form, the svm, through the use parameters like blosum <dig> substitution scores or the base position in the codon, partially depends on translation information limiting its application to genes with well defined expressed sequences . furthermore, the use of blosum <dig> requires prior knowledge of mutation transitions from their wild type state to their mutated states. finally, for the  <dig>  out of the  <dig>  known refseq genes that do not encode proteins, it would be inconsistent and unreliable to use codon transitions for predictions.

parameters depending on translation information have been removed from a second version of our svm that has been applied to all the coding regions within the human genome. each base position has been scored in accordance to the disease likelihood associated with a mutation occurring at this particular position. the calculated score provides a quantitative measure scaled from  <dig> to  <dig> instead of a qualitative prediction . figure  <dig> shows the cumulative frequency distribution for all hgmd and dbsnp mutations as a function of hgmd like score . the distribution for all coding bases in the human genome is also shown for comparison. the similarity between the dbsnp accumulated distribution and all coding bases, suggest that most bases, if altered, will not result in disease causation . the hgmd distribution curve was used to identify a threshold corresponding to the inflection point with maximum slope . this threshold was found to be 94%. this 6% range of conservation  is enriched with over half of the mutations in hgmd, while it includes only 13% of nucleotide bases  in the entire coding genome that could potentially play a causative role in disease/phenotype alteration. mutations and snps occurring within this range of conservation score, and for which no disease linkage has been established, have the highest potential value for researchers designing disease association studies.

using our methodology  <dig>  gene transcripts in the human genome found at least one ortholog in comparable genomes. these genes were then ranked according to their likelihood of being associated with disease if mutated, based on our disease probability score obtained with our svm based on conservation information only. out of the  <dig> top scoring genes, which are very sensitive to variation,  <dig> are known to be directly associated with a disease from published literature . conversely, only one gene out of the  <dig> with the lowest scores were found to be associated with disease in the published literature. many of those genes with lower scores are hypothetical, likely due to the low similarity with known genes . the results strongly suggest that the highest scoring genes are indeed enriched with those that might contribute to disease if mutated.

CONCLUSIONS
we have developed a comparative genomic analysis method for genome-wide identification of genome positions with a greater likelihood of being important to gene function. mutations occurring at these sites have a higher probability of representing disease alleles. new single base mutations or snps can then be scored for their potential to cause a disease, helping direct snp discovery efforts.

there is an underlying signature for disease mutations, as evidenced by their occurrence in the most conserved nucleotide positions, the favorability of residue substitution observed from blosum scores, codon bias and other factors. this signature was exploited to identify and flag putative disease-causing mutations in all coding human bases, including some in dbsnp, irrespective of the existence of annotation as causing a disease or clinical phenotype. additional genetic  factors, if discovered in the future to be causative of disease, can be easily incorporated in the prediction algorithm, i.e. the svm classifier. this makes this tool and approach versatile, enabling one to quantitatively test the strength of new factors or metrics for their potential for disease causation.

