BACKGROUND
zebra finches learn a song during distinct periods of vocal development  <cit> . exposure to cannabinoid agonists during these periods alters vocal development by reducing both song stereotypy and the number of notes incorporated into mature song produced in adulthood  <cit> . this, combined with evidence for distinct developmental regulation of cb <dig> cannabinoid receptor expression during periods of song learning  <cit> , suggests a role for endogenous cannabinoid signaling in normal vocal developmental processes. vocal learning and production in zebra finches is associated with marked physiological changes within distinct regions of telencephalon  and thalamus  known to be critical for song perception, production and learning. each of these regions distinctly and densely expresses cb <dig> receptors  <cit> . normal development in song regions is associated with gross anatomical changes in region volume, neuron number and density, both increases and decreases in axonal interconnections between song regions, and changes in synaptic densities. cannabinoid-altered vocal development implies that exogenous agonist exposure must somehow alter some or all of these processes responsible for critical periods of song learning. we are currently working to identify which processes are modified by developmental cannabinoid exposure and the mechanism responsible.

distinct song region cb <dig> receptor expression implies a role for endocannabinoid signaling in vocal learning. the endocannabinoid system is a bona fide neurochemical signaling system comprising at least two g-protein-coupled receptors , and an array of fatty acid ligands, most notably anandamide and 2-arachidonyl glycerol , that are capable of activating the receptors. like most cell signaling systems, cannabinoid receptors and endocannabinoid ligands are subject to biochemical regulation of synthesis, expression and metabolic breakdown  <cit> . a particularly notable form of g-protein-coupled receptor regulation is agonist-induced internalization and metabolism, whereby the duration of agonist effects are limited by decreased receptor expression  <cit> . thus, a potential mechanism for exogenous cannabinoid-induced alteration of normal development may involve endocannabinoid and receptor regulation. this hypothesis was tested through the experiments described below.

RESULTS
cb <dig> immunostaining
relative optical densities of cb <dig> immunostaining within selected brain regions are summarized by treatment groups in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  persistent effects of chronic, 25-day win treatments on cb <dig> staining densities were assessed by comparing veh-veh and win-veh groups. in the case of animals treated during sensorimotor development , repeated daily win treatments led to a significant decrease in staining density within all regions except dlm . this contrasts with chronic treatment effects produced in adult animals where chronic win treatments either produced no effect  or increased staining densities .

acute effects of win treatments  on staining densities were assessed by comparing veh-veh and veh-win groups. following developmental vehicle injections and maturation to early adulthood, acute win treatments decreased cb <dig> immunostaining densities in all brain regions except dlm. a different pattern of acute responsiveness was observed in animals treated in adulthood: acute increases in staining densities were observed within hvc, ra, dlm and ov. acute responsiveness following repeated win administration was assessed by comparing win-veh to win-win groups. in the case of animals treated with win during development, acute win exposure resulted in significantly increased cb <dig> immunostaining densities in all brain regions studied . this effect of acute win to increase staining densities following chronic win differed with responses observed following chronic veh in every brain region . following repeated win treatments of adults, no acute win effect was detected in any region except within the molecular layer of cerebellum where densities were increased following earlier chronic win exposure .

effects on brain 2-ag levels
effects of repeated win treatments on levels of the endocannabinoid 2-ag in various brain regions were assessed by lc-esi-ms-ms. results are summarized in figure  <dig>  win exposure during sensorimotor development significantly increased 2-ag levels in rostral telencephalon . levels were unchanged in caudal telencephalon  and thalamus/midbrain . in contrast to effects produced in rostral telencephalon, developmental win exposure decreased 2-ag content within cerebellum. no effects of repeated win treatments on 2-ag levels in adult animals were observed in any of the brain regions studied .

discussion
results reported herein demonstrate that developmental cannabinoid exposure persistently disregulates endocannabinoid signaling at both the receptor and endogenous agonist levels. this disregulation is significant because it's accompanied by altered vocal development that is produced by the same cannabinoid treatments  <cit> . these findings are among the first to associate cannabinoid-altered behavioral development with persistently-altered neurophysiology.

more work in evaluating persistent cannabinoid effects has employed cell and tissue culture systems. for example, in ex vivo cultures of rat hippocampi, periods of  <dig> hr win exposure dose-dependently reduces cb <dig> immunostaining  <cit>  which is consistent with persistent effects of chronic win that we find after developmental, but not adult exposure . it may be important that most ex vivo tissue culture systems employ tissue obtained from immature animals. for example, in the case cited above, hippocampi were isolated from rat pups at post-natal day two. therefore, ex vivo cultures of cns tissue may more closely model effects on the developing cns than the mature, adult system. interestingly, rat and zebra finch development occur over similar periods, with 'adolescence' reached between  <dig> -  <dig> days, and early adulthood by about  <dig> days  <cit> .

in cultures of cells heterologously expressing cb <dig> receptors, it has been appreciated for some time that agonist stimulation promotes a rapid internalization of receptor protein  <cit> . in our histological model, tissue is permeabilized, allowing antibody access to both plasma membrane-delimited and potential intracellular pools of receptor protein, making it unlikely that the rapid  changes in staining density that we observe are due to acute cellular translocation of receptor protein . a more likely mechanism for rapid changes in antibody staining may involve changes in epitope access related to interaction with other cellular proteins. the peptide used to produce our anti-zebra finch cb <dig> antibody represents the first  <dig> amino acids of the intracellular tail region of the receptor  <cit> , a domain implicated in signal transduction and interaction with intracellular regulatory proteins  <cit> . fixation and cross-linking of tissue with receptors coupled to such regulatory or signal transduction proteins may occlude epitope access, reducing antibody interaction and resulting in reduced staining intensity. thus, differences in staining densities that we have documented may be more indicative of differential effects on cb <dig> interaction with other proteins than on receptor abundance itself. of course we cannot exclude the possibility that decreased immunostaining may indicate receptor degradation and/or reduced expression, as both phenomenon are known to occur following agonist activation  <cit> .

it is interesting that acute win treatment of birds chronically treated with vehicle control injections responded differently following late-postnatal and adult treatments . we observed similar differential effects of control treatments on acute changes in foxp <dig> expression  <cit> . these differences may be attributable to distinct sensitivity to handling stress during sensorimotor development, but not adulthood. alternatively, a differential sensitivity to visual isolation in developing vs. adult animals may have contributed. following developmental treatment, birds were housed in visual isolation to prevent potential song learning from other subjects . this isolation lasted  <dig> days, encompassing late-sensorimotor development to early adulthood . zebra finches are social, flocking birds, and so isolation during development may have produced stress  <cit> . the potential for handling- and isolation-induced effects on vocal development is a question worthy of additional study. it is notable that accumulating evidence supports a role for endocannabinoid signaling in stress responses and fear extinction  <cit> .

despite the confounding effects of control treatments, chronic effects of repeated win exposure on later acute win sensitivity are clear. following developmental win treatment, staining densities were reduced in all of the brain regions except dlm . following adult treatments, significant increases were seen in only three regions: hvc, ra, and dlm. hvc and ra are vocal motor regions of caudal telencephalon . activity in hvc drives ra which outputs to the nucleus of the twelfth cranial nerve which innervates the syrinx, eliciting vocalization  <cit> . the thalamic region, dlm, modulates this caudal vocal-motor output indirectly through projection to the rostral song region, lman, that in-turn, projects to ra  <cit> . distinct cannabinoid effects in these vocal-motor regions during adulthood further suggests a normative role for cannabinoid signaling in song production, a conclusion reinforced by earlier evidence that acute win decreases vocal output in adults  <cit> . in addition to modulating vocal output in adulthood, the rostral song regions lman and area x are essential for vocal learning during development  <cit> . more generalized effects within all song regions but dlm following developmental cannabinoid exposure, underscores the distinct sensitivity to cannabinoid agonism during periods of zebra finch vocal learning.

on the surface it appears that developmental exposure-related increased levels of the endocannabinoid, 2-ag, and decreased cb <dig> immunostaining are contradictory . however, if as proposed above, staining is more a function of receptor state than abundance, it follows that persistently decreased staining following developmental agonist exposure may be due to interaction with signal transduction proteins that antagonize binding of the antibody. such coupling may actually increase the population of functional cb <dig> receptors. if this is the case, then acute increases in staining following win challenge of animals developmentally exposed may indicate uncoupling from other cellular proteins and decreased responsiveness . assays of cb <dig> receptor function following developmental treatments will be required to clearly test this hypothesis  <cit> .

reports of rapid changes in expression of endocannabinoid signaling elements in vivo have not been widely reported, and this is a key contribution of the work reported herein. most prior reports of altered expression of cannabinoid signaling elements in vivo involve studies of regulation of feeding behavior. in zebra finches, we have found that brief periods of food deprivation are associated with increased brain levels of 2-ag  <cit> . in pancreatic islet cells of wistar rats, overnight periods of food deprivation are associated with increased expression of cb <dig> receptors, an effect rapidly reversed by oral glucose  <cit> .

unlike food restriction-induced general increases of 2-ag levels in all regions of brain except cerebellum  <cit> , developmental win exposure increased 2-ag selectively within rostral telencephalon and decreased levels in cerebellum . these results indicate that cannabinoid-altered vocal development is associated with persistent enhancement of endocannabinoid signaling within rostral telencephalon. this is interesting as the song regions of rostral telencephalon , are not essential for production of learned song  <cit> , and seem to perform a modulatory function related to song timing, that perhaps serves as an error-correcting mechanism  <cit> . decreased 2-ag content within cerebellum is notable, as this region has not typically been associated with vocal development. potential persistent effects of developmental cannabinoid exposure on motor function warrants further investigation, and recent evidence suggests that cerebellum is more important to sensory integration and cognition in zebra finches than previously thought  <cit> . in mice, functional changes in cerebellar sensitivity to cannabinoid drugs have been observed as a function of tolerance and following antagonist-precipitated withdrawal  <cit> . this raises the possibility that similar effects of chronic treatment are produced following cannabinoid-altered vocal learning, and may contribute to altered developmental course.

production of opposing effects on 2-ag levels across cns regions by the same drug is interesting, and may be attributable to differing neurochemistry within each area . a growing consensus supports a presynaptic inhibitory role for endocannabinoid activation of cb <dig> to reduce the probability of neurotransmitter release. because presynaptic cb <dig> activation inhibits release of both excitatory  and inhibitory  transmitters, regional cannabinoid effects may depend upon relative levels of excitatory vs. inhibitory tone . for example, across all species studied, cb <dig> densities are particularly high within the molecular layer of cerebellum  <cit> . this region is largely comprised of the axonal parallel fibers that rise from cerebellar granule cells. these parallel fibers synapse on purkinje cell dendritic arbors, primarily releasing excitatory glutamate . presynaptic cb <dig> activation produced by repeated win treatments would be expected to reduce the probability of excitatory glutamate release, effectively reducing neural activity, and decreasing post-synaptic release of 2-ag. in the case of rostral telencephalon, distinct and dense cb <dig> receptors are expressed within the prominent area x of striatum  <cit> . cb <dig> expression is particularly dense within area x at 50- <dig> days of age, the period during which exogenous win treatments were administered in our current studies  <cit> . in contrast to molecular layer of cerebellum, area x is characterized by significant inhibitory gabaergic transmission  <cit> . thus, cannabinoid agonism may be expected to reduce inhibitory signaling within area x, leading to increased neuronal activity and post-synaptic 2-ag release.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, repeated cannabinoid agonist exposure during zebra finch sensorimotor vocal development was associated with increased levels of the endocannabinoid, 2-ag, and decreased cb <dig> immunostaining intensities within regions of rostral telencephalon. similar changes were not observed following repeated win treatment of adult animals, demonstrating distinct developmental cannabinoid sensitivity during vocal development. developmental win exposure also altered acute responsiveness to win challenge, an effect that was not seen following chronic treatment of adults. these findings suggest that the cannabinoid-altered vocal development involves persistent changes in expression, regulation and responsiveness of endocannabinoid signaling elements. in the context of the developing zebra finch cns, these endocannabinoid signalling elements are particularly susceptible to disregulation caused by prolonged exposure to cannabinoids.

