BACKGROUND
overactive bladder is a chronic clinical syndrome characterized by urgency and frequency with or without urinary incontinence affecting millions of people worldwide  <cit> . overactive bladder arises from uncontrolled contraction of the detrusor muscle during bladder filling  <cit> . although what element trigger unstable contraction is not resolved; myogenic  <cit>  or neural  <cit>  theories have been suggested in the attempt to clarify the etiology of this bladder dysfunction.

nevertheless, since contraction of the detrusor muscle and bladder emptying are primarily mediated by stimulation of muscarinic receptors by acetylcholine, anticholinergic agents are currently recommended as a first-line therapy for overactive bladder. of the available antimuscarinic agents, oxybutynin and tolterodine are the most widely used to treat this condition  <cit> .

as demonstrated by several investigations in patients, oxybutynin decreases urinary frequency, urgency and episodes of urge incontinence, in addition to increasing bladder volume at first desire to void, enhancing maximum bladder capacity and reducing maximum detrusor pressure during filling  <cit> . similar results have been reported after administration of tolterodine in patients affected by overactive bladder .

despite the favourable results observed in the clinical studies reported above with regard to the cystometrographic modifications induced by treatment with oxybutynin and tolterodine, the only effect generally observed in rats is a decrease in the maximum detrusor pressure at micturition  <cit> .

although purinergic mechanisms appear not to be involved to any extent in the normal function of human bladder  <cit> , they are involved in human pathological conditions  <cit> , and they are well documented for contraction of rat urinary bladder  <cit> .

the aim of the present experiments was, therefore, to study the effect of oxybutynin and tolterodine in rats, using different cystometrographic conditions, attempting to find suitable experimental conditions able to reproduce the effects observed in humans, in particular the increase of bladder capacity.

a preliminary account of this work was presented in an abstract  <cit> .

RESULTS
tolterodine and oxybutynin were evaluated as the most widely utilized antimuscarinics.

in general, 2– <dig> scaled doses of each compound were administered. in some pilot experiments each dose of compound was tested with a matched control group treated with vehicle. in other experiments, control rats and animals treated with different doses of test compound were evaluated simultaneously.

effect of intravenous and oral administration in conscious rats utilized  <dig> day after catheter implantation
when i.v. injected in conscious rats, oxybutynin  induced a prompt and marked reduction of mp showing a peak  <dig> min after injection. bvc, in contrast, was not modified in comparison with the values observed in control animals. similar results were obtained after administration of the same dose of tolterodine . after different doses of both antimuscarinics administration, a dose-dependent reduction of mp was observed, with no significant changes of bvc, tolterodine being substantially more potent than oxybutynin . after oral administration of oxybutynin  and tolterodine , the time-course of bvc and mp values in control and treated animals was similar to that observed after i.v. administration . the compounds induced a marked and statistically significant fall of mp reaching a peak  <dig> hr after administration with no significant effects on bvc. dose-response curves obtained after administration of the antimuscarinics are shown in fig.  <dig>  oxybutynin and tolterodine dose-dependently decreased mp.

the effects of oral administration of oxybutynin  were also evaluated in freely-moving rats using discontinuous cystometry, increasing observation period up to  <dig> hr after treatment. discontinuous cystometry allows parameters to be recorded for extended periods of time, avoiding the detrimental effects on the levels of basal physiological urodynamic parameters seen in restrained rats following continuous bladder infusion for a long time . oxybutynin induced a decrease of mp similar to that observed previously during the first 2– <dig> hr after treatment . the difference between treated and control group resulted statistically significant in spite of the figure course because it should be considered that it was evaluated on Δ values, as reported in the method section. bvc values resulted significantly  different in comparison with vehicle treated animals at  <dig> hr after administration. this result, in contrast to that previously obtained during classical cystometry, however, can be related to the behaviour of the control group, whose bvc values were extremely constant during the period.

to further study the effect of oxybutynin on bvc, the less inhibitory dose of oxybutynin on mp  was chosen and the saline infusion rate into the bladder was decreased from  <dig>  ml/min to  <dig>  and  <dig>  ml/min. however, the effect of oxybutynin on bvc and mp was found to be similar to that obtained with the higher flow rate .

in order to block the non-adrenergic, non-cholinergic component of the contraction, experiments were performed in rats with bladders infused with suramin . suramin  in vehicle-treated rats induced a significant increase  in bvc . under these conditions, oral administration of  <dig> mg/kg of oxybutynin reduced significantly mp , but bvc was again not significantly increased . in normal unanesthetized rats, igawa et al.  <cit>  found that co-administration of atropine in rats with purinergic receptors desensitised by administration of α,β-methylene atp induced urinary retention. in our experimental conditions, we did not observed overflow incontinence in rats with bladder infused with suramin and treated with oxybutynin, probably owing to the fact that suramin is not a specific antagonist  <cit>  and, therefore, not all the p2x receptors were inhibited.

effect of intravenous and oral administration in conscious rats treated  <dig> days after catheter implantation
catheterization of the bladder induces inflammation that reaches a peak between 1– <dig> days after surgery. at  <dig> days post catheterization, inflammation is considerably lower than at  <dig> day after catheter implantation, as confirmed by the higher values of bvc recorded  than those at  <dig> day after surgery . under these conditions, i.v. administration of tolterodine dose-dependently decreased mp without affecting bvc . the effect of tolterodine on mp was less than that observed in rats  <dig> day after surgery. the effect of oral administration of oxybutynin  on bvc and mp was not substantially different from that observed in rats utilized  <dig> day after catheter implantation.

effect of intravenous administration in anesthetized rats
cystometrographic and electromyographic recordings performed during micturition in rats under anesthesia show that the striated muscle of external urethral sphincter  exhibits high-frequency bursting that induces corresponding high-frequency oscillations  in the pressure recorded intravescically. hfo are correlated with the bursting pattern in the eus, and represent alternate contractions and relaxations of the urethral outlet, functioning like a pump to enhance urine flow. consequently, pharmacological manipulations that may result in impaired eus function might result in micturition disturbances, e.g. bladder-urethra dyssynergia.

in anesthetized rats, the i.v. administration of  <dig>  mg/kg of oxybutynin  induced again a significant, although not so relevant decrease of mp, probably owing to the lower basal value of this parameter due to the anesthesia. neither bvc nor threshold pressure showed a significant reduction. the number and amplitude of hfo were not modified by oxybutynin.

effect of intravenous administration in conscious rats with bladder infused with diluted acetic acid
bladders of conscious rats catheterized from  <dig> day were infused for a control period of  <dig> min with saline. then the infusion was switched to  <dig> % acetic acid. at the end of the first hour of bladder infusion with the irritant, bvc was markedly and significantly reduced  in all groups of animals, indicating bladder hyperactivity due to pain and an increase in afferent nerve firing. micturition pressure was less affected and generally increased .

in the groups of animals treated with vehicle, the continuous infusion of the bladder with acetic acid during the second hour of experiment induced a further decrease of bladder capacity , although this further reduction was not statistically significant. mp did not change during the period. oxybutynin  and tolterodine  had no effect on bvc, but caused a rapid and marked decrease of mp similar to that observed in rats during saline infusion of the bladder .

after the administration of the same i.v. doses as utilized in normal, saline-infused rats, both tolterodine and oxybutynin reduced mp, although the reduction appeared less marked . the antimuscarinics generally showed only a trend to reverse the decrease in bvc observed during the second hr of acid infusion. however, the intermediate dose of tolterodine produced a significant difference  between control and treated rats with regard to bvc.

effect of intravenous administration in conscious obstructed rats
in rats, bladder hypertrophy secondary to bladder outlet obstruction induces bladder instability characterized by the presence of non-voiding contractions  during filling. repeated cystometry in control obstructed rats injected with saline gave reproducible results in terms of frequency and amplitude of spontaneous contractile activity . bvc and mv in these animals were also not significantly changed. oxybutynin  gave results similar to control animals .

data are expressed as mean ± s.e. mean. bvc: bladder volume capacity; mv: micturition volume; nvc: non-voiding contractions. * = p <  <dig> ; ** = p <  <dig>  before vs after administration .

discussion
a summary of the different models and conditions utilized to evaluate the effects of tolterodine and/or oxybutynin is shown in table  <dig> 

= not significant change; ↓: decrease; ↓↓: dose-dependent decrease; n.e. = not evaluated ; = : some non dose-dependent effect was seen after tolterodine but not after oxybutynin.

cystometrographic evaluation performed in conscious normal rats utilized one day after catheter implantation showed that neither oxybutynin nor tolterodine increased bvc after oral or i.v. administration. in agreement with previously reported data  <cit> , however, both drugs induced a strong dose-dependent decrease of mp. furthermore, this behaviour was maintained when a discontinuous cystometry was performed or when different filling rates were utilized.

available evidence indicates that arachidonic acid metabolites produced along the cyclooxygenase pathway are involved in the physiological regulation of micturition during reflex activation of the urinary bladder. furthermore, endogenous prostaglandins are produced locally following distension of the bladder wall and modulate the afferent branch of reflex micturition by lowering the threshold for eliciting voiding contractions, serving as a link between detrusor muscle stretch produced by bladder filling and activation of capsaicin-sensitive afferents  <cit> . different authors  <cit>  have shown that cystometrograms in conscious rats with bladders infused with saline and recorded during the first 1– <dig> days after catheter implantation showed bladder overactivity with relatively low urine volume and a high frequency of micturition. cystitis is also present at this time and is characterized by edema in the submucosa and an increased tissue content of prostaglandins that stimulate capsaicin-sensitive sensory fibers in the afferent branch of the micturition reflex  <cit> . in the present study, cystometrographic recordings performed in conscious rats one day after catheter implantation and during saline infusion of bladder, confirmed that bladder capacity is significantly reduced in comparison with bvc values observed  <dig> days after catheter implantation, as previously reported  <cit> . it is therefore conceivable that in our experiments, performed under conditions of bladder inflammation, that a strong influence of prostaglandin levels on afferent firing was present. on the other hand, when the activity of oxybutynin or tolterodine was evaluated in rats  <dig> days after catheter implantation, the same effect as seen after  <dig> day, still occurred; namely, a decrease in mp with no change in bvc. these results indicate that the involvement of the inflammatory mediators is not the reason for the lack of antimuscarinic activity on bvc.

the involvement of atp in non adrenergic, non cholinergic  contraction of urinary bladder is well documented  <cit> . recently, it has also been demonstrated that atp is released from the urothelium of isolated urinary bladder following increased intraluminal pressure  <cit> . furthermore, it has been reported that intravesical atp stimulates the micturition reflex in awake, freely moving rats  <cit>  and that during cystometry the number of impulses generated in the afferent neurons was halved by treatment with suramin  <cit> . consequently, suramin infusion into rat bladder has been reported to increase bvc  <cit> . outflow obstruction may be associated with changes in the cholinergic function of the bladder associated with an increase of atropine-resistance. again, the bladder instability seen in obstructed rats seems to be particularly related to the atropine-resistant contraction component, where atp and prostaglandins play an important role  <cit> . however, we found that oxybutynin did not increase bvc either in rats under infusion of the bladder with suramin, or in obstructed rats. in addition, in this last experimental condition, oxybutynin did not modify the frequency and amplitude of the non-voiding contractions. these findings are in agreement with the lack of activity shown by tolterodine in the same model  <cit> , whereas kwak and lee  <cit>  reported a significant decrease of frequency and amplitude of the non voiding contractions in anesthetized rats after intraarterial administration of  <dig> mg/kg oxybutynin.

although the mechanism of action of antimuscarinic agents used for the treatment of overactive bladder  is thought to be due mainly to suppression of detrusor contraction through blockade of m <dig> muscarinic receptors on detrusor smooth muscle, an effect on central muscarinic receptors, located in the brain cannot be ruled out as both compounds pass into the central nervous system  <cit> .

effects on the lower urinary tract of drugs acting on central nervous system muscarinic receptors have been reported by several investigators  <cit>  following i.c.v. or i.t. administration in conscious normal rats of oxotremorine methiodide, a muscarinic agonist, a dose-dependent increase of bvc was observed. the muscarinic antagonist atropine did not change bvc after i.t. administration, and increased bvc after i.c.v. administration only in very high doses  <cit> . both oxybutynin and tolterodine i.c.v. administered showed no  or little  augmenting effect on bvc  <cit> . on the other hand, several authors reported that oral oxybutynin administered in conscious rats with lesions at the basal forebrain  <cit> , increases bvc. these findings seem to indicate that the inhibitory muscarinic mechanisms that can be activated by exogenously administered agonists seem to be inactive under normal conditions  <cit> , but are working in lesioned animals. these considerations, therefore, can explain the lack of central activity on bvc of antimuscarinics tested in conscious normal rats.

muscarinic receptors are also found on bladder urothelial cells, where their density may be even higher than in detrusor muscle. evidence has been reported for a release of acetylcholine from urothelium and/or nerves during bladder filling, and acetylcholine may act directly on afferent nerves to initiate the micturition reflex or to enhance the myogenic contractile activity of the detrusor. if this is correct, blockade of muscarinic receptors should be expected to reduce bladder tone during storage and to increase bladder capacity. this effect is observed after treatment with antimuscarinics in normal individuals as well as in patients with detrusor overactivity  <cit> . in conscious rats, however, infravescical administration of different concentrations of oxybutynin did not increased bvc, but significantly decreased mp  <cit> . furthermore, kim et al.  <cit>  recently showed that bladder infusion of different antimuscarinic agents  at concentrations equivalent to urine concentration in humans with oral application of these drugs, did not modified bvc when tested in normal rats but only inhibited bladder overactivity induced by intravesical instillation of carbachol.

CONCLUSIONS
despite the different experimental conditions utilized, the main effect of the antimuscarinics tested on cystometrographic parameters in anesthetized and conscious rats is a decrease of mp, whereas bvc is hardly and, generally, non-significantly affected, suggesting that the block of bladder muscarinic receptors is the only mechanism that can be affected and evaluated after treatment with these compounds in this animal species.

although urodynamic assessment showed significant comparable increases in bladder capacity following repeated treatment with oxybutynin and tolterodine in humans  <cit> , the published papers reporting the acute effect of these antimuscarinics in man are confusing, since oxybutynin seems devoid of effect  <cit> , whereas tolterodine increased the volumes at which subjects experienced the first sensation of bladder filling and normal desire to void  <cit> . it seems therefore difficult to reproduce in rats the cystometrographic effects observed in humans after chronic administration of these compounds. the effects observed in rats after acute administration  seem more similar to those recorded in patients treated with a single dose, with the exception of the modification in symptoms that can not be recorded in animals.

