BACKGROUND
introduction of foreign dna into plants via agrobacterium transformation has been well documented  <cit> . in most cases binary vectors containing t-dna  are used, and transformed cells are selected by expressing vector genes encoding resistance to antibiotics. in addition to selective genes, many vectors carry a reporter gene whose expression can be conveniently monitored by enzyme activity , fluorescence  or bioluminescence . these reporter genes are often used to monitor regulation of expression controlled by promoters and/or other sequences influencing transcription. indeed, mapping of regions in promoters responsible for activation or repression of gene expression is most conveniently done using a reporter gene .

the most popular promoter used in plant transformation vectors is the cauliflower mosaic virus 35s  promoter and derivatives thereof. this promoter is considered to be powerful and constitutive, although some temporal and tissue-specificity has been reported  <cit> . it represents the most frequently used promoter in the development of first generation plant transformation vectors. recently there has been renewed interest in developing second and third generation vectors improved in the control of transgene expression by incorporating tissue-specific promoters. tissue-specific promoters offer more precise spatial control over target genes, allowing expression in one or a few tissues, but not in others. of particular interest regarding consumer preference issues are those promoters which would allow expression of a transgene in a specific target tissue/organ while avoiding expression in edible plant tissue.

tissue-specific promoters of interest in genetic engineering strategies include those associated with photosynthesis where expression is restricted to "green" tissues, and is considerably lower or absent in non-photosynthetic tissues like roots, mature flowers  and mature fruit/nuts. such promoters would be expected to promote relatively high levels of transgene expression in leaves, stems and in young floral buds and fruits. several promoters of this type have already been described. transformation of tomato plants with the tomato rbcs3a  gene promoter fused to gus resulted in leaf-specific expression compared to green fruits  <cit> . in contrast, two other tomato rbcs promoters  showed similar gus activity in leaves and green fruits. interestingly, transient expression of the rbcs3a construct showed no difference in expression of gus between leaves and green fruit, implying that integration is necessary for specificity. a more recent study of agrobacterium-mediated transgene expression in apple utilized rubisco small subunit gene promoters from tomato  and soybean  to drive expression of gus  <cit> . expression in young apple seedling leaves was about 55–60% of that determined for a camv 35s-gus control. surprisingly, expression of the rbcs3c::gus construct in leaves was independent of light, in contrast to previous observations of rbcs expression. unfortunately, gus activity could not be determined in fruits, as the apple seedlings had not reached reproductive maturity during the experiment; however, tissue-specificity was determined by measuring gus activity in roots. for both rbcs constructs, gus activity was substantially lower in roots compared to leaves. a study  <cit>  using the strong photosynthetic promoter of pnzip from pharbitis nil  to drive gus expression reported high levels of expression in leaves and little expression in flowers and roots of transformed tobacco .

we are interested in identifying other photosynthetic promoters as potential candidates for regulating expression in leaves, but not in mature fruits. we previously  <cit>  described the isolation and characterization of a type ii chlorophyll a/b-binding protein  gene from peach . expression of this cab gene in developing leaves during the growing season followed patterns typical of developing leaves of herbaceous plants. shaded leaves showed a profile similar to that of sun-exposed leaves, although cab mrna levels were in general lower in the shaded leaves. of interest also is the observation that significant levels of cab mrna could be detected in very young fruit  but not in mature, ripe peach fruits . in the current study our objective was to use a minimal cab promoter, which retained its native tissue- and light-specificity. to achieve this objective we identified the lhcb2*pp <dig> promoter, isolated a short  fragment, and fused it with the uida reporter gene to monitor expression driven by the cab promoter in a tomato model host.

RESULTS
promoter region of lhcb2*.pp1
the isolation and characterization of a type ii chlorophyll a/b-binding protein gene was described in bassett et al.  <cit> . information from the coding sequence was used to design primers for genome walking to obtain sequences further upstream of the mrna leader. a clone containing approximately  <dig> bp of sequence 5' of the lhcb2*pp <dig> translation start site was isolated and sequenced. the results are shown in figure 1a. a consensus tata box was identified some  <dig> bases upstream of the putative transcription start site for lhcb2*pp <dig>  two caat boxes were identified upstream of the tata box. the only other regulatory sequence noted was a single g-box element with a downstream motif containing gata-like repeats . after construction of the cab::gus fusion recombinant plasmids , the region surrounding the junction between the cab <dig> promoter and the gus exon <dig> was sequenced to confirm the construction .

histochemical analysis of transformants
a fusion product containing the gus gene  under the control of the minimal cab promoter  was transferred to a plant binary transformation vector  in both orientations relative to the left border. a control plasmid carrying gus regulated by an enhanced mas35s promoter  <cit>  was also constructed . all three recombinant plasmids were transformed separately into tomato 'ailsa-craig', and transgenic plants were recovered on antibiotic selection media. regenerated plants were tested for the presence of uida or uida + cab promoter through pcr analyses. those regenerants that were positive for gus or gus + cab were grown to maturity and maintained in a greenhouse. ten independent lines of each construct  were selected for further evaluation.

to determine the relative expression of the different lines, leaf sections from fully expanded leaves were cut and stained for gus activity. untransformed controls showed negligible gus activity , but lines carrying the recombinant constructs showed wide variation in gus expression. interestingly, the smaller veins in leaves from all lines carrying the mas35s::gus construct stained more heavily than the lamina . although this was also seen to some degree in several cab19::gus lines, the staining of veins in these lines was considerably less than what was observed with lines carrying the control construct. similar results were obtained from transverse-sections through the major vein of leaves stained for gus activity , i.e. staining in the vascular bundles of cab19::gus lines was spotty compared to staining in mas35s::gus lines.

histochemical staining for gus activity in floral parts was negative for all lines carrying cab19::gus in either orientation . in contrast, staining of floral structures was observed in a number of lines carrying the mas35s::gus construct . gus activity was lowest in petals, higher in sepals and highest in anthers and stigmas. immature green fruits and fully ripe  fruits expressed variable gus activity . in green fruits, staining appeared to be more intense in vascular bundles, especially in the mas35s::gus lines. in red fruits little gus activity was observed in the cab19::gus lines, except for some light staining in locular material . staining in the vascular bundles of the mas35s::gus lines was intense, as was staining in locular tissues in these lines.

quantification of gus activity
gus activity was quantified for all transgenic lines using the mug assay. activity profiles for expanding leaves, mature roots and whole flowers are shown in figure  <dig>  for all lines tested a range of gus activities was seen in leaf tissue. however, in roots and flowers of transgenic lines carrying cab19::gus, activities were considerably lower than those seen in the mas35s::gus lines, although some of the mas35s::gus individual lines had low gus activity in roots and/or flowers. gus activity in whole fruits was also observed to vary considerably across independent transgenic lines . although immature green fruits expressed relatively high levels of gus activity  in all lines, red fruit carrying a cab19::gus construct expressed 3–5-fold lower activity on average than fruit from lines carrying mas35s::gus.

realtime quantification of cab and gus rnas from light- or dark-exposed seedlings
to determine whether or not the minimal cab <dig> promoter still contained light responsive element, real-time pcr was performed on seedlings from the a <dig> , c <dig>  and ac <dig>  lines. real-time pcr results were shown previously to correspond with gus activity measurements when lines varying in leaf gus activity were analyzed . real-time analyses were performed on a <dig>  c <dig> and ac <dig> seedlings germinated in the dark and subsequently exposed to light or kept in the dark. figure  <dig> presents those results demonstrating that the native tomato cab gene is expressed at a much lower level in the dark for both lines, as expected. gus expression in c <dig> was similar in light or dark while in contrast, gus expression in a <dig> was completely light-dependent .

discussion
sequence analysis of the peach lhcb2*pp <dig> gene promoter
we have described the isolation and characterization of the promoter of a peach type ii chlorophyll a/b-binding protein gene . the promoter was isolated as a minimal promoter containing ca.  <dig> bases of sequence upstream of the cab translation start site. analysis of this region for cis-acting elements located a consensus tata box near the 3' end of the promoter, two caat boxes, a single g-box sequence  and a motif conserved in several promoters containing gata-like elements. tata boxes control basal transcription from rna polymerase ii and have been highly conserved in eukaryotes during evolution  <cit> . caat boxes located within ca.  <dig> bases upstream of a tata box can enhance the basal level of transcription  <cit> , and these elements can also be found in a variety of eukaryotes. in plants, g-box elements are responsive to a variety of hormones and other signals, including light  <cit> , though others have shown that promoters lacking a g-box core are fully light inducible  <cit> . hence, the g-box in the lhcb2*pp <dig> promoter may function as a light-responsive element. the last identified motif present in this cab promoter is a gata-containing element similar to an activation sequence binding site required for leaf-specificity in transgenic tobacco, but not light regulation  <cit> .

tissue-specific regulation of the gus reporter gene under lhcb2*pp <dig> promoter control
constructs synthesized using the minimal cab promoter to drive expression of gus were used to transform tomato to assess expression. two different orientations of the promoter with respect to the left border were tested. no significant differences were observed between two  orientations. histochemical analysis of  <dig> transgenic lines  indicated considerable variability in expression among individual lines. it is presumed that this variability is due in part to position effects generated from random integration of plasmid dna into the chromosome and in part to differences in the number of integrated copies between independent lines. in fact southern analysis suggested that higher expressing lines of all transgenics appeared to have more than one copy of the construct inserted into the genome . although in general higher copy number accounts for higher expression of resident genes, the correlation is not always perfect  <cit> . in some cases the location of an inserted sequence on the chromosome influences expression due to the presence of enhancer/suppressor elements, as well as other factors related to chromosome structure.

nevertheless, despite the variability in expression among lines, some consistent differences were observed between cab19::gus constructs and the mas35s::gus controls. in leaf, more gus activity was seen in vascular tissue in the mas35sgus control lines, than in the cab19::gus lines. these results are similar to those observed with rubisco small subunit vs. 35s promoters in transgenic apple  <cit> . in addition, no gus activity was detected in floral tissues from the cab19::gus lines, whereas, staining in the stigmas, anthers, sepals and petals was observed in the mas35s::gus lines tested. these observations were supported by the quantitative mug assays of gus activity. for example, while there was substantial overlap in the range of activity seen in leaves of plants containing either the cab19::gus or mas35s::gus constructs, the average expression for all transgenic lines indicated that cab19::gus lines had 60–80% of the average observed for the mas35s::gus lines. gittins et al.  <cit>  reported similar results in transgenic apple shoots comparing 35s with the tomato rbcs3c and soybean srs <dig> promoters. yang et al.  <cit> , however, reported activities of another photosynthetic promoter  to be ca. 5–6-fold higher than 35s::gus. the mas35s::gus activities in our study appear to be 10-fold higher in leaf than the 35s::gus activity in the study by yang et al.  <cit> , after adjusting for differences in activity units between the two studies. the q <dig> photosynthetic promoter construct contains  <dig> bases 5' of the pnzip translation start site  <cit>  and is equivalent in size and sequence to the cab <dig> construct. comparison of the activities of these two promoters indicates that they are virtually equivalent in leaf, root and flower tissues. in addition, unlike the pnzip promoter, the cab <dig> constructs contain no potential upstream augs that could interfere with translation of fused genes  <cit> .

there was no overlap in gus activities between roots and flowers expressing cab19::gus or mas35s::gus. both cab19::gus constructs expressed very low levels of gus . these results are also consistent with the transgenic apple experiments where expression of rbcs3c::gus or srs1::gus in roots was 1–4% of the 35s::gus construct  <cit> . in addition, our observations support previous studies indicating that the integrated intact 35s camv promoter is active in most plant tissues  <cit> .

to our knowledge, no reports examining the expression of genes under control of photosynthetic promoters in fruit have been published. since fruit represent an economically significant portion of the agricultural production and contribute to human health and well being, it is important to evaluate promoters on their ability to restrict expression in tissues other than the edible fruit. histochemical staining of green  fruit showed that expression of gus was nearly identical in slices from transgenic tomatoes carrying either the cab19::gus or mas35s::gus constructs, except that in general, seeds of fruits from mas35::gus transgenic plants stained more intensely. elevated mrna levels of another photosynthetic gene, rubisco small subunit , was previously reported in young fruit of tomato  <cit> . furthermore, since young green tomato fruits are capable of limited photosynthesis  <cit> , expression of cab19::gus in young green fruit is not surprising.

histochemical staining of red  fruits carrying cab19::gus was higher in the locular matrix than in the mesocarp or skin. this observation is consistent with microarray analysis of early fruit development in tomato where high photosynthetic gene activity  was observed specifically in locules  <cit> . similar results were obtained during promoter analysis of the tomato rbcs <dig> family, showing little gus staining in the exocarp and mesocarp, but a range from slight to intense staining in locules of mature fruit  <cit> . as with immature, green fruits, staining was more intense and pervasive in slices from the mas35s::gus lines. the quantitative results also reflected these observations in that, although there was overlap among the lines, there were more mas35s::gus lines  with activities greater than  <dig> nmoles 4-mu/min/mg in ripe fruit, than in the two cab19::gus lines .

light responsiveness of the lhcb2*pp <dig> promoter
that the minimal cab <dig> promoter maintained its responsiveness to light is illustrated by the lack of detectable gus mrna in transgenic etiolated seedlings germinated and kept in the dark. although the relative levels of gus in transgenic cab19::gus epicotyls were low compared to the mas35s::gus lines, the response to light was dramatic and qualitatively similar to that obtained for the native tomato cab type ii gene. based on the overall results of the gus activity measurements and the real time rt-pcr experiments, we conclude that the minimal cab <dig> promoter retains its tissue specificity and responsiveness to light. this promoter can be used for the regulation of transgenes that need to be expressed in leaves or young fruit, but do not require expression in roots or mature fruit for biological effect.

biotechnological applications for a leaf- and green fruit-specific promoter with minimal expression in edible roots and fruit
there are a number of biotechnological applications which require expression of a desirable gene in leaves or immature fruit of economically important plants. for example, resistant genes to control damage by insect feeding could be expressed in the primary tissue under attack and not in every tissue/organ of the plant. in this way the cab <dig> promoter could be used where insects damage developing fruits either directly or by preferentially laying eggs on young fruit, as seen with plum curculio  or first generation coddling moths . regarding leaf-specific expression, the cab <dig> promoter was recently shown to effectively drive expression of an rnai construct in plum to control plum pox infection  <cit> . it is likely that the high level of expression generally obtained with the camv35s promoter will not be necessary to effectively express desirable genes in all cases. in those instances the cab <dig> promoter will be an acceptable alternative for controlling genetically engineered resistance to pests which target leaves and green fruit.

CONCLUSIONS
the minimal lhcb2*pp <dig> promoter  described here can be used in heterologous expression of genes in photosynthetic tissues, including immature, green fruits. this promoter contains all of the cis-elements for tissue-specific expression in photosynthetically active tissues. in addition elements contributing to light regulation of this promoter are also present. such a promoter will be useful in a variety of applications where expression of select genes in leaves and immature fruit is important, but where expression in roots, mature fruit and flowers is minimized.

