BACKGROUND
one of the main challenges of biological research is to understand the evolutionary assembly and maintenance of complex, multitrophic food webs  <cit> . the classic escape-and-radiate  hypothesis  <cit>  envisions the current remarkable diversity of plants and herbivorous insects  <cit>  as a result of a cyclic coevolutionary process: a plant lineage that acquires a new defensive trait  becomes free to proliferate and rapidly divides into multiple descendant lineages  <cit> . over time, the defenses of the new clade are overcome by some insect species, which now enter a vacant adaptive zone and diversify to exploit the species of the hitherto herbivore-free plant group  <cit> . a new cycle of diversification starts whenever a novel defense evolves in one of the plant lineages.

although the ear hypothesis was originally formulated in terms of plants and herbivores, it has recently been suggested that a concurrent ear process operates between plant-feeding insects and their associated parasitoids  <cit> . parasitic insects typically inflict heavy mortality on herbivore populations  <cit> , and the specialized host use of both insect herbivores and parasitoids leads to the intriguing possibility that these hyperdiverse interaction networks are created "from within", that is, by diversifying effects that are transmitted or even amplified through many trophic levels. "bottom-up" speciation cascades could result if diversification of plants spurs speciation of herbivores  <cit>  that, in turn, leads to increased resource diversity for associated parasitoids  <cit> . "top-down" diversifying forces could be equally important if parasitoids use plants as cues for finding their host insects; in such cases, an evolutionary shift to a novel host plant could provide "enemy-free space" for the herbivores  <cit> . release from enemies could accelerate diversification in the herbivore lineage that, in turn, would create more possibilities for parasitoid speciation.

diversifying selection exerted by natural enemies might similarly underlie the unusual diversity of many gall-inducing insect groups. the ability to induce galls on plants has evolved convergently in dozens of distantly related insect taxa and, as a result of spectacular adaptive radiations, many of these groups contain hundreds of species that differ markedly with respect to their host plant use and gall morphology  <cit> . phylogeny-based comparative studies have demonstrated that galls represent "extended phenotypes" of the gallers, meaning that gall form and location is determined mainly by the galling insects and not by their host plants  <cit> . because galler parasitoids have to penetrate a protective wall of modified plant tissue in order to gain access to their victims, stone and schönrogge  <cit>  recently concluded that morphology-dependent parasitism remains the most plausible adaptive explanation for the diversification of gall form, but they also noted that the needed phylogenetic tests are lacking.

despite its intuitive appeal, the ear hypothesis has never been tested in a phylogenetic framework  <cit> . therefore, we investigated how phylogenetic patterns of parasitism and diversification in gall-inducing sawflies belonging to the nematine subtribe euurina  conform to the predictions of the hypothesis. euurina sawflies induce leaf folds or rolls, or various closed galls on willows  and, at over  <dig> species, the subtribe includes over  <dig> times more species than its sister group with larvae that feed externally on leaves  <cit> . their main sources of mortality are larvae of parasitoids  and parasitic inquilines   <cit> . in all, the associated enemy complex comprises nearly  <dig> species that belong to  <dig> families in four insect orders  <cit> . sawfly gallers are particularly suited for studying the evolutionary assembly of complex food webs, because while each galler species is typically a specialist on a single willow species, all of the seven main types of closed galls can be found on multiple willow hosts  <cit> ; this cross-replication of willows and galls makes it possible to tease apart the respective effects of host plants and gall phenotypes on the composition of the enemy community attacking each galler species.

RESULTS
as a first step, we reconstructed the phylogenetic tree of willow gallers on the basis of dna sequence data from two mitochondrial genes . the strongly supported phylogeny  confirms earlier results that species inducing closed galls evolved from external-feeding sawfly lineages via leaf folders  <cit> , and demonstrates that the galler community on any given willow species is a collection of sawflies inducing different galls that have colonized the host, or one of its ancestors, at different time intervals.

contrasting the galler phylogeny with quantitative data on the mortalities inflicted by inquiline and parasitoid species shows that evolutionary changes in many different ecological traits can lead to full or partial release from natural enemies . permutation tests demonstrate a strong correlation between galler phylogeny and species-level enemy communities , which mainly follows from the fact that the largest differences in enemy communities occur among gall types, which are likewise strongly conserved with respect to the galler tree. constraining permutations of species-level enemy communities to occur only within gall types also leads to longer data lengths , but the increase tends to be less pronounced than in unconstrained randomizations. within gall-type groups, enemy communities in many cases differ markedly among willow species, but a statistically significant host plant effect extends also across gall-type boundaries . these results are robust enough to be found also in randomization tests based on qualitative  data on enemy communities .

sawflies inducing identical galls on different host species are in many cases attacked by very different parasite assemblages , which indicates that directional selection coefficients imposed by natural enemies can be extremely strong during host plant shifts. for example, host-provided enemy-free space evidently can be found especially on several distantly related willow species that grow in sub-arctic and arctic-alpine habitats  where, for example, the predominantly southern inquilines curculio crux  and hydriomena ruberata  occur only rarely . conversely, leaf gallers on northern willows generally suffer from increased attack by the parasitic wasps shawiana lapponica and lathrostizus flexicauda . contrasting selection pressures caused by spatial and temporal variation in enemy communities  <cit>  could explain why some prevalent and seriously lethal parasite species have been both lost and gained during the diversification of leaf-galling sawfly lineages .

however, the most dramatic shift in enemy communities coincides with the evolutionary transition from the ancestral condition of leaf galling to gall induction on shoots, buds, and petioles . this seemingly minor change in gall phenotype, which occurred at least six million years ago  <cit> , led to a near-complete elimination of parasitic inquilines and to a coincident pruning of the parasitoid community , demonstrating that gall-inducing insects can find immediate and long-lasting "enemy-free morphospace" even in the absence of host plant shifts. the community plot shows that the novel gall types were subsequently tracked and colonized by parasitic lineages that apparently were derived mainly from the ancestral pool of enemies. in accordance with the ear hypothesis, at least five probable cases of adaptive splitting along gall-type boundaries can be identified in the parasitic wasp genera lathrostizus , pteromalus , and eurytoma  , probably because successful attack on different galls requires specialized adaptations in the parasitoids' search behaviors and ovipositor structures  <cit> .

df, degrees of freedom

gall type was included as a fixed factor and sample size as a covariate in the ancova model. sample sizes were ln-transformed prior to the analysis, because logarithmic regressions produced more biologically realistic results and a better fit to the observed data  than did linear regressions with untransformed sample sizes.

*r <dig> =  <dig>  .

the central prediction of the ear hypothesis is that escapes from enemies trigger rapid radiations in prey lineages  <cit> , but our phylogenetic results  directly contradict this proposition. current estimates  <cit>  of species numbers in the conspicuously parasite-poor euura clade  are lower than those of their enemy-rich sister group composed of leaf midrib bean and pea gallers , and both of these clades contain more species than the monophyletic group comprising the enemy-rich leaf blade bean and sausage gallers . additional comparative studies involving other insect taxa are needed to confirm this conflicting pattern, but it has been argued that the prediction of elevated speciation rates in enemy-free lineages has a weak theoretical basis  <cit> , and our data suggest two explanations for the absence of notable speciation bursts. first, in complex food webs, release from some enemies can be quickly compensated by an increase in the severity of attack by the remaining ones, which is evidenced by a lack of association between numbers of parasite species and rates of parasite-inflicted mortality in comparisons across galler species . less obvious zero-sum games of survival are also possible, so that while overall rates of parasitism are slightly lower in euura species than in leaf gallers, the benefit seems to be offset by an increased susceptibility to defence reactions on behalf of the host plants  <cit> . second, if prey species are  themselves resource specialists, a moderate enemy pressure might promote the prey's colonization of novel niches  and thus facilitate ecological speciation in prey lineages. this could especially be the case if geographical variation in enemy assemblages drives different populations of widespread prey species into using different resources.

gall type was included as a fixed factor and number of parasite species as a covariate in the ancova model . mortalities were arcsine square root transformed prior to the analysis.

*r <dig> =  <dig>  .

CONCLUSIONS
coevolutionary studies on parasitoids and their prey commonly focus on physiological defenses and counterdefenses  <cit> , but our results clearly show that ecological traits constitute a central part of the defensive arsenal of herbivorous insects. prior to a niche shift, an evolving prey lineage must exhibit a polymorphism in resource use, which can be followed by quick fixation of one of the alternative states whenever different resources are associated with different enemy attack patterns. furthermore, our finding that several parasitoid lineages have responded to gall-type divergence by adaptive speciation provides strong support for suggestions  <cit>  that coevolutionary arms races have played an important role in the generation of the unusual diversity of herbivorous insects and parasitoids. nevertheless, our data also indicate that in its classic form the ear hypothesis is too simplistic to explain reciprocal diversification effects in complex food webs, in which escapes from enemies will tend to be too brief to lead to the predicted speciation bursts. instead, the observed patterns of parasitism and diversification are consistent with a scenario of stepwise antagonistic coevolution: colonization of new ecological niches by prey lineages is being continuously driven by temporary relief from parasitism, after which an evolutionary response by some of the associated enemies returns mortalities to normal levels. in its complexity, the willow-galler-parasite food web is representative of many antagonistic networks in which specialized interactions link species across multiple trophic levels. a close integration of ecological and evolutionary research is clearly needed if the origins of such networks are to be fully understood.

