BACKGROUND
subterranean ecosystems are considered natural laboratories to study the effect of temporal and spatial isolation on genetic divergence  <cit> . environmental stability, permanent darkness and oligotrophy are characteristics of caves, either terrestrial  or sub-aquatic . the subterranean environment puts their inhabitants under stress conditions, including "perpetual darkness and humidity, lack of some environmental cues, complex mazelike living space, stressful gas mixtures, patchy food resources, barren rocky substrates and occasional flooding"  <cit> .

the evolutionary patterns of the hypogean fauna are barely known, and precise data on the genetic and biogeographic processes associated with the adaptation to this habitat have only recently begun to be gathered  <cit> . adaptation to hypogean conditions involves a series of physiological, morphological and behavioural changes collectively known as troglomorphy  <cit> . these adaptations are common to animals as diverse as arthropods, flatworms and vertebrates, suggesting that they are the result of evolutionary convergence caused by living under similar selective pressures to those posed by the hypogean habitat  <cit> . some of the most studied characteristics in that respect are eye reduction and the loss of pigmentation  that darwin  <cit>  attributed to regressions caused by disuse. nevertheless, adaptation to these conditions seems to involve also other 'non-regressive' morphological changes, such as elongation of the body, antennae and legs of insects or crustaceans and the exacerbation of sensory organs . extreme convergence in cave life can also obscure species relationships and their geographical limits  <cit> .

gammaridean amphipod crustaceans have a considerable number of subterranean stygobiont species in many regions of the world  <cit> . the global subterranean amphipod fauna comprises more than  <dig> species embracing  <dig> families and  <dig> genera  <cit> . however, amphipods of the family talitridae  are the only representatives of the order with strictly terrestrial species, being mainly soil inhabitants of beaches and tropical humid forests. of these, only two species are known to have adapted to a strictly troglobitic life in volcanic cave habitats: spelaeorchestia koloana  <cit>  in kaua'i  and palmorchestia hypogaea  <cit>  in the canary islands. a third species, orchestia remyi  from corsica, is microphthalmous and presumably has adapted to subterranean life in karstic caves. p. hypogaea is exclusively found in lava tubes on the island of la palma showing troglobitic morphological characters and lifestyle. these include strong eye reduction , the complete loss of body pigmentation and very elongated appendages  <cit> . p. hypogaea is also one of the few hypogean taxa for which an epigean occulated, pigmented close relative species  is known to occur nearby, in the litter of the humid laurel forest on the same island  <cit> .

stygobiont amphipods display biogeographic patterns caused by past episodes of colonization by epigean fresh or marine/brackish water ancestors. adaptive shifts, stream capture, regression of marine embayments and fluctuating sea levels have been recognized as the main driving forces underlying these biogeographic patterns  <cit> . in landhoppers, stock  <cit>  suggested an evolutionary scenario for the adaptation of p. epigaea to the lava tubes of la palma. given the similarity of some morphological characters of the forest-dwelling p. epigaea with marine/supralittoral extant orchestia species such as o. gammarellus, he proposed that an ancestral littoral orchestia species once colonized the humid forests of la palma. the recent advent of relative drought episodes in the canaries would have reduced the previously wider distribution of p. epigaea to dark, humid forest pockets remaining at altitudes between  <dig> and  <dig> m, especially in the more humid northern and north-eastern face of the island. drought episodes have been deduced from analyses of fuerteventura  paleodunes  <cit> , showing a first cycle at  <dig> – <dig>  million years ago  and more recent ones dated from  <dig>  to  <dig>  years ago, and around  <dig>  and  <dig>  years before present. these episodes could have affected the island of la palma, thus creating selection pressures favouring the colonization of deep crevices and lava tubes with enough humid conditions, through an adaptive shift. alternatively, local extinction of epigean ancestors by the drought episodes mentioned above, and survival of populations in the hypogean habitat and dark humid areas could explain the observed pattern . in any case, two evolutionary transitions, one from the littoral to inland environment, followed by another from forest to cave habitats, should have occurred in a period within  <dig> , <dig> years, the k-ar dating for the oldest subaerial lava flows known on the island  <cit> . it is unclear why other species of the genus orchestia occurring in humid laurel forests on other canary islands  have not colonized the subterranean habitat of their respective islands.

another important issue concerns the dispersal potential of subterranean animals and whether apparently widespread subterranean species have evolved once and expanded their range by dispersal  or evolve independently by convergent evolution from widespread surface populations in different parts of their range  <cit>  the first case would lead to the display of convergent adaptations. this seems to be the case in the different astyanax fish populations, the best studied case of adaptation to the subterranean environment in vertebrates  <cit> . in the facultative cave-dwelling crayfish cambarus tenebrosus, the cave-dwelling and subterranean populations form a monophyletic group and clades are geographically but not habitat-structured, suggesting that there is  gene flow between the two habitats  <cit> . in the cave-dwelling landhopper p. hypogaea, stock and martin  <cit>  claimed that the distribution of the species in lava tubes and caves all over la palma and especially in tubes formed by recent lava flows , would suggest that this talitrid can colonize new subterranean habitats quickly. thus, a single colonization event followed by dispersal via the hypogean crevicular system could explain the observed pattern of habitats of these crustaceans.

we have used mitochondrial  dna and nuclear sequence data to establish a phylogenetic framework for testing hypotheses on the origin of p. hypogaea and to study the phylogeography of cave and surface populations of the genus palmorchestia on the island of la palma. in particular, we tested whether all populations of p. hypogaea could have derived from a common ancestral population that adapted to life in the volcanic tubes and dispersed through the volcanic subsoil, or whether there were multiple independent invasions of the caves from partially isolated, genetically differentiated populations of an ancestor presumably similar to the extant forest species p. epigaea.

RESULTS
a total of  <dig> palmorchestia individuals were sequenced  for the subunits cox <dig> and cox <dig> of the cytochrome oxidase mtdna region resulting in an alignment of  <dig> bp. the examined individuals of the two species showed many distinct haplotypes ; see table  <dig> and table s <dig> in additional file  <dig>  haplotypes were endemic to their respective cave or surface localities in the two species, with the exception of one haplotype of p. epigaea that was shared by the two nearby localities, cubo de la galga and barranco de la galga, at the north-east of the island . therefore, no shared haplotypes between subterranean and surface species were evident in our samples. mtdna haplotype diversity, measured by either species or locality, was high although sample sizes were low in some cases . only barranco de la galga and andén verde  and cueva de la buraca  showed a fixed mtdna genotype , but all other surface localities or lava tubes in which palmorchestia was sampled rendered multiple haplotypes with a remarkably high rate of nucleotide variation.

phylogenetic analyses
a sequence alignment was obtained for the palmorchestia haplotypes plus the sequences obtained of  <dig> individuals from five related orchestia species collected . one hundred and seventy-nine nucleotide positions were of the cox <dig> gene, up to  <dig> of an intergenic spacer, and  <dig> of cox <dig>  the minimum in-group mean corrected distance among species  was  <dig> % between p. epigaea and p. hypogaea and a maximum of 78% between o. gomeri and p. hypogaea. the sequence of the related landhopper talitroides alluaudi was used as an out-group. histone h <dig> sequences obtained from  <dig> individuals  showed no variation within palmorchestia or within the other orchestia species sequenced while a  <dig> % mean distance was obtained in comparisons between in-group species. mtdna bayesian inference and parsimony trees showed the same overall topology, which agreed with the among-species relationships deduced from nuclear histone h <dig> sequences . each orchestia species formed highly supported monophyletic mtdna lineages, although relationships between species were weakly supported in most cases when using only mtdna . a monophyletic clade composed of all palmorchestia sequences appears as a sister group to orchestia sp. from gran canaria . interestingly, the sequences of p. hypogaea and p. epigaea did not form reciprocally monophyletic clades when using mtdna , yet all examined individuals of these species showed identical histone h <dig> sequences. the clade formed by sequences of a p. epigaea population  is sister to the p. hypogaea palmeros de aguatavara cave  clade  and two p. hypogaea cave populations  cluster with the mtdna haplotypes of the remaining four p. epigaea surface populations of the same geographical region . all but two surface localities  showed support for monophyletic mtdna clades . this suggests that the palmorchestia populations are highly structured geographically and have diverged genetically. moreover, there is evidence that current gene flow among surface populations is limited to geographically close populations. parsimonious reconstructions of habitat type based on the mtdna analysis showed a minimum of five transitions to the subterranean habitat from epigean ancestors , assuming that reversal to the surface of hypogean lineages is absent or very unlikely. alternatively, if transition between the two habitats was considered, four hypo-epigean shifts in the phylogeny could be deduced , but for this scenario to hold a subterranean lineage that became extinct or has not yet been found must be invoked.

divergence rates and molecular clock
based on a relaxed molecular clock bayesian analysis and an a priori calibration for the node of palmorchestia using la palma subaerial age, the mean substitution rate was estimated to be in the range of  <dig> – <dig> % per lineage per million years using a yule and coalescent size models as priors, respectively . this results in an average substitution rate of  <dig>  × 10- <dig> per site per year for the cox1–cox <dig> fragment used with 95% highest posterior densities  in the range  <dig> – <dig>  × 10- <dig>  similar divergence time estimates for the major cladogenetic events were obtained irrespective of the model used except for the tree root node that was estimated to be significantly more recent using the yule process than when coalescent models were applied . the constant population size coalescent model had the best likelihood value . within palmorchestia, the most recent common ancestor for the subterranean lineage ag and the surface population ja was estimated at  <dig>  years with 95% hpd values of  <dig> – <dig> , <dig> years assuming a constant population size model. the most recent common ancestor  of the surface-subterranean northern clade including bu + ga + fr + av + cg + bg haplotypes  would be dated at an estimated mean of  <dig>  years . the mrca of cave populations spanned from a minimum of  <dig>  years for ga  to a maximum of  <dig>  years for pa  . more recent coalescent times were estimated for the forest populations. this shows that the adaptation to cave life is relatively ancient for the age of la palma.

analysis of molecular variance
analysis of molecular variance  showed that variance among groups maximized when partitioning palmorchestia samples considering the north-east localities as a single population and the remaining sites as distinct populations , in accordance with the tree topology. partitioning the populations in subterranean and surface habitat groups produced a very low variance between groups , whereas most variance was attributable to differences among populations within groups . this demonstrates that there has been no significant association between genetic variation and habitat, but a strong association of haplotypes with island geographic realms irrespective of their surface or troglobitic life style.

statistical parsimony
network diagrams represent intraspecific evolution better than phylogenetic bifurcating trees  <cit> . analysis of the palmorchestia data set with the program tcs showed  <dig> as the maximum number of substitutions before homoplasy was likely to occur under the 95% probability criterion. this produced eight separated sub-networks above this limit, corresponding to the main clades of the tree of figure  <dig>  a cave locality  has two disjoint sub-networks , suggesting that two distant mtdna lineages occur within the same cave system. the rest of the cave localities and the epigean juan adalid  north-west sampling site showed specific separate networks and thus highly distinct mtdna lineages. only one sub-network  included mtdna haplotypes united below the limit of parsimony from individuals coming from six localities: four from surface populations of the north-north-east part of the island and the caves cueva honda de gallegos and cueva de la buraca , located in the same geographical area . as mentioned above, the general pattern is consistent with considerable geographic structuring of both p. epigaea and p. hypogaea populations and indicates a strong allopatric fragmentation. nested clade phylogenetic analysis  could only be applied to the northern sub-network, corresponding to evolutionary recent events deduced to have occurred less than  <dig>  years ago on average . the haplotype network and nesting design for this lineage is represented in figure  <dig>  haplotype cg <dig> appears central in the network and is the most frequent, as it is present in six of the  <dig> sampled individuals of this clade. this haplotype is also fixed in the bg population, and is present in the neighbouring cg locality. nesting resulted in  <dig> one-step clades containing sampled haplotypes that were further nested into higher-order groups until the total cladogram was obtained. the higher-order groups included surface haplotypes from fr and av plus the only haplotype of the bu cave  and haplotypes from surface cg, bg and cave ga sampling sites . the nested contingency analysis of geographic associations and the interpretations of the statistically significant clades lead to a 'contiguous range expansion' within clade  <dig>  and a 'past gradual range expansion followed by fragmentation' within clade  <dig>  , assuming that haplotype cg <dig>  is ancestral to any other haplotype in the north-east sub-network.

habitat associations
habitat association of mtdna haplotypes  was confirmed by permutation chi-squared tests for clades  <dig>   and  <dig>  . in addition, there was no significant association of cave and surface haplotypes with the position  of those in the network . these data suggest that there is no evidence supporting a recent colonization of the subterranean habitat by forest populations or vice versa on the north shield of the island.

discussion
the phylogenetic and population analyses clearly show that on la palma there is strong phylogeographic structuring for palmorchestia populations and that subterranean populations have multiple independent origins from surface ancestors. divergent mitochondrial lineages are restricted to precise cave systems or surface ravines and regions. analysis for all but two populations sharing the same mtdna haplotype supported monophyletic clades and a dna sequence variation that denoted an absence of current gene flow between populations; the exceptions were the bg and cg north-east surface closely placed localities. amova confirmed this and showed that when grouping palmorchestia populations by habitat type, the genetic variation between groups proved very low. however, variation was maximized when considering localities  as distinct populations, except for the north-east cave and surface sampling sites that contain a single population. this, added to the lack of reciprocal monophyly of p. epigaea and p. hypogaea mtdna sequences, suggests that any division of the two species by habitat and ecology is unnatural.

nuclear histone h <dig> gene and mitochondrial sequences showed the close relationship of palmorchestia species with the orchestia sp. of gran canaria. the two palmorchestia species currently considered are clearly paraphyletic and genetically quite distant from the other canary endemic landhoppers of the genus orchestia. within the palmorchestia lineage three mitochondrial clades were obtained. the relationship of these mtdna lineages with geography and geological history requires an understanding of the volcanic evolution of the island. the geological development of la palma has been studied in detail  <cit> . two defined edifices can be distinguished  <cit> ; the northern shield began to emerge over the sea at about  <dig> – <dig>  mya and has undergone several volcanic cycles and terrain collapses that ended about  <dig>  mya. the southern ridge of the island is the product of much more recent and intense volcanic activity, beginning  <dig>  mya and lasting until the present. thus, the southern half of la palma, presumably including the shallow subsoil, is dominated by recent lava flows, some of them of in historic times. only one of the three major mtdna lineages within palmorchestia is exclusive of hypogean populations, including a central and relatively more ancient lava tube  and two southern younger caves . the other two lineages include surface and cave populations, one lineage from the north  and the other from the north-east localities  on the older northern shield, but surprisingly showing lower genetic divergences than the other lineages. the third mtdna lineage includes south-west , north-west  and west  populations. this shows that intraspecific genetic variation is clearly not directly linked to subterranean or surface habitats and that its geographic distribution cannot be explained only by the geological history of the island. in a phylogeographic study of the la palma weevil brachyderes rugatus, initial predictions based on the geological history of the island also proved to be too simple to explain the phylogeographic history of the species  <cit> .

divergence time estimations gave a faster molecular rate than other calculations made for stygobiont crustaceans using cytochrome oxidase subunit  <dig> . faster rates have nevertheless been suggested for subterranean australian amphipods  <cit> . however, mutation rates could be slower in subterranean organisms owing to longer generation times  <cit> . cave-dwelling organisms have lower metabolic, growth, fecundity and fertility rates and thus longer generation times than their surface relatives  <cit> . stygobiont amphipods and isopods need 8– <dig> years to reach sexual maturity, whereas their surface relatives only required 1– <dig> years  <cit> . accordingly,  <dig> years was assumed as the generation time for australian stygobiont amphipods of the genus pilbarus and chydaekata  <cit> . similarly, in decapod crustaceans, generation times of  <dig> and  <dig> years for surface and subterranean closely related species, respectively, have been used  <cit> , based on data published elsewhere  <cit> . in addition, it has been debated whether there is a relationship between the rate of molecular evolution and sampling time  <cit> . however, several factors other than intrinsic problems with lineage rate variation and branch length estimation can produce overestimations of the molecular rate when dating nodes based on island ages  <cit> . these include uncertainty of k-ar dating caused by the burial of earlier lava flows resulting in underestimation of island age, population genetic variation within the ancestral island population and lineage extinction  <cit> . we have obtained a reasonably good sampling of la palma populations but there is a long branch in the phylogenetic tree joining the mrca node of the sampled palmorchestia populations and the sister species occurring in gran canaria, making it feasible that extinction could be a factor that has inflated our rate estimate. nevertheless, mean time estimates for epi-hypogean transitions  for two supported nodes in the bayesian mitochondrial tree that relate surface and subterranean populations ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mya in the northern and western lineages, respectively. this suggests that independent episodes of colonization of the underground from surface pre-diverged lineages have probably occurred repeatedly in la palma at different times during the pleistocene and are probably related to documented drought episodes in the canaries  <cit> .

according to stock's hypothesis  <cit> , one can speculate on the role played by the relative drought of the island in the local extinction of surface palmorchestia populations, except in permanently humid zones such as the scattered ravines radiating down the volcano . in relation to this, two general competing hypotheses have been proposed to explain the transition from surface to subterranean life: the 'climatic relict hypothesis'   <cit>  and the 'adaptive shift hypothesis'   <cit> . in the crh, species pre-adapted to the cave environment  invade the hypogean habitat, with the epigean populations becoming extinct because of subsequent climatic change. in contrast, the ash assumes active colonization of caves and parapatric speciation accompanied by adaptive differentiation and reduced gene flow between the epigean and hypogean populations. support for both hypotheses has been obtained using mitochondrial phylogenies and molecular clock approaches , although the lack of likely surface ancestral lineages and robust phylogenies makes it difficult to test them in particular cases  <cit> . the pattern obtained in palmorchestia suggests a recurrent entrance into the cave systems by already highly structured surface populations with subsequent independent adaptation to the hypogean environment and eventual interruption of gene flow between the two habitats. local extinction of surface populations as the climate became drier  <cit>  and multiple invasions of the underground make the pattern more consistent with the crh than with a parapatric speciation via adaptive shift. the apparent contradiction between the age of the surface lava flows and some of the mtdna lineages deduced by molecular clock approaches would support this. no surface populations have been found in the southern ridge of la palma, but caves in this area are home to palmorchestia ancestral haplotypes that could have derived from recent subterranean dispersion from north-central island populations. indeed, some of the surface lava flows above these caves are recent but sampling shows ancient mtdna haplotypes with estimated coalescent times of about  <dig>  years, whereas another cave  harbours divergent lineages. if the lava tubes in these young island regions were coetaneous to surface lava flows, landhopper populations in these systems should be considered as recent newcomers and, at least in some cases, the product of independent colonizations. however, the sampling scheme has probably not covered all of the existing populations, including only a partial representation of the underground biodiversity, as access to this habitat is limited to the known entrances to the lava tubes accessible to humans . in contrast, cavehoppers can easily disperse through cracks and crevices of the lava flows , quickly colonizing the new cave systems underneath older terrains, either epigean or hypogean. this renders a scenario in which episodic colonizations involved dispersal from the surface to the underground, followed by recurrent range expansion and colonization through the subsoil, whereas on the surface isolation was caused by distance and fragmentation because of the patchy nature of the suitable habitat.

eight independent networks were obtained using statistical parsimony . five of these were site-specific and separated by many mutational steps, implying long periods of independent evolution. the north-east palmorchestia mitochondrial lineage, which includes several surface populations and two lava tube populations, provides an opportunity to infer recent evolutionary events and relationships between lineages from the two habitats. this clade has an estimated age of  <dig>  years using our relaxed molecular clock calibration , being the only clade that includes all mtdna haplotypes from different populations into a single network under the limits of parsimony. application of ncpa to this network showed an inference of contiguous range expansion from the northern surface  to north-east cave  populations and previous gradual range expansion followed by fragmentation for the clade including populations bg + cg and the distant cave ga . complex interactions either among populations within one habitat or among populations of the two habitats plus incomplete sampling and low sample size for some localities could partially explain why the significant associations found are few and dependent on the clade level . in a similar study of the facultative cave-dwelling crayfish cambarus tenebrosus, restricted gene flow and contiguous range expansion were the more frequent inferences, explaining the considerably and unusually large distribution of this species  <cit> . this kind of pattern could occur frequently in populations of facultative subterranean organisms that have remained isolated for a sufficient time, but are lost or not evident in populations with long histories of isolation, as occurs in many of the palmorchestia populations. tests of association of haplotypes with habitat type or positioning in interior or terminal nodes in the network show that haplotypes are habitat-specific, but palmorchestia has been present in both caves and surface habitats for a long evolutionary time. this can be deduced from the fact that ancient clades often occur in caves and in the network within the northern clade by the lack of statistical support for an association of surface haplotypes with interior nodes and of subterranean haplotypes with terminal nodes.

an added complication posed by cave fauna is the absence of morphological differentiation among divergent genetic lineages, resulting in the presence of cryptic species. this is in part caused by a high level of convergent evolution linked to the adaptation to darkness and has been shown recently for stygobiont amphipods  <cit> . in palmorchestia, the independent evolution of populations for a considerable evolutionary time and fast molecular evolution are apparently uncoupled with morphological divergence. these results indicate that a re-evaluation of the taxonomic status of the current species of palmorchestia is needed, with a revision of the presumed diagnostic morphological characters that differentiate p. epigaea and p. hypogaea and a search for characters that could identify individuals from different surface geographical regions and/or cave systems. if, as genetic data suggest, multiple entries to the subsoil have occurred in palmorchestia, convergent morphological adaptation by eye degeneration and body depigmentation could have arisen independently by different mutations, as has been shown to occur in astyanax fasciatus  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the phylogenetic and population analyses of palmorchestia from la palma show the need for a rigorous revision of the taxonomic status of the genus, its evolutionary relationship with other talitridae, and the morphological characters in which the two currently considered species differ. the island populations show an ancient independent evolution and there is evidence for multiple invasions of the volcanic cave systems that have historically acted as refuges. the data obtained supplement recent genetic studies on subterranean amphipod fauna  <cit> , with the potential of using these new systems to test classical hypotheses of modes of evolution for hypogean organisms. these include causes of the uncoupling of morphological and genetic evolution and the role of climatic change, hydrology and regressive evolution as processes shaping and determining subterranean biodiversity.

