BACKGROUND
with more than  <dig> species and due to some ecological adaptations, such as a ruminant-like chambered stomach to digest food rich in fiber, the old world monkey subfamily colobinae represents a diverse and enigmatic group of primates  <cit> . colobines are predominantly arboreal and occur in forest and woodland habitats. they have experienced two major radiations, one in africa with the genera procolobus, piliocolobus and colobus, and a second in south and southeast asia comprising the langur genera semnopithecus, trachypithecus and presbytis, and the odd-nosed monkey genera rhinopithecus, pygathrix, nasalis and simias  <cit> . however, their phylogenetic relationships are disputed  <cit> , and recent molecular studies detected substantial gene tree discordance  <cit> .

traditionally, african and asian genera are believed to form reciprocally monophyletic groups  <cit> , though paraphyly has also been proposed  <cit> . molecular investigations clearly confirm a common origin of asian colobines and the odd-nosed monkey group  <cit> , but evidence for monophyly of the langur group as well as for african colobines is still lacking. moreover, nuclear and mitochondrial data indicate conflicting relationships among langur genera, and between langurs and the odd-nosed monkeys  <cit> . while nuclear data consistently link semnopithecus and trachypithecus to the exclusion of all other asian colobines  <cit> , mitochondrial data either do not resolve these relationships  <cit>  or suggest a clade consisting of presbytis and trachypithecus  <cit> .

incongruent phylogenetic relationships among genes, like those detected among colobines are common in phylogenetic studies and could be explained by homoplasy, insufficient data, nucleotide composition, differential lineage sorting, or hybridization  <cit> . to ascertain which of these possibilities are responsible for the incongruence, information from various independent molecular loci can be helpful  <cit> . to date, only mitochondrial and x chromosomal data as well as presence/absence information of mobile elements, all based on an incomplete taxon sampling, are available for comparative phylogenetic studies in colobines  <cit> . among all marker systems, mobile element insertions are a promising tool to uncover phylogenetic relationships among colobine genera. compared to sole sequence data, mobile elements such as short interspersed elements  and long interspersed elements  exhibit advantages which make them ideal markers for phylogenetic reconstructions . accordingly, mobile elements are successfully applied in numerous primate phylogenetic studies  <cit> .

in our study, we examined the presence/absence pattern of mobile elements and compared the inferred phylogeny with those derived from mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data . we extended available x chromosomal and mitochondrial genome data, and sequenced de novo five autosomal loci that map to different human chromosomes, and six y chromosomal loci from all ten colobine genera. by combining results from different marker systems, we provide detailed insights into the evolutionary and biogeographic history of colobine monkeys, and show that different hybridization mechanisms might have been involved during the colobine radiation.

RESULTS
nuclear phylogeny
eighty-three mobile elements are phylogenetically informative for colobines . each of the following clades is strongly supported by at least five integrations: all colobines , asian colobines , odd-nosed monkeys , trachypithecus and semnopithecus , and nasalis and simias . three integrations were found in piliocolobus and procolobus and all asian colobines , but not in colobus. two insertions suggested a sister grouping of procolobus and piliocolobus , presbytis and the odd-nosed monkeys , and a basal position of rhinopithecus among the latter . based on maximum-parsimony  bootstrap analysis, most relationships were strongly supported . only the piliocolobus/procolobus , presbytis/odd-nosed monkey , and pygathrix/nasalis/simias  clades gained relatively weak bootstrap values . based on alternative tree topology tests, different positions of the piliocolobus/procolobus clade and presbytis among colobines were not rejected , while relationships other than the most likely one were significantly rejected for all other taxa  .

next, we performed phylogenetic analyses based on the concatenated nuclear sequence dataset, including five autosomal loci, six y chromosomal loci and a fragment of the x chromosomal xq <dig>  region . we combined all nuclear sequence data, because heuristic search methods for individual loci produced no conflicting relationships , and partition homogeneity tests revealed no significant difference in their evolutionary history . nucleotide composition of studied species was similar . phylogenetic reconstructions yielded identical and significantly supported branching patterns irrespectively of the applied algorithm  . only the pygathrix/nasalis/simias  clade had lower support values . the resultant tree topology was mainly congruent with the mobile element-based phylogeny, but two cases of incongruence were obvious. first, in the nuclear sequence-based phylogeny, african  and asian  colobine genera formed reciprocally monophyletic clades and second, presbytis represented a sister lineage to the other asian genera . according to alternative tree topology tests , paraphyly of african colobines with piliocolobus/procolobus being closer related to asian colobines than to colobus as well as various alternative positions of presbytis among asian colobines were not rejected . however, affiliations of presbytis to either semnopithecus or trachypithecus were rejected .

estimated divergence ages from the combined nuclear dataset  and single loci , both based on an a-priori fixed tree topology as obtained from mobile elements, differed slightly, most likely due to the general low variability in the studied loci . however, estimates were in the same range suggesting that loci evolve at similar evolutionary rates . according to our nuclear estimates, colobus and piliocolobus/procolobus successively split off from asian genera  <dig>  million years ago  and  <dig>  mya, respectively . the latter two separated  <dig>  mya. in asia, an initial split occurred  <dig>  mya and led to a clade consisting of trachypithecus and semnopithecus, and a group containing presbytis and the odd-nosed monkeys. among the latter, presbytis diverged  <dig>  mya and the odd-nosed monkeys began differentiating  <dig>  mya. the most recent splits among asian genera occurred between trachypithecus and semnopithecus  and between nasalis and simias .

mitochondrial phylogeny
mitochondrial and nuclear datasets were not combined, because the partition homogeneity test suggested that both track different evolutionary histories . thus, mitochondrial sequence data were analyzed separately. for both alignments , we observed a major shift in nucleotide composition between colobine and non-colobine representatives . both alignments produced identical and significantly supported branching patterns among genera . only the pygathrix/nasalis/simias  and african colobine  clades gained low mp  and nj  bootstrap values, but ml and bayesian reconstructions provided strong support for both nodes . in principal, the tree topology was identical to those obtained from mobile elements and nuclear sequence data. however, as in the nuclear sequence tree, mitochondrial data suggested african  and asian  colobines as reciprocal monophyletic clades. moreover, asian colobines further diverged into a lineage leading to the odd-nosed monkeys , a lineage comprising trachypithecus and presbytis , and finally a lineage with solely semnopithecus, while the relationships among these three lineages remained unresolved.

according to alternative tree topology tests, paraphyly of african colobines with piliocolobus/procolobus being closer related to asian colobines than to colobus was rejected . among asian colobines, relationships in which trachypithecus and presbytis do not form a monophyletic clade were also rejected , as well as a close relationship of trachypithecus and semnopithecus . in contrast, different positions of semnopithecus among asian colobines were similarly likely .

divergence age estimates from mitochondrial data were similar to nuclear estimates in case where identical branching patterns were obtained . according to mitochondrial data, african and asian colobine lineages were separated  <dig>  mya. in africa, colobus represents the first split , followed by the divergence of piliocolobus and procolobus . the major asian split leading to the three lineages semnopithecus, trachypithecus/presbytis and the odd-nosed monkeys occurred  <dig>  mya. trachypithecus diverged from presbytis  <dig>  mya. the diversification of odd-nosed monkeys into genera started  <dig>  mya and ended with the split between nasalis and simias  <dig>  mya.

inferring hybridization in the presence of incomplete lineage sorting
to assess the possible reasons for the incongruence between the nuclear and mitochondrial trees, we applied the method proposed by kubatko  <cit> . the method assumes that incomplete lineage sorting  explains observed gene tree incongruence to some extent, and seeks to determine whether all variation in observed gene trees can be explained by ils alone, as modeled by the coalescent process, or whether hybridization helps to explain significantly more the observed variation. then, the akaike information criterions  in each model  were compared to determine the best-fit model. for our data, two possible hybridization events were hypothesized. the first involved trachypithecus, with parental taxa semnopithecus and presbytis, while the second involved the clade containing piliocolobus and procolobus, colobus and the ancestor of asian colobines.

by comparing the results from models with or without the hybridization events, the best-fit model  was a tree in which trachypithecus is the result of hybridization between presbytis and semnopithecus. the second best-fit model  comprised the tree that includes both tested hybridization events. aic values for all seven other models were considerably higher . since aic values for the scenarios presented in figures 2f and 2i were the lowest and were within  <dig> of one another, both were considered plausible explanations for the observed gene tree discordances  <cit> . it is worth pointing out that the model used here to compute the aic assumes that ils is a possible source of gene trees incongruence. since the two best-fit models include at least one hybridization event, it is clear that ils alone does not adequately describe the extent of incongruence in the observed gene trees.

discussion
by combining presence/absence analysis of mobile elements with autosomal, x chromosomal, y chromosomal and mitochondrial sequence data, the present study provides comprehensive insights into the evolutionary history of colobines. most relationships are resolved and strongly supported by mobile elements and sequence data. moreover, relationships and estimated divergence ages as obtained from different datasets are mainly congruent and in agreement with earlier studies  <cit> . our study, however, also reveals significant discrepancies among gene trees. first, mitochondrial and nuclear sequence data suggest a monophyletic african colobine clade, while mobile elements provide evidence for a closer connection of the piliocolobus/procolobus clade to asian genera than to colobus. second, mobile elements indicate close relationships between semnopithecus and trachypithecus, and between presbytis and the odd-nosed monkeys. nuclear sequence data support the former clade, but suggest presbytis as basal among asian colobines. in contrast, in the mitochondrial phylogeny, presbytis and trachypithecus are displayed as sister lineages, while the position of semnopithecus remains ambiguous.

possible explanations for gene tree discordance
inadequate data, homoplasy, nucleotide composition, ils or hybridization could be potential explanations for the observed differences  <cit> . for the mitochondrial dataset, at least for the african and presbytis/trachypithecus clades, incorrect branching patterns due to inadequate data or homoplasy are unlikely, since sufficient phylogenetic resolution with long internal branches is obtained. likewise, a shift in nucleotide composition and differential sorting of ancestral mitochondrial lineages is implausible. since the major shift in nucleotide composition was detected between colobines and non-colobines, it cannot be responsible for gene tree discordances among colobines. if the african and presbytis/trachypithecus clades are indeed the result of incomplete sorting of mitochondrial lineages, the mitochondrial divergence between respective genera should predate the nuclear splitting times, which is not the case . however, the unresolved position of semnopithecus among asian colobines might have been affected by one or several of the above mentioned factors, or alternatively, might be the result of a true radiation-like divergence of lineages. for nuclear data, these factors are unlikely explanations as well for the branching of trachypithecus and semnopithecus, because ten independent insertions and sequence data from  <dig> nuclear loci clearly confirm their close relationship. more challenging are explanations for the discordant positions of presbytis and the african genera among colobines in phylogenies revealed by mobile elements and nuclear sequence data. mixed genomes due to differentially selected genes cannot be excluded, but interestingly, both mobile elements and nuclear sequence data  show no conflicting phylogenies themselves. most prominent, however, the mobile element-based phylogeny is not rejected by nuclear sequence data, indicating that insufficient informative sites, as also suggested by the low resolution of phylogenetic relationships in single-locus analysis, in the latter dataset might display incorrect relationships. for the integration of mobile elements, homoplasy is typically regarded as minimal  <cit> , but ils has been reported  <cit> . only two and three integrations support the branching of presbytis with odd-nosed monkeys and the paraphyly of african colobines, and alternative relationships cannot be rejected statistically. however, no inconsistent elements were detected and subtractive hybridizations specifically set up to screen for african colobine and trachypithecus/presbytis monophyly markers revealed no equivalent insertions. accordingly, ils seems to be an unreasonable explanation for our findings. since the mobile element-based phylogeny is not rejected by nuclear sequence data and due to their reliability as molecular-cladistic markers, the phylogeny suggested by mobile elements is assumed to reflect the true nuclear phylogeny of colobines, although we explicitly note that mosaic genomes cannot be excluded.

because all above-mentioned factors provide no sufficient explanation for the herein detected discordances between mitochondrial and nuclear phylogenies, we favor ancestral hybridization as the main reason for the discordant pattern. furthermore, comparisons of models with and without hybridization in a model selection framework strongly support hybridization in the presence of ils over models of ils alone. in other words, even after ils was taken into account as a factor in the observed incongruence among gene trees, we still found support for hybridization in the evolutionary history of these taxa. this refers at least to asian colobines, but hybridization among african colobines cannot be excluded either by the method we applied here.

hybridization hypothesis
although bidirectional hybridization, which would be indicated by mixed genomes, cannot be excluded with our data, a female introgression event is hypothesized for african colobines. the direction of gene flow remains obscure due to the rapid diversification of the colobine ancestor in africa, but female introgression from piliocolobus/procolobus into colobus is indicated and gains further support by some biological data  <cit> . in contrast to colobus, females in piliocolobus and procolobus tend to leave their natal groups, which was most likely also the case in their ancestor  <cit> , and colobus males are on average larger than piliocolobus and procolobus males  <cit> , thus increasing the chance of hybridization between colobus males and piliocolobus/procolobus females. moreover, hybridization between both ancestral lineages is in principal possible, because  they occur in sympatry over wide ranges of their distribution  <cit> . accordingly, after the successive separation of colobus and piliocolobus/procolobus from the asian colobine ancestor, piliocolobus/procolobus females might have entered colobus populations and hybridized with their males. backcrossing of hybrid females with resident colobus males might has led to the fixation of the piliocolobus/procolobus mitochondrial lineage in the hybrid population, while the original nuclear genome of colobus increased again in every generation.

for asian langurs, we propose male introgression from semnopithecus into trachypithecus followed by nuclear swamping. both genera are similar in their morphology and general appearance  <cit> , but males in semnopithecus are larger than in trachypithecus  <cit> . moreover, hybridization events due to  partially overlapping ranges are generally possible  <cit> . accordingly, after an initial separation, semnopithecus males, which leave their natal group like most other primate males  <cit> , might have invaded trachypithecus populations and hybridized successfully with the resident females. by backcrossing with further invading semnopithecus males over a longer period, the trachypithecus population might have accumulated nuclear material of semnopithecus , while the mitochondrial genome remained trachypithecus-like.

biogeographic implications
by combining the available information, we develop the following extended dispersal scenario for colobines . the origin of the subfamily is most likely in africa, which is in agreement with earlier suggestions  <cit> . on the african continent, colobus split off first from the main stem ~ <dig>  mya, followed shortly afterwards by the progenitor of piliocolobus and procolobus. after this initial separation, hybridization between both lineages might have lasted until finally both mitochondrial lineages diverged . presumably, respective splitting and hybridization events took place in western africa, because all three genera occur there in sympatry  <cit> , and the most ancient splits among piliocolobus and colobus species are also found there  <cit> . the asian colobine ancestor most likely invaded eurasia via an emerging land bridge connecting africa and the arabian peninsula in the late miocene  <cit> . whether a route into eastern asia north or south of the himalayas was chosen is a matter of speculation, but north of the himalayas, on the tibetan plateau, colobine fossils from the late miocene were found, which is not the case south of the himalayas  <cit> . although not confirmed, the hengduan mountains in the border region of today's burma, india and china might have been a possible diversification hotspot  <cit> . in the region, all the larger southeast asian rivers  rise, which are all well-known as barriers for arboreal primates  <cit>  and are all known to exist since at least the early miocene  <cit> . semnopithecus might have diverged as first lineage and invaded the indian subcontinent. subsequently, the progenitor of presbytis and trachypithecus separated from the odd-nosed monkey ancestor and migrated into southern mainland asia. afterwards, presbytis diverged from trachypithecus and entered first the malaysian peninsular and later on sundaland during periods of lowered sea levels  <cit> . trachypithecus and semnopithecus came into secondary contact and might have hybridized until the earliest pleistocene. a potential contact zone could be the region of today's bangladesh, burma and the northeast of india, which is suggested as hybridization area for several primate species  <cit> . on the asian mainland, odd-nosed monkeys successively migrated from china to the south and expanded their range into indochina and sundaland in the latest miocene. the migration into sundaland was probably via land bridges connecting the mainland with sundaland islands during periods of lowered sea levels  <cit> . finally, nasalis on borneo and simias on the mentawai islands west of sumatra diverged in the pleistocene. due to the dating discrepancy , further gene flow between both genera after the initial separation cannot be excluded, especially considering that migration was repeatedly possible via land bridge connections during the pleistocene  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our study gives new and most comprehensive insights into the evolutionary history of colobine monkeys, and suggests hybridization among ancestral lineages as the most likely cause for the observed phylogenetic incongruences. only the combination of maternally, paternally and bi-parentally inherited markers as well as the combination of sequence data with presence/absence patterns of mobile elements proved to be an adequate and reliable phylogenetic approach, particularly in revealing hybridization events. however, data from additional nuclear loci and a broader taxonomic sampling is required to fully understand hybridization mechanisms in colobines.

hybridization among taxa is traditionally recognized as a factor leading to limited diversification, reproductive isolation and lowered fitness  <cit> , whereas our and earlier studies clearly indicate that hybridization played a prominent role in diversification and speciation of primates . hybridization events are genetically confirmed within all major primate lineages, mainly among species  but also between genera . even for the human lineage, hybridization has been suggested as an important evolutionary mechanism  <cit> .

since male dispersal and female philopatry predominates in primates  <cit> , male introgression, and if intensive backcrossing of hybrids with more invading males occurs, followed by nuclear swamping would be the most likely hybridization scenario. in fact, the hybridization among asian langur genera is most likely the result of such an event. however, as proposed for african colobines, alternative mechanisms  could also occur, promoted by a respective social organization, where female migration predominates.

