BACKGROUND
all animals must recognize and respond to chemosensory information in their environment. although the marine mollusc aplysia has been a valuable model to investigate the molecular basis of behavior  <cit>  and reproduction  <cit> , our knowledge of how they recognize and respond to environmental signals is limited. in particular, it is unknown how they distinguish and bind water-soluble molecules and transfer exogenous information intracellularly. in contrast, the molecular components and mechanisms of chemical detection in a range of vertebrates and other invertebrates have been well studied.

vertebrate chemoreception is made possible by six distinct classes of multi-transmembrane receptors:  olfactory receptors   <cit> ,  trace amine-associated receptors  <cit> , vomeronasal receptors  type  <dig> and  type  <dig>  <cit>  and taste receptors  type  <dig> and  type  <dig>  <cit> . besides binding chemical molecules, all share the common traits of seven transmembrane  domains, g-protein signaling and precise sensory cell expression. in mammals, non-volatile pheromone perception is thought to act primarily through the vomeronasal organ sensory epithelium  <cit>  and be mediated intracellular via the interaction of chemical molecules with vomeronasal receptors located on the dendrites of vomeronasal sensory neurons  <cit> . however, in teleost fishes who do not have a vomeronasal organ, the vomeronasal receptors are found in the main olfactory epithelium  <cit> . it appears that genes involved in an animal's response to its environment are subject to extensive gene duplication, gene loss and lineage-specific expansion over time, leading to large gene families such as those observed in the or and vomeronasal receptor repertoire. in fact, or genes represent the largest mammalian gene family  <cit> .

chemoreception through 7-tm domain receptors appears to have evolved multiple times independently, as vertebrate chemoreceptors are not closely related to those known in insects and nematodes. recognition of external chemicals in drosophila is accomplished by families of  <dig> genes encoding 7-tm domain receptors  <cit> , including or  and gustatory receptors . gustatory receptors are greatly reduced in the honeybee  <cit> . insect chemoreceptors do not belong to the g-protein coupled receptor  family due to a unique inverse membrane topology  <cit> . rather, they use an alternative, non-g protein-based signaling pathway where receptors not only detect chemicals but can also act as ion channels  <cit> . in support of this, heterologous cells expressing silkmoth, fruitfly or mosquito heteromeric or complexes showed g-protein independent extracellular calcium influx and cation-non-selective ion conductance upon stimulation with odorant  <cit> . nevertheless, chemical detection is still mediated by a large and divergent family of 7-tm domain receptors.

a central issue that has not been adequately addressed is how water-borne chemicals are detected at the molecular level by the huge diversity of invertebrates that inhabit marine environments. in marine invertebrates, chemosensory abilities are essential for almost all aspects of their life, from feeding to predator avoidance and reproduction. a recent bioinformatic survey of the sea urchin genome resulted in the identification of a remarkable diversity of chemoreceptors, expressed specifically and differentially in adult sensory structures  <cit> . meanwhile, there have been important findings forthcoming from research into the molluscan group. olfactory studies of squid have shown that both phospholipase c  and camp-mediated pathways may be involved in olfactory sensory neurons activation  <cit> . in support of this, immunolocalization experiments revealed the presence of g proteins involved in both camp  and plc  pathways which are clearly co-expressed in certain cell types.

aplysia possesses many advantages necessary for chemical communication research, such as an extensive knowledge of its anatomy, a detailed understanding of the molecular and cellular basis of behavior, and now considerable genomic and expressed sequence tag  resources. moreover, we have found that in aplysia, conspecific and congener attraction is mediated by a remarkable cocktail of water-borne protein pheromones  <cit> . in aplysia, freshly laid egg cordons are considered to be a source of both water-borne and contact pheromones that attract conspecifics and closely related species to the area and induce them to mate and lay eggs. egg laying results in the release of at least four proteinaceous attraction pheromones, including the 58-residue attractin  <cit> . t-maze bioassays have demonstrated that binary blends of attractin with either enticin, temptin or seductin are sufficient to attract potential mates  <cit> .

at the anatomical level, aplysia chemosensory detection is achieved by the rhinophore  <cit> , specialized anterior sensory organs on the dorsal surface of the head. rhinophore are retractile and primarily used for distance chemoreception and rheoreception , whereas the oral tentacles, which are found more ventrally, are possibly involved in contact chemoreception and mechanoreception  <cit> . the neuroanatomical organization of rhinophores includes a rhinophore groove where most of the sensory cells appear to be concentrated. its sensory epithelium contains sensory neurons that project axons back to rhinophore ganglia and dendrites that end in either a surface-exposed cilium or a small protuberance  <cit> . consistent with a potential role in chemical transduction, gene transcripts encoding g protein, plc or inositol  <dig> ,5-trisphosphate receptor were found to be expressed in aplysia rhinophore sensory epithelium  <cit> . the involvement of nitric oxide as a potential chemosensory processing component has also been implicated in molluscan chemoreception based on cytological nadh-diaphorase histochemistry of the aplysia rhinophore  <cit> . of significance, was the finding that nitric oxide synthase is present in epithelial sensory-like cells that had multiple apical ciliated processes exposed to the environment. this is consistent with findings demonstrating that inhibition of nitric oxide synthase disrupts slime trail following, suggesting a role for nitric oxide in neural processing of stimuli in snails  <cit> .

the presence of g protein mrnas in aplysia sensory epithelium suggested that multi-transmembrane gpcr-like proteins could play an important role in chemosensory detection. with the availability of a 2× genome coverage for aplysia californica, we expected that it would provide an excellent and first opportunity to investigate the molecular basis of chemical detection in a mollusc. here, we performed iterative basic local alignment search tool  searches to identify genes similar to rhodopsin gpcr genes encoding 7-tm domains from the a. californica genome. we identified genes representing three unique monophyletic families that show rhinophore, oral tentacle and ovotestis expression. based on their expression, these may encode chemosensory proteins, including pheromone and gustatory receptors. antisera directed against a conserved region of a candidate chemosensory receptor, as well as aplysia gαq, gαi, and gαo, confirmed their expression in sensory tissues, with localization to the outer sensory epithelium.

RESULTS
identification of genes encoding rhodopsin g-protein coupled receptor-like proteins in the aplysia californica genome
we performed iterative tblastn for closely related novel genes and discovered a large number of genes encoding rhodopsin gpcr-like proteins. using this approach, we successfully identified a total of  <dig> genes encoding proteins belonging to the gpcr superfamily. of these,  <dig> were predicted to contain 7-tm domains. it was not possible to annotate the full-length sequence of all genes, especially in the 5'-regions, and  <dig> genes encoding six transmembrane domains were considered partial-length. note that these numbers are the minimal estimates, because the genome sequencing of a. californica had not been fully completed. we expect that further rhodopsin gpcr-like genes will be found beyond the ones we have identified. also, several of the multi-transmembrane gene models appeared to be pseudogenes with various defects, including the insertion of stop codons and frame-shifting indels leading to premature termination of the coding region. these were not included in the final data set.

phylogenetic construction and analysis of identified rhodopsin g-protein coupled receptor-like genes
we have performed phylogenetic analyses of the  <dig> selected rhodopsin gpcr-like genes , together with four non-aplysia gpcr genes . the  <dig> sequences  comprised  <dig> to  <dig> characters. for the two phylogenetic analyses  we had to restrict the character sets to  <dig> and  <dig> alignable positions, respectively, in order to maintain the conservative approach. both phylogenetic reconstructions, with and without outgroup, display a congruent picture regarding the phylogenetic relationship of the aplysia gpcrs . branch lengths of groups a  and b , especially in the former, are considerably shorter than of group c . gpcr-like gene group features are summarized in additional file  <dig>  the phylogenetic analyses support a monophyly of the three different subfamily groups, although sufficient phylogenetic signal for subfamily c monophyly is achievable only when non-aplysia taxa are not present.

besides structural predictions that place these genes within the 7-tm superfamily, which includes rhodopsin gpcrs, these genes have little amino acid identity  to any known genes, and do not appear in the published aplysia est neuronal transcriptome  <cit> . they show only distant similarity with known molluscan multi-transmembrane receptors, including well-characterized aplysia neurotransmitter gpcrs. genbank tblastn searches also reveal most amino acid identity with regions of orphan gpcrs of the sea urchin, strongylocentrotus purpuratus , various ghrelin receptors  and a candidate gpcr  for subfamilies a, b and c, respectively. based on the gene characteristics described below and observed tissue distribution , we subsequently called them candidate aplysia californica chemosensory receptors  subfamilies a to c.

candidate aplysia californica chemosensory receptors subfamily a
a total of  <dig> genes encoding rhodopsin gpcr-like proteins were identified within the aplysia genome that grouped into the single monophyletic accra. of these,  <dig> appear to encode 7-tm domain proteins that range in size from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids . the remaining  <dig> genes encoded 6-tm domain proteins; however, we were unable to identify an initiator methionine suggesting that these represent partial length genes. figure 2a is a comparative representation of the 7-tm proteins, showing conservation of predicted amino acid sequences for the gene repertoire. overall, amino acid sequence identity among the subfamily ranges from 70% to 95%. these genes are most distinct from other subfamily sequences we identified due to the presence of a conserved intron between coding regions islm95/glav . this was later verified by reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction  cloning and sequencing /rt-pcr gene identification). also, conservation of gla/sv96– <dig>  y <dig>  itafitf150– <dig>  k <dig>  g <dig>  dra/v271– <dig>  mvt287– <dig>  et336– <dig>  and nssvni339– <dig> are distinct this subfamily. most variability is found within the n-terminal regions . semi- and highly conserved cysteine residues are located at c <dig>  c <dig>  c <dig>  c <dig>  c <dig> and c <dig>  while glycosylation sites can be found at n18ns, n91is, n210a/vt and n339ss. most share a signature motif with a fitafitferclcia amino acid sequence in the third transmembrane domain and second intracellular loop. we found that one genomic contig aasc <dig> contained two genes, accr14a and accr27a . we predict that these are part of larger clusters that may become apparent upon completion of the full genomic assembly. within the aplysia genome , accr14a and accr27a are separated by  <dig> bp, and are in the same transcriptional orientation. a comparative amino acid alignment of the partial accr14a and full-length accr27a proteins are shown in figure 2c.

candidate aplysia californica chemosensory receptors subfamily b 
a total of  <dig> full-length intronless genes encoding predicted multi-transmembrane rhodopsin gpcr-like proteins were identified belonging to accrb. sizes ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids in length . figure 3a is a comparative representation of these proteins, showing conservation of predicted amino acid sequence for the gene repertoire. overall, amino acid sequence identity among the subfamily members ranges from 43% to 92%. most variability is found at the n-terminal region and most conservation is within the predicted transmembrane  <dig> . most share a signature motif with a witafvtferclcia amino acid sequence in the putative second intracellular loop. we found that at least some of the genes are clustered in the genome, including genes accr11b and accr12b , as well as genes accr13b and accr14b . within the aplysia genome, genes accr11b and accr12b are separated by  <dig> bp while genes accr13b and accr14b are separated by  <dig> bp, which also includes a putative non-long terminal repeat retrotransposon element in the reverse orientation  . amino acid identity between accr11b and accr12b, as well as accr13b and accr14b is high,  <dig> % and  <dig> % respectively . conserved cysteines  can be found at c <dig>  c <dig>  c <dig>  c <dig> and c <dig> and n-linked glycosylation sites include n5es, n65it, n184kt, n310st, and n320ms.

candidate aplysia californica chemosensory receptors subfamily c 
a total of  <dig> full-length genes containing uninterrupted coding regions were identified belonging to accrc. sizes ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids in length . figure  <dig> is a comparative representation of these proteins, showing conservation of predicted amino acid sequence for the gene repertoire. overall, amino acid sequence gene identity ranges from 19% to 91%. most variability is found at the n-terminal region and within the proposed third intracellular domain, which carried length polymorphisms . conserved cysteines  are located at c <dig> and c <dig>  while semi- and highly conserved n-linked glycosylation sites are located at n5et, n16is, n54it, n187tt, n280is, n331ts.

tissue specificity of expression
we next studied the expression of subfamily genes in adult tissues using degenerate primers designed to conserved codons specific to each of the accr subfamilies. this approach was designed to detect if any members within the three subfamilies were expressed in the target tissues. transcripts from accra and accrb were identified in rhinophore, as well as the oral tentacle; accra transcript was also present in the ovotestis . accrc transcripts were detected in the oral tentacle, indicating that each of the gene subfamilies are differentially expressed in the sensory tissues. no transcripts were detected in the skin, central nervous system, albumen gland or large hermaphroditic duct using the method described. we used the aplysia housekeeping gene actin to demonstrate the integrity of each rt sample . an alignment of deduced accra amplicon sequences obtained from rhinophore, oral tentacle and ovotestis revealed that different members are present, which correspond most closely to genes accr5a , accr19a , and accr7a , respectively . a comparative analysis of proteins encoded in accrb amplicons showed that the rhinophore and oral tentacle express a common candidate chemoreceptor gene, corresponding to the gene accr17b. several point mutations, however, were present within the rhinophore transcript, which led to a premature stop codon . the accrc amplicon corresponded to the clone accr2c.

scanning electron microscopy and molecular identification of candidate chemoreceptors
based on results from tissue-specific expression experiments, we focused on the chemosensory organs. in reproductively mature aplysia adults, the rhinophore  is round and tapered from the base to the tip . scanning electron microscopy  supports histological examination  <cit>  and reveals that rhinophore grooves comprise folds of sensory epithelia bearing numerous cilia extending from a common pore . the tip and outside surface of rhinophores are largely devoid of obvious cilia. this rhinophore groove epithelium was previously isolated by lcm and used to construct a cdna library  <cit> . in a mature adult, the oral tentacle extends laterally and anteriorly from the ventral surface of the head, with an epithelium containing numerous bunched cilia . although ciliated regions were most common, the oral tentacle did contain regions of no obvious cilia. we next performed pcr with the aim to identify full-length candidate chemoreceptors from the rhinophore epithelium lcm library or prepared oral tentacle cdna. three clones were selected for further analysis. subsequent protein sequence analyses using the protein families database of alignments and interpro database  <cit>  revealed that the deduced amino acid sequences have characteristics common to rhodopsin gpcrs .

accra
pcr amplification of a rhinophore epithelium lcm library using degenerate primers that were selective for members of accra sequences  generated amplification products of  <dig> bp. several amplicons were successfully cloned and sequenced, revealing multiple partial-length accra genes. subsequently, the full length of one gene sequence was identified by 5'- and 3'-race, containing  <dig> bp and encoding a protein of  <dig> amino acids . the sequence data has been submitted to the genbank database under accession number eu <dig>  it possesses three protein kinase c  phosphorylation sites  and four n-linked glycosylation sites . the intron/exon boundary exists between coding regions islm80/glav. kyte-doolittle hydropathy profiles indicate the existence of seven hydrophobic transmembrane segments that were composed of between  <dig> and  <dig> residues, connected by extracellular and cytoplasmic loops.

accrb
pcr amplification of a rhinophore epithelium lcm library using degenerate primers that were selective for accrb sequences  generated amplification products of  <dig> bp. several amplicons were successfully cloned and sequenced, revealing multiple partial-length accrb genes. subsequently, the full length of one gene sequence was identified by 5'- and 3'-race, containing  <dig> bp and encoding a protein of  <dig> amino acids . the sequence data has been submitted to the genbank database under accession number eu <dig>  it possesses potentially six pkc phosphorylation sites  and four n-linked glycosylation sites  within the predicted n-terminal region and intracellular loop domains. kyte-doolittle hydropathy profiles of the deduced amino acid sequence showed that it contained seven hydrophobic transmembrane segments that were each composed of  <dig> residues.

accrc
accrc genes could not be pcr-amplified from a rhinophore lcm library. however, transcripts could be obtained from oral tentacle cdna preparations . pcr amplification of oral tentacle cdnas using degenerate primers selective for accrc  generated an amplification product of  <dig> bp. the amplicon was successfully cloned and sequenced. subsequently, the full-length gene sequence was identified by 5'- and 3'-race, containing  <dig> bp and encoding a protein of  <dig> amino acids. the sequence data has been submitted to the genbank database under accession number eu <dig>  it possesses  <dig> pkc phosphorylation sites  and six n-linked glycosylation sites  within the n-terminal region and intracellular loop domains. kyte-doolittle hydropathy profiles of the deduced amino acid sequence showed that it contained seven hydrophobic transmembrane segments that were composed of between  <dig> and  <dig> residues.

immunofluorescent localization of a candidate chemoreceptor
we complemented our rt-pcr gene expression study by analyzing the spatial distribution of accr29b protein within rhinophore and oral tentacle. figures 8a and 8b shows representative sections of immunoreactivity within similar cell types located at the epithelial surface of rhinophore and oral tentacle, respectively. in both, antisera strongly label cell bodies and processes that extend to the surface, containing no apparent cilia. rhinophore immunolabeling was most prominent in cells located in epithelia at the tip and outer surfaces, while not obvious within epithelium of the rhinophore groove at the magnification tested. controls in which the primary antibody was preabsorbed against its antigenic peptide showed greatly reduced staining at the same exposure .

distribution of gαq, gαi and gαo immunoreactivity in rhinophore
sections were taken from the sites of pheromone detection, the rhinophore. aplysia g proteins encoded by previously isolated transcripts from rhinophore sensory epithelium  <cit>  are shown schematically in figure 9a. commercial antibodies used for this study were directed to the c-terminus which shares 100% identity with aplysia gα proteins. immunofluorescence studies confirmed the immunoblot expression results  <cit>  and demonstrated localization of immunoreactive aplysia gαq in rhinophore sections. numerous gαq immunoreactive fibers were observed proximal to the rhinophore epithelium and within the distal layer ; gαqimmunoreactivity appeared to be present in the outer sensory surface, consistent with a potential role in pheromone signal transduction. gαi-labeled cells were identified throughout rhinophore sections, where immunoreactivity was particularly concentrated in the distal regions of sensory epithelia. inspection of these sections at high magnification revealed that the majority of cells in the epithelium were labeled, including cells presumed to be supporting cells and sensory neurons . immunoreactive fibers could also be found spreading into the cortex of the rhinophore, although this was less prominent. in contrast, immunoreactive aplysia gαo had a more restricted distribution, in that each section contained several immunoreactive fibers that were observed primarily within presumptive olfactory neuron dendrites ; fewer immunoreactive presumptive sensory neuron cell bodies were observed. no immunoreactivity was observed when primary antibody to gαq, gαi or gαo was omitted .

discussion
in this study, we provide an important step towards understanding the molecular and cellular basis of chemosensory recognition in molluscs. mining of the incomplete a. californica genome revealed a novel and diverse set of genes encoding  <dig>  rhodopsin gpcr-like proteins that are likely to mediate chemosensory responses in aplysia. to initially identify genes encoding multi-transmembrane gpcr-like proteins that may play a role in chemosensory detection, a number of assumptions were made that have proved important for the successful isolation of chemoreceptors in other metazoans. first, receptor genes would encode 7-tm domains and be clustered in the genome. second, receptors would be relatively rapidly evolving and thus have limited amino acid sequence identity to members of known conserved gpcr families. finally, receptors would be encoded by unique families of related genes, as has been observed in a range of other bilaterians  <cit> . phylogenetic analysis of the identified aplysia genes revealed the existence of three monophyletic subfamilies, which we have named candidate aplysia californica chemosensory receptor  subfamilies a to c; their primary features are summarized in table  <dig>  the gene expansion observed could provide the diversity of receptors required to enable the animal to recognize diverse water-soluble molecules, as well as complex pheromone blends during the coordination of attraction and reproduction.

* not including those considered partial-length .

** based on degenerate reverse transcription-polymerase chain reaction strategy outlined in this study 

rhino, rhinophore; ot, oral tentacle; ovo, ovotestis.

consistent with known chemosensory receptors , all selected genes that were considered full length encoded 7-tm regions and semi-conserved glycosylation sites, as well as several common cysteine residues and amino acid sequence motifs. conserved amino acids and post-translational modifications would likely contribute to the correct folding and functioning within the plasma membrane so that they may bind chemical stimuli and couple to appropriate secondary signaling molecules. for example, katada and colleagues  <cit>  demonstrated that in rodents, n-terminal glycosylation is critical for proper targeting of ors to the plasma membrane. while proteins encoded by accra and accrb genes share notably high sequence identity, comparative analysis within accrc shows that they share as little as 19% amino acid identity. as a consequence, there are very few defining sequence motifs which are retained throughout. however, it is not uncommon for chemoreceptors, and in particular gustatory receptors, to be divergent; similarity between most insect and mammalian gustatory receptor pairs is only 15% and 25% or less at the amino acid sequence level, respectively  <cit> .

of the major gpcr superfamily groups, the identified aplysia genes categorize most closely to the rhodopsin gpcr family . as is the case with many other rhodopsin family gpcrs, these genes largely lack introns. moreover, all encoded proteins have a short n-terminus and a highly conserved arginine  residue located at the cytosolic end of the third transmembrane domain. this residue is typically associated with the dry  motif, crucial for controlling agonist-dependent receptor activation. of the three residues constituting dry, arginine is the most conserved residue, and appears to be essential for forming intramolecular interactions that constrain receptors in either the inactive or activated conformation  <cit> . consistent with this, receptors lacking the arginine side chain fail to activate g-protein signaling  <cit> . in the novel aplysia proteins, however, this has been replaced by an erc motif, a feature also observed in the human prostaglandin f2α receptor and most other prostanoid receptors  <cit> . studies show that substitution of the glutamic acid to a threonine residue leads to full constitutive activation and implicates the region in agonist-dependent g-protein coupling control  <cit> . we predict that this may also be essential to receptor activation in the identified aplysia receptors.

the canonical model of gpcr activation is via an interaction with intracellular heterotrimeric g-protein signaling components. the genes identified in this study show little amino acid identity to gpcrs found in the metazoa and we have not shown that they directly interact with g-proteins. despite this, our study indicates that gα proteins are present in the rhinophore sensory epithelium, possibly in close association with transmembrane gpcrs. the presence of sensory tissue g-protein immunoreactivity adds further support to studies of other marine invertebrate olfactory systems implicating g-proteins in sensory transduction  <cit> . moreover, the existence of multiple g-type proteins in sensory epithelium suggests that multiple signal transduction pathways may be activated following ligand stimulus. in squid, for example, the pattern of immunolabeling implies that a g protein coupled to a plc pathway  may be present in similar cells as those coupled to a camp pathway . as suggested by mobley and colleagues  <cit> , overlapping g-protein pathways could facilitate discrimination between odorants detected by the same neuron. this contrasts rodent models where the role of g proteins in olfactory transmembrane signaling at the dendrites has been studied extensively. researchers have demonstrated spatially restricted patterns of expression of respective g proteins  <cit> . gαo and gαi <dig> are highly expressed by separate subsets of neurons that are located in different regions of the vomeronasal neuroepithelium  <cit> .

of particular relevance to aplysia chemosensory studies is the rhinophore epithelium, where water-borne molecules such as pheromones presumably bind and initiate activation of pheromone-receptive neurons. in the rhinophore groove, receptor cells with a suspected chemosensory role have been described previously in molluscs  <cit>  and their presence was further supported by our sem analysis. the rhinophore groove ciliary aggregations are likely necessary in the separation and circulation of fluid throughout the groove, and may also be directly involved in detection of external chemical stimuli. it is from this precise location that we isolated cdnas encoding identified novel gpcr-like proteins. their presence raised the question as to whether their expression was specific to sensory tissues. subsequently, representatives of each subfamily were found to be restricted to or differentially expressed in the rhinophore, oral tentacles and ovotestis, suggesting that they encode functional receptors and that these olfactory organs sense different chemicals. in the rhinophore, spatial expression of cells immunoreactive to candidate chemoreceptor accr29b was most prominent in the tip and outer epithelium, peripheral to the groove. chemosensory detection could likely benefit from this broad distribution, whereby stimulation may activate sensory fibers that extend to higher brain centers. although this finding clearly indicates a sensory role, a more extensive study of aplysia sensory organs at higher magnification is required to delineate the precise distribution of this receptor, as well as other receptor subfamily members.

interestingly, we found gene expression within the ovotestis, and our preliminary analysis of various aplysia neuronal est databases indicate that a relatively small fraction of these genes may be expressed in the central nervous system. deep sequencing of neuronal transcripts has resulted in identification of tags for  <dig> different genes in the central ganglia of a. californica  as well as several orphan receptors similar to vertebrate ghrelin and histamine receptors . some of those are associated with centrally located sensory neurons that send neuronal processes to the periphery and therefore may be involved in chemoreception. other neuronal cell types were previously described as motorneurons. taken together, these findings imply that external chemical detection may not be their sole function, which is consistent with that described of chemoreceptors in mammalian olfactory bulb  <cit> , cardiac muscle  <cit>  and vertebrate germ tissues  <cit> . the functional significance of such expression is currently unknown. we speculate that there may be a role for aplysia chemoreceptors in oocyte recognition, possibly because both are activated by identical or structurally similar hormones and pheromones. in addition to the exocrine albumen gland, the aplysia pheromone seductin is known to be expressed in ovotestis tissue  <cit> .

it will be of interest to perform a comparative gene analysis to determine whether a. californica candidate chemoreceptors are also present in other aplysia species. this finding would suggest that these genes are highly similar throughout aplysia species and strongly imply a selective pressure for conservation. we have already established that several aplysia species share a comparable attraction pheromone blend  <cit> , and therefore cognate receptor binding sites are likely to be similar. the identification of ligands for chemosensory receptors is often problematic and therefore it is an advantage that we have these attraction pheromones for use in future functional studies to definitively link identified genes to chemosensory detection. as these are the first such novel gpcrs identified in molluscs, it will also be of interest to see if analogous receptors are found in evolutionarily distant molluscs. however, apart from the highly conserved insect receptor or83b  <cit> , it is generally accepted that chemoreceptors seem to be very divergent with little sequence conservation within and across orders  <cit> .

our analysis of the aplysia genome noted that accra genes as well as various accrb genes are clustered, a common feature of fast-evolving genes such as chemoreceptor genes  <cit> . we also found that, although the assembly of the genome used was incomplete, some genes contain mutations that introduce stop codons to encode truncated proteins, one of which appears to be expressed in the a. californica rhinophore. hominoids, in particular, are known to possess a high pseudogene content  among their ors, whereas only 20% of or genes are pseudogenes in the mouse  <cit>  and less in the drosophila melanogaster genome  <cit> . upon genome completion, a more comprehensive analysis of gpcr gene families in aplysia will be necessary to determine the precise pseudogene number. indeed, some of the pseudogenes identified may in fact be 'flatliners', that is, genes whose functional versus pseudogene status is unclear  <cit> . as demonstrated in c. elegans, many of these genes have apparently functional alleles in one or more wild isolates and therefore are not pseudogenes. evidence for this has also been shown for some drosophila ors  <cit>  and gustatory receptors  <cit> , as well as anopheles gambiae gustatory receptors  <cit> . although pseudogenes are generally accepted as nonfunctional and therefore not transcribed, occasionally it has been shown that such pseudogenes can be transcribed  <cit> ; however, there is no evidence of the functional relevance.

CONCLUSIONS
aplysia is an excellent model animal for studying the molecular mechanism of chemical communication in the marine environment. in this study we have isolated a novel group of genes encoding multi-transmembrane rhodopsin gpcr-like proteins that show expression in chemosensory tissues. this expression pattern and observed genomic clustering provide strong evidence that these have arisen via gene duplication and may be used to discriminate the large diversity of water-soluble molecules. the expression of some of these in rhinophore suggests that they are excellent candidates to be involved in pheromone detection. further knowledge of the receptor gene genome organization, characterization of their developmental and spatial expression profile, secondary signaling and their evolutionary relationship to other molluscan species would be the next significant steps towards defining the logic behind how chemical communication in molluscs, and potentially other marine animals, operates.

