BACKGROUND
the genetic manipulation of target genes in transgenic animals in vivo is one of the most valuable tools for assessing gene functions and for modelling human diseases. the most popular approaches for the generation of genetically modified mice are the targeted engineering of genomic dna in embryonic stem cells to introduce gene knockouts and the dna microinjection into the pronuclei of fertilized eggs, which results in random integration of the transgene into the genome for the overexpression of gene products.

these valuable techniques have inherent limitations related to the irreversibility and ubiquity of the germ line genetic modifications. if essential genes are targeted, this will potentially lead to embryonic lethality or activation of compensatory mechanisms, which complicates or even impedes the phenotypic analyses of these animal models  <cit> . in particular this holds true for the large number of genes involved in the formation of neuronal structures emerging late in embryonic development or at early postnatal stages. to overcome these limitations, several techniques for the spatial and temporal control of gene expression in genetically modified mice have been proposed and developed  <cit> , of which the cre/loxp recombination system  <cit>  and the tet-controlled transcription activation system  have become the most widely applied and characterized  <cit> .

cre is a site-specific recombinase that catalyses recombination between its recognition sites, loxp, leading to an inversion or deletion of a loxp-flanked dna sequence. hence, cre recombinase can be applied to delete genes or to activate transcription by removing a transcriptional termination  sequence  <cit> . to obtain an inducible version of cre, the recombinase was fused to a mutant form of the human oestrogen receptor, leading to cytoplasmic localization and therefore inactivation of the fusion protein   <cit> . once the ligand tamoxifen is applied, creert <dig> translocates into the nucleus, where recombination takes place.

the tet system is based on two central elements, the tetracycline -controlled transactivator  and a specific responsive promoter , which controls expression of the transgene  <cit> . ptet is specifically activated by binding of tta. tet and tet derivatives such as doxycycline hydrochloride  interfere with the dna-binding activity of tta, thereby abolishing transcriptional activation of ptet. by tissue-specific expression of cre recombinase or tta, the impact of transgenic perturbation can be limited to defined cell populations.

for many scientific questions the rat is the preferential animal model  <cit> . this is mainly related to its larger body size, relevance to human physiology and large body of experimental experience with these animals  <cit> . rats are of particular importance in neuroscience because they are the preferred species for behavioural testing of higher cognitive functions, multielectrode recordings, studies of neuronal regeneration  <cit>  and for gene therapy experiments  <cit> .

up to now, the establishment of techniques for the conditional manipulation of genes in the rat is far behind those for mice  <cit> . furthermore, in light of the recent technological breakthroughs that allow targeted genomic manipulations in rats, including the application of zinc finger or transcription activator-like effector nucleases  <cit>  and the development of germ line-competent rat embryonic stem cells  <cit> , there is an urgent need to introduce conditional technologies for rats and to develop specific cre driver lines to realize tissue-specific genetic modifications.

in this report, we describe the generation of transgenic rat lines expressing tta and the tamoxifen-inducible cre recombinase creert <dig> under the control of the forebrain-specific ca2+/calmodulin-dependent protein kinase iia  promoter. for functional characterization of the camkiiα-tta and camkiiα-creert <dig> lines, we generated novel tta and cre reporter lines that allow faithful monitoring of spatial and temporal ptet-controlled and cre/loxp-mediated gene regulation. these novel tta and creert <dig> lines can be used for inducible transgene overexpression, as exemplified herein with reporter genes, or for inducible gene knockouts once loxp-flanked gene alleles become available for the rat genome.

RESULTS
inducible gene expression in rats using the tet system
to establish the tet-controlled conditional gene expression system in transgenic rats , we generated two separate sprague-dawley  rat strains either carrying the tta expression unit  or the gene of interest under control of the tet-inducible promoter ptet . double transgenic rats were generated by breeding the response lines with driver lines, generating animals heterozygous for both transgenic alleles. such animals will express the transgene depending on administration of the tet derivative dox, which can be supplied in the drinking water.

generation of camkiiα-tta rat lines
in mice, an  <dig>  kb camkiiα 5' regulatory sequence has been shown to efficiently drive transgenic tta expression in excitatory forebrain neurons  <cit> . the resulting mouse line 1mmay) is one of the most frequently used transactivator mouse lines generated so far and its application has been a seminal contribution to the field of learning and memory  <cit> . a similar transgenic rat line would enable and facilitate the study of more complex cognitive tasks. as a similar well-characterized rat promoter fragment was not available and the cross-species use of promoters to express tet controlled transactivators between rats and mice has been successful in the past  <cit> , we decided to use the functionally proven mouse camkiiα promoter to spatially control tta expression in transgenic rats . after dna microinjection, nine transgenic camkiiα-tta founders could be identified, three of which transmitted the transgene to the f <dig> generation .

generation of ptet-controlled rat reporter lines
for functional characterization of camkiiα-tta driver lines, we generated response lines carrying the reporter genes luciferase  and enhanced green fluorescent protein  under the control of the bidirectional tet-inducible promoter  . the experimental strategy for creating the egfp-ptetbi-luc lines has previously been described  <cit> . in brief, a  <dig> kb genomic mouse fragment containing the ptetbi-controlled transcription unit was used for microinjection into fertilized sd rat oocytes. in mice, these genomic sequences have been shown to minimize the influence of the genomic integration site on tet-regulated promoters  <cit> . two transgenic founders harbouring the full-length transgene could be identified. both lines showed broad range dox-dependent ptet-controlled regulation of luciferase in primary fibroblast cultures after transfection with tta-encoding plasmids . therefore, both lines were used to establish independent reporter lines .

analysis of tet-regulated gene expression in double transgenic camkiiα-tta/egfp-ptetbi-luc rats
all three transgenic camkiiα-tta driver lines were crossed to the response lines to generate double transgenic camkiiα-tta/egfp-ptetbi-luc rats. in these rats, preliminary luciferase luminescence analysis of crude forebrain lysates demonstrated functional ptet-controlled luciferase expression in two camkiiα-tta driver lines . these were further used for in-depth analysis of ptet-controlled gene expression.

transgenic animals of both tta driver lines were mated with both egfp-ptetbi-luc response lines  to yield double transgenic camkiiα-tta/egfp-ptetbi-luc offspring of all four combinations. individual animals were first studied by non-invasive luciferase imaging  <cit>  to investigate the overall distribution of ptet-controlled reporter gene expression . for that purpose, rats were injected intraperitoneally with the luciferase substrate d-luciferin and luciferase activity was monitored noninvasively in anesthetized animals using a photon imaging system  <cit> . as expected, brain-specific luciferase bioluminescence could be detected only over the head region of camkiiα-tta/egfp-ptetbi-luc rats. the observed brain-specific transgenic expression was further confirmed by luciferase measurements in tissue lysates of liver, kidney, heart, lung, spleen and muscle where the enzyme activity did not exceed  <dig> relative light units /μg .

to investigate the spatial and quantitative expression pattern in the brain, we prepared tissue lysates of the olfactory bulb, cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum from double transgenic and single transgenic animals and measured luciferase activity . all four strain combinations showed comparably high expression levels in forebrain regions while single transgenic reporter rats of line  <dig>  or  <dig>  showed practically no luciferase activity, confirming that ptet-controlled luciferase expression is dependent on tta-mediated promoter activation.

according to the endogenous camkiiα expression pattern, high luciferase activity was found in forebrain regions, that is, in the olfactory bulb, hippocampus and cortex, whereas very low enzyme activity was found in the cerebellum. when luciferase reporter expression was analysed for both reporters , camkiiα-tta line  <dig>  showed better expression levels in the olfactory bulb compared with line  <dig>  , whereas luciferase activity in the other regions was comparable. no statistically significant differences were found between the two egfp-ptetbi-luc lines used, confirming that both rat lines show equal efficacy in reporting ptet-controlled gene activation. however, the mean of luciferase expression was slightly higher in the cortex and hippocampus of combination  <dig> . ×  <dig>  compared with all other combinations . as a consequence, we decided to further investigate ptet-controlled gene expression using double transgenic animals of strain combination  <dig> . ×  <dig> .

ptet-controlled gene expression in camkiiα-tta/egfp-ptetbi-luc rats was further examined on brain slices, taking advantage of the second ptet-controlled reporter gene egfp. egfp was either detected by immunohistochemistry  using a gfp antibody  or directly by fluorescent microscopy . egfp expression was restricted to the forebrain, with strong egfp-positive cells in the olfactory bulb , the cortical somatomotor and visual areas and the hippocampal ca <dig> to ca <dig> region  . dual-label fluorescence ihc detecting egfp and the neuronal marker neun confirmed neuronal cell specificity of mosaic egfp expression in camkiiα-tta/egfp-ptetbi-luc rats . ptet-mediated gene expression was most prominent in the hippocampus, with egfp expression in  <dig> %  of neun-positive cells in the pyramidal layer of the ca <dig> region;  <dig> %  gfp-positive/neun-positive cells in the ca3; and  <dig> %  in the hilus of the dentate gyrus. in the cortex, egfp expression was highly variable. however, in regions with notable reporter gene expression, such as the somatomotor area , up to  <dig> %  of neun cells stained positive for gfp.

the possibility to directly visualize egfp-expressing cells indicates a very strong expression using the tet system in these transgenic rats . luciferase and egfp are expressed in the same brain areas, which confirms the feasibility of co-expressing two genes at the same time in rats using the bidirectional tet-promoter ptetbi  <cit> . for the most part, the expression pattern found in camkiiα-tta rats mirrors the spatial expression pattern found in camkiiα-tta transgenic mice harbouring a similar camkiiα-tta construct   <cit> . however, only scarce expression was found in the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus and in the striatum, and expression in the cortex was highly mosaic. endogenous camkiiα immunoreactivity is detected in most, if not all, neurons in the forebrain, but not in glial cells  <cit> . the mouse camkiiα promoter might therefore not have the full expression range in transgenic rats. however, for transgenic mice, it has been repeatedly shown that different ptet transgenes yield varying patterns of expression in combination with the same camkiiα-tta transgene  <cit>  and these differences are considered to result from integration site-dependent effects on the expression of the ptet promoter  <cit> . we believe that similar mechanisms in the rat genome could act on the camkiiα-tta transgene as well, leading to the mosaic-like expression pattern.

doxycycline-mediated control of gene expression
next, we assessed whether ptet-controlled gene expression could be suppressed with dox. to that end, we analysed adult double transgenic camkiiα-tta/egfp-ptetbi-luc rats which had chronically received dox  during embryonic and postnatal development until postnatal day   <dig> . ihc for egfp  demonstrated that ptet-controlled reporter gene expression could be completely suppressed with dox. these results were confirmed by luciferase measurements in brain extracts of the aforementioned brain regions . in addition, we show that luciferase activity in adult camkiiα-tta/egfp-ptetbi-luc rats, which previously had not received dox, could be efficiently suppressed by dox treatment  when given only during a short period during adulthood  . dox treatment led to a 1000-fold reduction in luciferase expression in all forebrain-specific regions when compared with untreated animals . these findings confirm that ptet-controlled gene expression can be suppressed at any time during the rat's life.

if expression of the gene of interest is thought to be detrimental during development or if adaptive changes during development caused by the transgenic overexpression should be avoided, gene expression should be induced only after embryonic development. hence, we determined whether ptet-controlled gene expression could be activated when it was previously shut off with dox  for a period of continuous suppression during development. dox was permanently administered to double transgenic rats during development  either until embryonic day   <dig>  p <dig> or p <dig>  after which dox was removed from the drinking water. brain tissue was prepared from double transgenic offspring at p <dig> for luciferase quantification and ihc analyses . interestingly, we found an inverse correlation between the length of dox treatment during development and the efficiency of ptet-controlled reporter gene expression after dox withdrawal. rats treated with dox until e <dig> were found to exhibit superior induction of reporter gene activity compared with rats that were treated until p <dig> or p <dig> . however, even in rats treated with dox until e <dig> only, the expression level did not fully reach the activation level of untreated animals . gfp antibody staining of rats treated with dox until e <dig> revealed inducible gene expression mainly in the olfactory bulb , the ca <dig> and ca <dig> region of the hippocampus and areas of the somatomotor cortex . rats treated with dox until p <dig> and p <dig> only showed gene activation in the olfactory bulb, the ca <dig> region and in few cells of the cortex . previously, a similar weak induction has also been observed in camkiiα-tta mice that were raised with dox until p <dig>  <cit>  or p <dig>  <cit> . failure to reach full expression has either been attributed to a dox clearance problem or to specific epigenetic modifications of the ptet-promoter sequences in camkiiα-positive neurons during the suppression period  <cit> .

in summary, we demonstrate strong, forebrain-specific reporter gene expression in transgenic rats that can be suppressed with dox at any desired time. the bidirectional expression module provides a useful tool for the co-regulated expression of two genes at the same time. however, prolonged dox treatment restricts the ability to reactivate ptet-controlled gene expression in principle forebrain neurons.

inducible gene expression in rats using the cre/loxp system
the creert2/loxp system has been widely used for tissue-specific and inducible gene ablations. apart from this application, the creert2/loxp system can also be used as an alternative to the tet system for conditional gene overexpression  <cit> . while it does not allow for reversible activation of target genes, it allows for irreversible cre-mediated deletion or activation of loxp-flanked dna sequences. we explored this alternative inducible expression system in rats and compared it with the tet system. for this purpose, rat camkiiα-creert <dig> lines were generated and inducible recombination was functionally assessed using a newly generated cre reporter line.

generation of camkiiα-creert <dig> rat lines
again, the same mouse camkiiα promoter fragment was chosen for tissue-specific control of creert <dig> recombinase expression in forebrain neurons  <cit>  . using pronuclear dna injections, we were able to generate  <dig> transgenic camkiiα-creert <dig> founders. offspring from all lines were initially analysed for cre expression via ihc using a cre antibody  <cit> , but only eight lines showed notable cre recombinase expression in the forebrain. we selected four camkiiα-creert <dig> lines  which recapitulated the forebrain-specific camkiiα expression pattern  <cit>  most adequately with abundant cre-staining in most parts of the forebrain , including the olfactory bulb, cortex and hippocampus. similar to the camkiiα-tta lines described above, the hippocampal dentate gyrus was largely devoid of transgenic expression. sparse expression was also found in the striatum and thalamus.

generation of cre reporter rats
we generated a rat cre reporter line pcag-loxp.lacz.loxp-egfp  to functionally characterize cre-mediated recombination . the establishment of a broadly applicable cre reporter line critically depends on the widespread expression of its reporter genes, which ideally should not be limited to certain cell types or be influenced by position-effect variegation. therefore, the chicken β-actin  promoter, which has been shown to confer rather ubiquitous activity in rodents in nearly all tissues  <cit> , was used for the design of the reporter construct. cag promoter sequences were placed upstream of a loxp-flanked  stop cassette containing a nuclear localized synthetic lacz gene and a bovine growth polyadenylation  signal to ensure transcriptional termination. this lacz/stop cassette was followed by egfp as a second reporter gene. under baseline conditions, that is without cre-mediated recombination, the cag promoter drives only β-galactosidase  but not egfp expression. upon cre-mediated recombination, the lacz/stop cassette is deleted, which activates cag-promoter controlled expression of egfp.

to create transgenic rat cre reporter lines, the cag-loxp.egfp construct was microinjected in fertilized sd oocytes, resulting in  <dig> cre reporter founder rats. all founders were first assayed for baseline, non-recombined β-gal activity by x-gal staining of primary fibroblast cultures derived from ear biopsies . the primary fibroblast cultures of four founder animals showed a strong nuclear x-gal staining and those were selected for further in vivo characterization.

tissue slices and whole organs of single transgenic cag-loxp.egfp rats were analysed by x-gal staining. line  <dig> showed the most abundant β-gal signal of all analysed lines . here, x-gal staining was detected in all organs analysed, with strong and broad expression in fibroblasts, lung, kidneys, muscle, heart, spleen, pancreas, stomach and gut. only in the liver was mosaic expression found.

finally, we analysed cag promoter activity in the brain. brain sections of transgenic cag-loxp.egfp offspring of the four β-gal-positive cag-loxp.egfp cre reporter lines were examined for β-gal expression using x-gal staining and ihc. again, x-gal staining of line  <dig> showed the strongest and broadest signal in the brain . dual-label fluorescent ihc with antibodies against β-gal and neun  demonstrated that most neun-positive neurons in the brain also stained positive for β-gal . by contrast, egfp expression could not be detected, which proves that the polya signal downstream of the lacz gene reliably functions as a transcriptional stop fragment, leading to tight regulation of recombination-dependent egfp expression. our results in rats demonstrate the broad applicability of the cag-loxp.egfp line  <dig> for functional characterization of newly generated tissue-specific rat cre lines.

analysis of cre-mediated gene expression in double transgenic camkiiα-creert2/cag-loxp.egfp rats
to functionally examine the spatial and temporal pattern of creert <dig> recombinatorial activity, we crossed rats of the four camkiiα-creert <dig> lines  to our cre reporter line cag-loxp.egfp to generate bitransgenic camkiiα-creert2/cag-loxp.egfp rats.

at the age of  <dig> weeks, double transgenic rats were intraperitoneally injected with tamoxifen  alternately once or twice per day, resulting in a total of seven tamoxifen injections over five consecutive days. ten days after the last tamoxifen injection, animals were analysed with ihc for egfp to assess forebrain-specific recombination . of the four different transgenic cre lines, camkiiα-creert <dig> line  <dig> showed the most efficient forebrain-specific recombination, that is, egfp expression, in the hippocampus and in the cortex , whereas only scattered recombination was found in the striatum and thalamus . outside the forebrain, egfp-positive cells were absent . this forebrain-specific recombination pattern concurs with the recombination pattern found in camkiiα-creert <dig> mice, where inducible cre activity was primarily found in the hippocampus and cortex and only low levels of creert <dig> expression were identified in the striatum and thalamus  <cit> . importantly, the recombination pattern  closely mirrored cre expression , demonstrating the excellent functionality of the reporter line to detect cre-mediated recombination in the brain. we assume that the transgenic cre reporter rat described herein harbours multiple, randomly integrated dna fragments and might therefore represent an easily accessible genomic locus, ideally suited for a broad and sensitive detection of cre-mediated recombination.

next, we evaluated background recombination without tamoxifen treatment . sparse recombined egfp-positive cells could be identified in various forebrain regions, for example, in the cortical somatomotor area, the postsubiculum and the piriform area. such tamoxifen-independent recombinase activity has also been described for inducible creert transgenic mouse lines  <cit>  and is caused by the incomplete trapping of the cre fusion protein in the cytosol in the absence of tamoxifen. low cre activity in absence of the ligand was also found in camk-creert <dig> mouse lines  <cit> . interestingly, background recombination was not observed in cag-loxp.egfp rats mated with less active creert <dig> driver lines, thereby confirming the observation that the ligand-independent activity of inducible cre lines correlates with its intracellular concentration  <cit> .

to assess cell-type-specific neuronal recombination after tamoxifen induction, double transgenic camkiiα-creert2/cag-loxp.egfp rats were analysed with dual-label fluorescent ihc using antibodies against egfp and neun . confocal microscopy of hippocampal regions revealed  <dig> %  recombined egfp-positive/neun-positive neurons in ca1;  <dig> %  in ca3;  <dig> %  in the hilus; and  <dig> %  in cortical neurons.

in combination with the cre reporter line cag-loxp.egfp, we demonstrate effective temporal regulation of cre activity by tamoxifen treatment in the newly developed rat line camkiiα-creert <dig>  in the absence of tamoxifen, only minor recombination occurs, whereas the application of tamoxifen results in widespread recombination within forebrain neurons of the hippocampus and cortex. in total, we were able to target about 50% of neun-positive neurons in the aforementioned regions. similar to the tet system, we assume that position-effect variegations in the transgenic loci are responsible for the overall variable expression  <cit> . we can exclude insufficient tamoxifen induction as the reason for this mosaic expression pattern, because doubling the injection time and thus tamoxifen dose did not lead to a higher recombination rate. both the camkiiα-tta and camkiiα-creert <dig> lines only sparsely mediate expression in the dentate gyrus or in the striatum. this common phenotype is indicative that the used mouse camkiiα promoter fragment lacks regulatory sequences needed for expression specifically in this region in transgenic rats.

to date, only a limited number of cre-expressing rat lines have been published  <cit> . tissue specificity and temporal control of recombination was obtained by local injections of cre-expressing adenoviruses  <cit> . however, an increasing demand for tissue-specific cre-expressing rat lines can be anticipated in the near future, as the first successful gene targeting in rat embryonic stem cells was recently published  <cit>  and several other tools for the targeted modification of the rat genome, such as zinc finger nucleases  <cit>  or transcription activator-like effectors  <cit> , are emerging. thus, there is little doubt that conditional alleles of target genes will also become available in the rat. another attractive application is the injection of cre-dependent viruses to achieve optogenetic control of genetically defined cell types in rats  <cit> . moreover, as depicted here with the newly developed cre reporter line, the cre/loxp technology can be employed for the tissue-specific overexpression of transgenes or alternatively for the knockdown of endogenous gene activities using polymerase ii controlled small hairpin rnas  <cit> . the presented cre reporter line cag-loxp.egfp should provide a versatile tool for the characterization of newly developed cre rat lines in both neural and non-neural tissues.

CONCLUSIONS
the laboratory rat was the earliest mammalian species domesticated for scientific research and has been used as such for over  <dig> years  <cit> . although constitutive overexpression of genes in transgenic rats has been successfully applied to generate relevant models for gene-related diseases  <cit> , only limited attempts have been made in the past to establish transgenic rat models with inducible and tissue-specific gene expression and no one has successfully addressed the brain  <cit> . in transgenic mice, the development of conditional strategies to control gene expression in a spatial and temporal manner has been crucial for modelling human diseases and deciphering tissue-specific gene functions  <cit> . with new emerging technologies, such as the presented forebrain-specific cre or tta driver lines, techniques in transgenic rats will close the gap with current mouse technologies. such rat-based disease models will complement existing mouse models and the comparison of both will enable a better differentiation between rodent-specific and general mammalian phenotypes  <cit> .

our experiences with both inducible systems suggest complementary applications. the tet system should be applied for the overexpression of transgenes only during embryonic development or until a defined time point during adolescence, which then can be easily turned off by feeding dox. by contrast, with the creert2-based system, a previously inactive expression module is efficiently activated any time after birth.

