BACKGROUND
the devr dormancy regulon of mycobacterium tuberculosis  is a transcriptional program induced by low oxygen tension, nitric oxide , carbon monoxide  or vitamin c treatment that enables bacterial adaptation and survival during periods of non-replicating persistence in in vitro models of dormancy  <cit> . this regulon is believed to assist bacterial survival during latent tuberculosis  infection, a chronic asymptomatic state that afflicts one-third of the global population  <cit> . the expression of the ~ <dig> gene regulon is coordinated by devr  which binds to target sites on dna and induces transcription after its phosphorylation by devs and/or dost  <cit> . devs and dost sensor kinases were therefore proposed as targets for the development of novel antibacterial compounds against dormant bacteria  <cit> . devs was also predicted to be a potential persistence target inhibiting dormant m. tb using an in silico approach  <cit> .

two component systems are considered as compelling targets for drug design due to a number of reasons including their absence in higher eukaryotes, the difference in bacterial two-component signaling as compared to signaling pathways in eukaryotes, and most importantly, the essential roles they play in bacterial viability, virulence and drug resistance. inhibitors of bacterial histidine kinases have been reported in the literature  <cit>  but most suffer from the drawback of being extremely hydrophobic. most inhibitors exhibit multiple mechanisms of action including surfactant and membrane damaging properties that are independent of two-component system inhibition. the high hydrophobicity of these molecules makes formulation and delivery of the compounds extremely difficult. furthermore, the compounds showed excessive plasma protein binding and minimal bioavailability and were ineffective in standard in vivo infection models. in contrast, peptides are believed to confer several advantages, such as high target specificity, lower accumulation in tissues and lower toxicity coupled with new efficient synthesis strategies and low monomer prices. a recent study identified potential phoq inhibitor compounds that inhibited autophosphorylation and also inhibited severe keratoconjunctival inflammation in mice inoculated with shigella flexneri <cit> , suggesting that two-component systems are potential targets for the development of drugs against bacteria.

we had earlier described the properties of a devr binding peptide devrs <dig> identified through phage display technology that inhibited devr function  <cit> . here we report the identification of peptides that majorly target the autokinase function of devs sensor and inhibit devr-mediated transcription and survival of m. tb under hypoxia. the ability to interfere with devr-devs function at more than one step demonstrates that this two-component system is a rich target for developing inhibitor to effectively block m. tb adaptation to hypoxia, a potent dormancy signal.

RESULTS
isolation of devs binding peptides from a phage display peptide library
the cytoplasmic domain of devs , that transfers the activating phosphosignal to devr  <cit> , was used to screen a phage display peptide library using a panning strategy described in figure  <dig>  a total of  <dig> phages from the glycine eluate of devs <dig> plate from the third round of panning were individually amplified and screened by elisa to assess their devs binding specificity. devs binder phages were enriched relative to the unpanned library after three rounds of panning . thirty clones  showed 2– <dig> fold higher binding to devs <dig> versus bsa or uncoated wells . dna sequence analysis of the peptide coding sequences in these phages revealed four peptide sequences, namely, hntrgee , tfesysl , slfrdwp  and itnpdpy  that were repeated 2– <dig> times .

activity of 'pep’ peptides
the 'pep’ peptides identified by biopanning were tested for activity in devs autokinase assays. pep a, b and d peptides were found to inhibit devs autokinase activity to varying degrees . however, the data showed a great variation and was not reproducible among the assay replicates for individual peptides. this could be attributed to protein aggregation that was observed upon addition of peptides to the assays. however, pep c did not inhibit autokinase activity at any of the concentrations tested.

similarity between pepa, pepb, pepc and pepd sequences and devr catalytic centre
the 'pep’ peptides identified by panning were aligned next with the protein sequence of devr. three peptides appeared to align near the asp- <dig>  thr- <dig> and lys- <dig> residues located in the n-terminal domain of devr . asp- <dig> is the site of phosphorylation and thr- <dig> and lys- <dig> residues are involved in phosphorylation-induced conformational changes  <cit> . the partial identity noted between 'pep’ peptides and devr protein sequences suggested that these peptides might represent surfaces on the n-terminal domain of devr  that could interact with devs.

the devrn domain interacts with the cytosolic domain of devs
because devrn, in particular its asp <dig> residue, is involved in interaction of devr and devs proteins of m. smegmatis <cit> , we investigated the possibility of a similar interaction occurring between devrn and devs proteins of m. tb. an in vitro phosphotransfer assay was performed using devrn and the cytosolic domain of devs protein. a rapid and comparable transfer of the phosphosignal was noted from m. tb devs to either devr or devrn, which established that the n terminal domain of devr interacts with devs .

having demonstrated that  'pep’ peptides exhibit a modest anti-devr activity ,  'pep’ peptides bear sequence similarity with conserved sequences in the n-terminal domain of devr  and  devrn interacts with devs , we proceeded to synthesize 'devr mimetic’ peptides that mapped in the same regions as the 'pep’ peptides and were of identical sequence to devr. the assumption was that devr 'mimetic’ peptides would interact with greater affinity with devs as compared to the 'pep’ peptide sequences. the synthesized peptides were named as devrs a , devrs b , devrs c  and devrs d . extended 10– <dig> mer versions of the devrs peptides were also synthesized  assuming that they may afford better binding characteristics . due to the problem of protein aggregation observed in assays containing the 'pep’ series of peptides, only extended 'devrs’ and 'devrs-ext’ peptides were characterized further. moreover, these extended peptides were likely to afford better binding characteristics if indeed they represented interacting regions.

'devrs’ peptides inhibit devr-mediated transcription
devrs a, b, c and d and devrs a-ext, c-ext and d-ext peptides were assessed for their ability to inhibit devr-regulated transcription using a m. tb gfp reporter assay. the reporter assay measures the activity of the rv3134c promoter, a well characterized devr-dependent promoter  <cit> . two of the peptides that were tested, namely devrs a-ext and devrs d, significantly  inhibited rv3134c promoter activity up to ~40% under hypoxic conditions and ~20-30% inhibition under aerobic conditions . both these peptides map at or near the conserved sequences of devr that are involved in phosphorylation and are believed to mediate a conformational change during its activation. the observed inhibition of promoter activity in aerobic cultures  is ascribed to hypoxia development in standing cultures reported earlier and not to aerobic inhibition per se  <cit> . it was noteworthy that both devrs a-ext and devrs d peptides did not inhibit siga promoter activity  under identical conditions, establishing the target specificity of these peptides for devr. however, the remaining peptides inhibited the rv3134c promoter , but caused non-specific inhibition of the siga promoter and/or were inhibitory under aerobic conditions , suggesting a lack of target specificity . the specific inhibition of the rv3134c promoter by devrs a-ext and devrs d peptides  implies that the expression of other members of the devr regulon would also be impaired  <cit>  and accordingly these two peptides were characterized further in viability assays.

'devrs’ peptides specifically inhibit hypoxic survival of m. tuberculosis
devrs signaling is established to be essential for m. tb viability during hypoxia and not under aerobic conditions  <cit> . therefore, devrs a-ext and devrs d peptides were evaluated for anti –tb activity using cfu assays and resazurin reduction-based assays  as described in the methods section. the rema and hyrra assays are very useful for screening anti-tubercular anti-dormancy compounds under aerobic and hypoxic conditions respectively and can be safely performed in high-throughput format in m. smegmatis, m. bovis bcg and m. tb <cit> . in the cfu assay, devrs a-ext and devrs d peptides severely compromised hypoxic survival m. tb  in contrast to only a modest reduction in cfu yields in aerobic cultures , thereby confirming target specificity . the resazurin reduction assays confirmed the target specificity of both the peptides; ~ <dig> to 70% loss in viability was observed in the presence of each of these peptides in the hypoxic hyrra assay as compared to a modest inhibition in the aerobic rema assay . these findings are consistent with our earlier observation that the hyrra assay truly reports the viability of drug/inhibitor-treated dormant cultures  <cit> . a greater loss in peptide-mediated bacterial viability was observed in the cfu assay and it might be explained by the fact that inhibitor-treated bacteria were unable to grow on solid medium plates in the cfu assay but were maintained in viable form in broth cultures in the hyrra/rema assays as discussed earlier  <cit> .

'devrs’ peptides inhibit devs autokinase activity
auto phosphorylation of the sensor kinase is the first step in the devs/dost-devr signaling cascade. to decipher the mechanism of action of the peptides, devrs a-ext and devrs d were tested in an in vitro atp-dependent autokinase assay as described  <cit> . the addition of devrs a-ext and devrs d in the reaction inhibited devs autokinase activity by 55% and 37% respectively . our findings suggest that the inhibition of autokinase activity by devrs a-ext and devrs d is caused by peptide binding at/near the devs phosphorylation site.

in addition to inhibiting autokinase activity , the peptides could in principle also inhibit transfer of the phosphosignal from devs ~ p to devr. however, neither devrs a-ext nor devrs d inhibited this reaction in an in vitro phosphotransfer assay . based on these findings, the observed defects in hypoxic adaptation of m. tb cultures are majorly attributed to a peptide-mediated block in the autokinase activity of devs sensor kinase. because  of the high sequence homology between devs and dost kinases,  dost, in addition to devs, can activate devr through its autokinase activity under hypoxia  <cit>  and  exposure to devrs a-ext and devrs d peptides results in a severe loss of hypoxic viability , we further propose that these two peptides inhibit the activities of both devs and dost kinases.

cytotoxicity of 'devrs’ peptides
devrs a-ext and devrs d peptides were assessed next for their cytotoxicity in cho and hepg <dig> mammalian cell lines using the mtt assay as described earlier  <cit> . both the peptides were cytotoxic in the range of 20-40% at  <dig> mm and  <dig>  mm concentration relative to the dmso vehicle control .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the observed peptide-mediated inhibition, albeit at millimolar concentrations, demonstrates that interference of devs/dost signaling at the step of autokinase activity severely attenuates m. tb adaptation and survival under hypoxia, a condition that prevails within granulomas and is a likely trigger for bacterial dormancy initiation and maintenance in vivo during latent tb. we have earlier demonstrated that phenylcoumarin- or peptide-mediated blocking of devr function severely impairs m. tb adaptation to hypoxia  <cit> . the small molecule inhibited devr function by preventing its binding to specific motifs on dna while the mode of action of the devr binding peptide is yet unknown. in another approach, the isolated n-terminal domain of devr functioned as a novel competitive inhibitor that interfered with signal transfer from devs to native devr. competitive signaling resulted in a defect in devr mediated transcriptional response and a loss of hypoxic viability  <cit> . in the present study, we show that inhibition of devs autokinase activity at an early step of the signaling cascade interferes with devrs function and significantly reduces the hypoxic viability of bacteria. thus the devr-devs system is a rich target to develop molecules that interfere with one of many steps in the signaling cascade during m. tb adaptation to hypoxia . our findings further suggest that phage display technology is a powerful approach for designing inhibitors and is likely to be useful for inhibiting the activity of other bacterial two-component systems.

