BACKGROUND
in the first trimester of pregnancy the placental trophoblast has to fulfil a wide range of key functions in order to establish and maintain a successful pregnancy. these are not covered by one trophoblast phenotype, but rather associated with various trophoblast subpopulations each with unique features. in a series of differentiation steps the trophoblast subpopulations originate from cytotrophoblast stem cells  <cit> , and acquire specific functions associated with their distinct tasks. two main differentiation pathways of cytotrophoblasts are known: 1) in the villous pathway they differentiate and fuse to form the syncytiotrophoblast. this differentiation is paralleled by the onset of secretion of β-human chorionic gonadotropin . in the extravillous pathway they differentiate into the extravillous cytotrophoblast . a small subgroup of these cells maintains their proliferative capacity, while most of the cells further differentiate into highly invasive extravillous trophoblasts that invade the maternal uterine wall thereby ultimately opening the uterine spiral arteries.

proper invasion is critical for placental and fetal development and its dysregulation results in a considerable spectrum of pregnancy abnormalities. shallow invasion has been implicated in intra-uterine growth restriction   <cit>  and early-onset pre-eclampsia  <cit> . in contrast, profuse invasion results in abnormally deep utero-placental adhesion such as seen in placenta accreta, increta and percreta, or may even lead to placental-site tumors  <cit> . the process of physiological invasion is tightly regulated in space and time by invasion-promoting and invasion-inhibiting factors that bind to receptors expressed on the extravillous trophoblasts. the invasion regulating factors either originate from the maternal decidua, the villous stroma or are secreted by various trophoblast populations. decidua-derived soluble factors, such as transforming growth factor beta , tissue inhibitor of metalloproteinases- <dig>  and kisspeptin- <dig> decrease trophoblast invasion, whereas insulin-like growth factor-i  and-ii , β-hcg, endothelin- <dig> , epidermal growth factor  and hepatocyte growth factor , all of them highly expressed in the placenta of the first trimester, stimulate trophoblast invasion  <cit> . tnf-α is a cytokine produced and secreted by trophoblasts and decidual macrophages that limits trophoblast invasion as well as the trophoblast-endothelial interaction in the uterine spiral arteries . cytokines and growth factors secreted by cells in the decidua or the trophoblast thus form autocrine or paracrine loops ultimately fine-tuning the regulation of trophoblast invasion in a concerted manner.

in vitro research into the regulation of this physiological, non-malignant invasion is not only hampered by the limited availability of first trimester placental tissue, but also by the limited lifespan of primary first trimester trophoblasts in culture as they differentiate and shift into stages of apoptosis . in order to overcome this problem a number of human choriocarcinoma cell lines have been established such as bewo, jar and jeg <dig> that display a long lifespan and high proliferation activity. however, these cells reflect a carcinogenic cell type and differ from primary trophoblasts in many regards. choriocarcinoma cells are malignant, immortal cells exhibiting non-physiological carcinogenesis  and they have developed mechanisms enabling them to escape from control of normal trophoblast invasion  i.e., from decidual cytokines  or low oxygen . thus, choriocarcinoma cell lines have to be considered critically as cell model for trophoblast invasion.

several trophoblast cell lines have been established and characterized. all of them have different features and each of them may resemble a distinct trophoblast subpopulation. they are important for investigations on the specific trophoblast subpopulations. however, they are of limited value for studies into the paracrine/autocrine interplay between subpopulations of trophoblasts a) as they do not comprise the subpopulations, b) because of their differing genetic background, and c) because of the varying strategies used for their immortalization. since the interaction between subpopulations is a fine-tuned mechanism even subtle differences in genetic background may play an important role.

in order to overcome these limitations we have designed a strategy allowing to establish an immortal first trimester cell line . immortalization was achieved by fusing primary first trimester trophoblast cells with the choriocarcinoma cell line ac1- <dig> .

first trimester trophoblasts isolated from human placentas essentially comprise two trophoblast subpopulations, villous cytotrophoblasts  and invasive extravillous trophoblasts . both populations differ among other features in their expression of hla-g. we hypothesized the presence of these subpopulations also in the hybrid cells. different from all other cell lines they will have a syngeneic background.

after their development and rigorous characterization the ach-3p cells were used to identify autocrine and paracrine loops related to trophoblast invasion and differentiation. thereby, a novel tnf-α effect on the expression of the membrane bound matrix metalloproteinase mmp <dig>  was discovered. mmp <dig> is mainly expressed by extravillous trophoblasts, cleaves components of the extracellular matrix and activates various pro-proteins present in the extracellular space i.e., prommp <dig> and protnf-α 

RESULTS
morphology and cell culture
ach-3p showed a uniform polygonal, epithelial-like cytomorphology  similar to the parental cell line ac1- <dig>  the mean diameter and the volume of the cells were greater in both cell lines ac1- <dig> and ach-3p than in primary trophoblasts .

the generation time in ach-3p was shorter than in ac1- <dig>  hence, ach-3p, like ac1- <dig>  represents a strongly proliferating cell line . most preparations of primary trophoblasts hardly proliferate under the conditions used and were, therefore, not included into this comparison.

expression of trophoblast markers
immunocytochemistry and facs analysis of ach-3p  demonstrated a stable expression of the trophoblast marker cytokeratin- <dig>  but absence of vimentin, a protein, that is present in all non-trophoblast cells. this is a clear demonstration of the trophoblast origin of ach-3p .

ach-3p secreted hcg, a hormone expressed by differentiated cytotrophoblasts and the syncytiotrophoblast, but accumulated over  <dig> hours higher in ac1- <dig> and highest in first trimester trophoblasts . according to gelatin gel zymography ach-3p produce the invasion relevant active matrix-metalloproteinases mmp <dig> and mmp <dig> similar to primary trophoblasts, whereas in the culture supernatant of ac1- <dig> a very high amount of only mmp <dig> was detected .

according to facs analysis ach-3p cells are heterogeneous for the non-classical mhc antigen hla-g, a protein characteristic for highly invasive evt. about 60% of the cells were hla-g negative and 40% showed moderate hla-g expression . this heterogeneity was also found in first trimester primary trophoblasts, but with a smaller number  of hla-g positive cells. in contrast ac1- <dig> cells strongly express hla-g. according to propidium iodide  staining after methanol fixation the hla-g positive and negative population within the ach-3p cells did not differ in dna amount .

invasion ability
in invasion assays primary trophoblasts and ach-3p revealed the highest invasion index on laminin and the lowest on collagen- <dig> . a different pattern was observed with the highly invasive ac1- <dig>  here, invasion was strongest on fibronectin and weakest on matrigel.

cytogenetic analysis
fifty metaphases were cytogenetically analysed . fusion of ac1- <dig> cells that contain 60– <dig> chromosomes with primary trophoblasts resulted in ach-3p cells. they contain 94– <dig> chromosomes and represent a male cell line like their parental cell line ac1- <dig> 

microarray analysis
a heatmap displays all genes that were differentially expressed  between these cells . the dendrogram at the top indicates the close relationship between ach-3p and first trimester primary trophoblast cells and the larger distance to the ac1- <dig> cells. thus, the transcriptome of the fused ach-3p closely resembles that of the parental primary first trimester trophoblasts.

when the genes differentially expressed between the ach-3p and primary trophoblasts were clustered according to their putative function, a predominant proportion was related to cell cycle regulation, oncogenesis and proliferation. the full list as well as a functional categorization into most prominent biological processes of these genes is given in the additional tables . the carcinoma cells ac1- <dig> differ by more than  <dig> genes from the ach3p and the primary trophoblasts .

characteristics of the hla-g positive and negative ach-3p and primary trophoblast subpopulations
immuno-separation of the hla-g positive and negative ach-3p cells resulted in morphologically different cell populations . more  hla-g positive than negative cells  showed a higher number of pseudopodia. rt-pcr found evt-specific genes expressed at higher levels in the hla-g positive subpopulation. examples include hla-g, itga <dig>  mmp <dig>  mmp <dig>  but also other mmps , a pro-invasive acting receptor  of which β-hcg modulates the affinity. the expression of itga <dig> and itga <dig> between the hla-g positive and negative ach-3p subpopulations did not correlate with the expression pattern of hla-g positive and negative primary cells. this degeneration is obviously a remnant of the parental ac1- <dig> cells and a common result of carcinogenesis . no change was found in the expression of the endothelin and igf <dig> receptor-ligand systems . the difference in gene expression levels between hla-g expressing and lacking ach-3p resembled the hla-g positive and negative subpopulations of the primary trophoblasts. mmp <dig> and igf2r were higher expressed also in their hla-g positive ach-p and trophoblast subpopulation whereas the tnfr <dig> mrna level was considerably higher in the hla-g negative subpopulations of cell line  and primary cells . the difference in expression of the investigated genes remained stable in the two ach-3p subpopulations up to passage  <dig> after separation after which time these decline.

effect of tnf-α on mmp <dig> expression in hla-g positive and negative ach-3p cells and in first trimester placental explants
tnf-α treatment increased the expression of mmp <dig> only in the hla-g positive ach-3p cells and in first trimester placental explants . the oxygen tension  used for the explant culture mimics the in vitro situation in a 7th week of gestation. as evt are the cell type predominantly expressing mt2-mmp , the mt2-mmp in the explant is presumed to be expressed by the evt.

discussion
ach-3p closely resemble first trimester trophoblasts
the new hybrid cell line ach-3p strongly expresses cytokeratin- <dig>  but is devoid of vimentin, a protein expressed in all non-trophoblast cells of the placenta proper . hence, ach-3p is a trophoblast cell line. in addition to this standard criterion, the expression pattern of well established proteins  <cit>  typical for different first trimester trophoblast subpopulations  demonstrates that ach-3p cells express various markers for invading evt i.e., hla-g , integrin α5β <dig>  and the gelatinases mmp <dig> and mmp <dig> . in addition, the presence of markers typical for the proliferating cytotrophoblasts  and the villous syncytiotrophoblast  in ach-3p cells obviously reflects the heterogeneous pool of trophoblast subpopulations in the preparations of primary first trimester trophoblast cells . as the ach-3p comprise a polyclonal cell line, the presence of other subpopulations in addition to the described hla-g positive and negative cannot be excluded, but these may only occur to a low proportion. after their separation, the subpopulations remain stable up to the 5th passage. therefore, it is mandatory to always freshly isolate the target subpopulation from the polyclonal pool for each experiment.

in addition to the presence of the characteristic evt markers, ach-3p were also capable of invading extracellular matrices. the invasion indices on the different matrices resembled that of first trimester trophoblasts with highest values on laminin, which is paralleled by a strong expression of the laminin receptor integrin α <dig>  hence, ach-3p contain a subpopulation of cells with an evt phenotype. contrary to the invasion properties and the expression of trophoblast markers, the morphology, cellular size and proliferation of ach-3p resembled that of the parental choriocarcinoma cell line ac1- <dig>  a favourable result as proliferation is a desired property of a model cell line.

cytogenetic analysis revealed a high number of chromosomes. this was expected due to the fusion of a normal somatic cell type with a tumour cell line that per se contains 60– <dig> chromosomes. the range of  <dig> to  <dig> chromosomes and the stable dna content of ach-3p observed in facs analyses proved homogeneity with regard to chromosome number and thus the consistent fusion of the hybrid cells.

microarray analysis paralleled the above observed close relationship between first trimester primary trophoblasts and ach-3p. this was clearly seen by the hierarchical clustering of all genes differently expressed between ach-3p and first trimester primary trophoblasts as well as between first trimester primary trophoblasts and ac1- <dig> 

autocrine/paracrine regulation of invasion relevant molecules of ach-3p subpopulations
after immuno-separation for hla-g the two subpopulations differed in their morphology and in the expression of a number of invasion relevant genes. the hla-g positive cells impress by their high number of pseudopodia, extensions of the plasma membrane that enable invasion of motile cells. this obviously reflects the high invasion capacity of the hla-g positive ach-3p subpopulations. additionally, these cells exhibited a higher expression of various markers of the invasive evt lineage such as integrin α <dig>  mmps  and hcg. this strongly resembled the hla-g positive first trimester trophoblasts indicating that the phenotype of the trophoblast subpopulations remained in the fused cells .

this notion is substantiated further by the prevailing presence of components forming an established autocrine loop to regulate invasion in the hla-g positive primary trophoblasts and ach-3p cells. beta-hcg is known to stimulate invasion by modulating igf <dig> binding to the igf-2r on  <cit> . the higher expression of both modulator and receptor in the hla-g positive evt was confirmed in our primary trophoblast preparations. it was also found in the ach-3p cells . this demonstrates that the hybrid cells are well-suited for studies into the regulation of components making up autocrine or paracrine loops.

these features of ach-3p cells were then used to test the hypothesis that tnf-α, presumably derived from the decidual macrophages or trophoblasts, will stimulate mmp <dig> expression on invading i.e., hla-g positive evt. if confirmed this would identify a novel effect of tnf-α and establish a new heterologous paracrine or autocrine regulation of one factor involved in trophoblast action . mmp <dig> is stronger expressed in the hla-g positive primary cells  and ach-3p , respectively, and tnf-α is produced by cells located nearby the invading trophoblasts i.e., the decidual macrophages. this suggests a direct interaction and regulatory loop between tnf-α and mmp <dig> expression. furthermore, mmp <dig> was up-regulated by tnf-α only in the invasive hla-g positive subpopulations of ach-3p although the expression of tnfr <dig> was higher in the hla-g negative subpopulations of the cell line and the primary cells. the stronger responsiveness of mmp <dig> expression towards tnf-α in the hla-g positive cells despite their lower tnfr <dig> expression is most likely a result of their higher basal mmp <dig> expression level. the up-regulation was also found in first trimester placental explants, an experimental model close to the in vivo situation. these findings highlight that the induction of mmp <dig> expression is a physiological effect and not only a result of the specific conditions of cell culture. because the different experimental models i.e., ach-3p cell culture and placental explants, showed a similar response , the effect of tnf-α on mmp <dig> expression is obviously independent of oxygen concentration and extracellular matrix. importantly, again the model cells resembled the original tissue. the consequences of these results for invasion regulation are unclear, because in vitro tnf-α limits trophoblast invasion. nevertheless, mmp <dig> may not only be involved in processes related to invasion, but as a result of its wide spectrum of substrates, also in activation of pro-proteins such as prommp <dig> and protnf-α. the newly identified induction of mmp <dig> expression by tnf-α thus further supports a key role of tnf-α in regulation of trophoblasts.

CONCLUSIONS
collectively, the new ach-3p cell line provides the characteristics of different aspects of first trimester trophoblast subtypes combined with the proliferation potential of the parental choriocarcinoma cell line. it therefore, represents a useful tool for the investigation of characteristic features of first trimester trophoblasts such as non malignant invasion. furthermore, two subpopulations can be separated according to hla-g expression. the hla-g positive cells strongly resemble the invasive evt and thus represent a tool to investigate trophoblast invasion against the syngeneic hla-g negative background. these cells are particularly well-suited for studies into autocrine and paracrine regulation of various aspects of trophoblast function. as an example a novel effect of tnf-α on mmp <dig> expression in hla-g positive first trimester trophoblasts and ach-3p was found .

