BACKGROUND
the field of cerebrovascular research has created new and exciting opportunities for investigative and clinical studies. the challenge of reproducing the physiological characteristics and response of multiple brain vascular segments in vitro represents a critical biotechnological springboard for future mechanistic or preclinical studies. a realistic model of the brain circulation may significantly help understanding the mechanisms involved in the cerebrovascular response to a number of physiological and pathological stimuli. this, in turn will provide new strategies to accelerate the development on novel central nervous system  drug therapies and reduce the burden of major neurological disorders. as the research community recognize, mimicking the physiology of multiple vascular segments in vitro is a challenging task. an ideal cerebrovascular model should be able to reproduce the hemodynamic and cellular characteristics of each vascular segment. for example the vascular bed of brain microcapillaries selectively excludes most blood-borne substances from entering the brain and vice versa
 <cit> . the venule segment is more permissive and allows leukocyte extravasation
 <cit> .

the barrier property of the cerebral vasculature depends on inter-endothelial tight junctions between adjacent endothelial cells that limit paracellular diffusion. at the bbb level, the endothelial cells are also characterized by low pinocytotic activity, lack of fenestrations, and unique expression patterns of trans-membrane transport proteins to regulate traffic into and out of the brain parenchyma
 <cit> . therefore, transit across the bbb involves translocation through the capillary endothelium by asymmetrically expressed carrier-mediated transport systems. these are responsible for passage of certain water soluble but biologically important substances such as glucose, mono-carboxylic acids, amino acids, etc.
 <cit> . furthermore, in addition to a physical and a transport barrier the bbb endothelium acts as a metabolic barrier. this function is mediated by a bbb-specific cytochrome p <dig> enzymes that catalyze the biotransformation of lipids and steroidal hormones, as well as xenobiotics for example, the antiepileptic drug undergoes brain-specific metabolism in addition to its known conversion by liver p <dig> enzymes
 <cit> .

bbb endothelial cells are surrounded by astrocytic end feet processes sharing a basal lamina, and enveloping > 99% of the bbb endothelium
 <cit> . astrocyte interactions with the cerebral endothelium modulate bbb function, regulate protein expression, facilitate endothelial differentiation and play a major role in the expression and maintenance of functional inter-endothelial tight junctions as well as of other bbb properties
 <cit> .

flow plays a crucial role in modulating bbb functions
the exposure to physiological shear stress  also plays a critical role in modulating bbb functions and facilitating the differentiation of vascular endothelial cells into a bbb phenotype
 <cit> . flow across the apical surface of the vascular endothelium activates a number of mechanosensors 
 <cit>  which transduce physical stimuli into biochemical signals. despite the variety of potential mechanosensors present on the luminal side of the endothelial cell membrane one of the major common downstream effect is the activation of extracellular-signal-regulated kinases 1/ <dig> . these are pleiotropic modulators of the cell physiology and play an important role in the control of the expression of gene involved in the regulation of cell division, apoptosis, cell differentiation and cell migration
 <cit> . interestingly, expression of these genes in endothelial cells is under the control of shear stress
 <cit> .

rheological and architectural characteristics of distal brain venules
the architecture and cellular milieu of these vessels are remarkably different from that of the bbb due to the existence of mural cells 
 <cit>  and perivascular spaces. this affects the organization of the inter-endothelial tight junctions
 <cit> , which leads to the formation of a significantly less selective vascular bed than bbb capillaries
 <cit> . there is general agreement that, venular endothelial cells are exposed to a significant lower level of ss  than those forming the capillary vascular bed. direct measurements of shear stress values in bbb vessels and their venular counterparts are lacking, but given our previous work showing a direct effect of shear on the physiological and functional properties of the vascular endothelium it is reasonable to assume that capillary vs. venules differ in the properties in party owing to shear levels.

RESULTS
modular dynamic capillary-venule in vitro system: physiology in a box
one of the major limitations of current vascular in vitro models is their inability to mimic the functional characteristics and response of multiple vascular segments within the cerebrovascular network. to address this problem we have developed a new dynamic in vitro model that recapitulates the hemodynamic, metabolic and functional characteristics of capillary and post-capillary vessels of the human brain vascular network. the modular assembly of the system  originated from a serial combination of capillary and venule modules. in this configuration, a fully established bbb module influences its respective venule module through gas permeable silicon tubing connecting the respective luminal compartments. each module reproduces as closely as currently possible the cellular composition of its corresponding vascular segment in vivo. in the capillary module, luminal human primary brain microvascular endothelial cells were co-cultured with abluminal human astrocytes to mimic the cellular milieu forming the bbb microcapillaries in vivo. in the venules module, the abluminal glial cells were replaced by human vascular smooth muscle  as observed in distal post-capillary segments of the cerebral vessels
 <cit> . a peristaltic pump within the system generated a pre-capillary high flow velocity input characterized by an arterial systolic-like blood pressure of ≅ 70mmhg . within the system medium flow moves through a gas permeable silicon tubing allowing the exchange of oxygen and co <dig> with the external environment before entering into the first module . the number of hollow fibers in the capillary  and venule  modules were determined to mimic the rheological characteristics  of the corresponding cerebrovascular segments in vivo <cit> . for the experiments shown herein, the flow rate was between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ml per minute. note the significant pressure reductions observed when flow passed first through the capillary and then through venule segments . our data showed that the transmural pressure and the shear stress were consistent with the corresponding in vivo observations . furthermore, a computer controlled pumping mechanism allowed us to reproduce a broad range of perfusion scenarios, each characterized by different levels of shear stress, intraluminal pressure, pulsatile rate to reproduce heart beats/min.

the capillary-venule in vitro system can mimic the rheological characteristics of the corresponding vascular segments in vivo
figure 
2a shows changes that occurred in the hemodynamic profile  of capillary and venule segments in respect to perfusion. note that increases in the perfusion rate determined a significant proportional increase in both shear stress  and intramural pressure  in the capillary segment . table 
 <dig> shows a comparison between in vivo and in vitro parameters. changes in the corresponding shear stress and intramural pressure measured in the venule segments are significantly less evident . note  that the tubing connecting the luminal output of the capillary module to the venules did not affect the rheological characteristics of flow. this is shown by comparing post-capillary segment  to pre- venous  pressure values. therefore, from a hemodynamic standpoint, the two modules behaved as a contiguous vascular system, which however, exhibited distinct capillary and post-capillary rheological features characteristics of the corresponding segments in vivo.

vascular integrity and permeability characteristics of capillary and venules in vitro
 <cit>  between capillaries and venules in vitro . furthermore, figure 
3b shows that astrocytes, in presence of venous perfusion flow, are not sufficient to induce a high teer and low paracellular permeability. however, astrocytes are necessary for the development of a tight barrier since when venule modules were exposed to capillary levels of shear stress we did not observe any significant increase in teer.
 <cit> . note the difference of ≈  <dig> order of magnitude between capillaries  and venules . the more stringent vascular bed formed in the capillary module can discriminate drug permeability based on the octanol-water partition coefficient  with a significantly higher degree of selectivity than venules . the asterisk “*” indicates a statistically significant difference .

a functional capillary/bbb model must be able to discriminate the permeability to molecules based on their oil/water partition coefficient. in addition, a capillary-venule model must be able to differentiate the permeability to the same compound between each segment. in fact, where the tightness of the vascular endothelium is a determining factor for the permeability the capillary vascular bed will impede the passage of polar molecule more effectively than that of the venules. to validate our model we performed permeability tests across each module using three different classes of compounds: 1) sucrose ; 2) phenytoin ; 3) diazepam . permeability of each compound was calculated for each segment  by integrating the area under the ecs and lumen data points  between time  <dig> and time  =  <dig> minutes  according to the equation described in the methods section
 <cit> .

figure 
3d shows the results of the permeability measurements in the capillary and venule segments. permeability to diazepam  measured in the capillary module was comparable to that observed in the venules . phenytoin permeability  measured in the capillary was  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ±  <dig>  cm/sec versus  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ±  <dig>  cm/sec in the venule. sucrose  permeability  was  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ±  <dig> cm/sec and  <dig>  × 10- <dig> ±  <dig> cm/sec in the capillary and venule segments respectively.

vascular response to a hyperosmolar agent
intracarotid infusion of hyperosmolar  mannitol, a cell-impermeable and non-toxic polyalcohol, has been to previously used to reversibly disrupt the bbb in vivo <cit>  to facilitate the passage of chemotherapic drugs  in the treatment of malignant brain tumors
 <cit> . the osmotic opening of the vascular endothelium is a non-energy-dependent mechanism
 <cit>  solely mediated by dehydration of endothelial cells, cerebrovascular dilatation, and contraction of their cytoskeleton protein structures. we tested the effect of hyperosmolar mannitol injection on vascular integrity in the capillary and venule modules. the intravascular compartment of div capillary-venule system was perfused for  <dig> sec with hyperosmolar media containing mannitol . the flow rate used was  <dig> ml/min. teer was measured to assess real-time changes of vascular integrity in the capillary and venule modules . we observed a transient  loss of vascular integrity  in the capillary module. this was paralleled by a loss of vascular integrity in the venule module which was significantly longer in duration  although less significant in magnitude.

bioenergetic metabolism of capillary and venule cerebrovascular segments
the assessment of cell metabolism  provides important information on the bioenergetic mechanisms  used by brain vascular segments. figure 
 <dig> shows changes in glucose consumption and lactate production in the vitro capillary and venule segments. note that during anaerobic respiration each molecule of glucose is converted into  <dig> lactate molecules  while during aerobic respiration glucose in totally converted into co <dig> and h2o. in the capillary segment , lactate production-glucose consumption ratio  was suggestive of a bioenergetic behavior favoring oxidation. in contrast, in the venule segment  we measured a lactate production-glucose consumption ratio of  <dig>  ± sem  <dig> , thus suggesting that in the presence of reduced vascular shear stress  the cellular bioenergetic demand is largely fulfilled through anaerobic glucose metabolism
 <cit> . these preliminary results need larger scale validation and experiments where cell variables  are interchanged. this is evident in figure 
5c which shows the side-by-side comparison of the glucose consumption-lactate production ratios between capillary and venule segments established in the div system.

discussion
hemodynamic alterations as well as pro-inflammatory and exogenous stimuli can adversely affect vascular integrity and lead to the pathogenesis and/or progression of a number of major neurological disorders
 <cit> . in vitro studies are set to support and facilitate our understanding of the mechanisms involved in the physiological and pathological modulation of cerebrovascular functions. this is of critical importance for the development of novel strategies aimed at reducing the burden of cns disease associated with brain vascular impairments. other in vitro systems have attempted to reproduce the physiological and functional characteristics of capillary or venular segments of the cerebrovascular system . however, these models lack the ability to reproduce the environmental cues  to which these vascular beds are exposed in vivo.

the use of hollow fiber technology allowed us and others to establish the first quasi-physiological in vitro bbb models
 <cit>  which was then further humanized
 <cit>  to reproduce not only healthy bbb properties but also properties of multiple drug resistance and leukocyte extravasation
 <cit> . this technology allows to develop the first artificial interlinked brain capillaries and venules segments, which retain their distinct vascular properties. as shown in figure 
 <dig> the pumping mechanism generates arterial high velocity flow with a systolic blood pressure range  comparable to in vivo. a dramatic drop of perfusion velocity and transmural pressure occurs when flow enters the capillary segment generating a vascular shear stress comparable to what has been reported for non-bbb vessels in vivo <cit> . after leaving the capillary module, the medium flow enters into the venule module were perivascular astrocytes were replaced by smooth muscle cells to more closely mimic the in situ cellular milieu of this vascular segment. at this level systolic transmural pressure is low  and flow is characterized by low shear stress . it is important to underscore again that direct measurements of shear levels in brain microvessels is lacking and that the values used in this manuscript are extrapolations from other vascular beds in vivo <cit> .

the div capillary-venule model not only mimics the rheological characteristics of the corresponding brain vascular segments but also their functional and physiological properties . in agreement with previously published studies bbb capillaries in vivo are characterized by high teer, lack of paracellular pathways, low permeability to polar molecules  and a selective permeability that  reflects the lipophilicity of the specific substance
 <cit> . our results have clearly shown that, similar to in vivo, the artificial capillary vascular bed was characterized by a high teer ; low permeability to the paracellular marker sucrose, and was capable of selective permeability reproducing the in vivo rank order of the tested substances 
 <cit> . overall, the relationship between lipophilicity and permeability found in the div-capillary module was similar to that reported by others in vivo <cit> .

venules are characterized by a significantly more permissive vascular bed with a lower teer and a reduced ability to provide a barrier to the passage of polar molecules than capillaries
 <cit> . in this respect, the div-venules showed lower teer, and a reduced selective permeability . our findings also suggest that abluminal astrocytes and high shear stress are both necessary to establish a tight vascular bed
 <cit> . in fact, when the capillary modules were established under venular level of shear stress and vice versa,  no teer increase suggesting the formation of stringent vascular bed was observed.

bbb opening following exposure to hyperosmotic mannitol is common clinical procedure used to enhance chemotherapeutic drug penetration into the cns to treat patients with metastatic or primary brain tumors
 <cit> . hyperosmotic opening of the bbb is mediated by vasodilatation and shrinkage of cerebrovascular endothelial cells , with widening of the inter-endothelial tight junctions to an estimated radius of  <dig> Ǻ. this provides paracellular pathways previously lacking that can facilitate the passage of substances across the brain capillary endothelium
 <cit> . our results  demonstrated that loss of vascular integrity of in the div capillary-venules model mimics the expected physiological vascular response to hyperosmotic agents  of the corresponding vascular segments in vivo. the tightness of brain capillary vascular beds is the most dependent upon the tight junctions’  ability to seal the space between adjacent endothelial cells. the presence of tight junctions between endothelial cells in our capillary model was demonstrated by electron microscopy
 <cit>  and confirmed by functional assays that measured for example permeability to k ions
 <cit>  the mechanisms of osmotic blood–brain barrier disruption is believed to depend on endothelial cell shrinkage. this may be caused by the exposure to a hyperosmolar environment, efflux of water from the endothelial cell and subsequent cytoskeletal rearrangement. the latter may cause stretching of tj and widening the interendothelial space. the temporary formation of paracellular routes of entry across the bbb as demonstrated by the monophasic teer decrease.

the effect of mannitol was strikingly different in the venule compared to capillary modules. recovery was delayed and overall disruption achieved was less notable at the venular level; the latter may be due to its more prominent paracellular pathway. there is no clear-cut explanation for the delayed recovery of venular teer after osmotic challenge. however, we would like to underscore that when we performed experiments in vivo  we found that at 30’- <dig> hr. intervals white matter venules retained blood–brain barrier disruption properties  while gray matter small vessels  were, at this time point, “intact”. the fact that we can reproduce this finding in vitro suggests that the persistence of disruption in larger vessels, and venules as seen in white matter, is due to intrinsic properties rather than vascular access issues, or parenchymal influences. it is also critical to address the issue of molecular mechanisms of osmotic disruption and recovery of teer. for example, are tj protein involved in a transcriptional vs. positional way? are other mechanisms such as transcellular access relevant? we believe that our findings require additional studies, and that only a side-by-side comparison of our in vitro/in vivo will elucidate this. finally, it is striking that a clinically relevant procedure such as osmotic bbbd has never been mechanistically explored to show what truly are the mechanisms underlying increased permeability after intrarterial mannitol.

oxygen delivery to the cns is another important function bestowed upon the brain vessels. recent studies have shown that po <dig> values increase from the post-capillary venules to the distal vessels of the cerebrovascular network and by contrast, measurements of the radial gradients are consistent with an increase oxygen loss
 <cit> . these data support the hypothesis that venules may indeed play a critical role in oxygen delivery. these findings are consistent with our data related to the metabolic behavior of capillary and venule segments. in fact, the highly oxygenated blood from the arterial circulation reaching the brain microcapillaries allows the bbb endothelium to make use of the highly efficient aerobic-driven metabolic respiration to meet the cellular bioenergetic demand and to use less glucose in the process thus maximizing that delivered into the brain . on the other hand, if oxygen delivery to the brain primarily occurs at the venular level as suggested by recent studies
 <cit>  than a non-oxidative  metabolic behavior  would minimize vascular oxygen consumption leaving more oxygen available for brain delivery. furthermore, recent studies have clearly shown that shear stress plays a key role in the modulation of bioenergetic metabolism of vascular endothelial cells favoring the utilization of the more energy rewarding aerobic pathway. this perhaps also suggests an additional link between shear stress/flow and vascular functions of the different cerebrovascular territories. however, additional and more specific studies will be necessary to validate this hypothesis and to understand the underlying mechanisms.

a limitation of our study concerns the lack of pericytes to the abluminal mixture of cells. pericytes have been shown to control several aspects of bbb function in vivo <cit>  including “barriergenesis”  and protection against hypoxia-induced bbb disruption
 <cit> . although our preliminary experiments  revealed no significant effects of pericytes on bbb tightness, these findings needs to be carefully reproduced under different combinatory approaches of cells . in addition, functional bbb modulatory effects specific for the endothelium or abluminal astrocytes  are still poorly understood and need to be further investigated. another limitation of our study is that we did not attempt to isolate the differentiating effects of shear vs. abluminal cell type. thus, how astrocytes or vascular smooth muscle influence endothelial cell differentiation under conditions of equal shear stress need to be further investigated. in particular.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have successfully established an in vitro dynamic capillary-venule modular system capable of reproducing the physiology and the functional characteristics of multiple segments of the brain vascular network. this innovative model represents a refinement of the div-bbb, which has fostered many advances in our understanding of the mechanisms regulating bbb function under normal and disease conditions
 <cit> . the div capillary-venule system provides critical, yet unexploited, features to investigate the cerebrovascular response to pathophysiological stimuli. this may help the development and validation of novel cns therapeutic strategies to reduce the burden of many neurological diseases characterized by poor cns drug penetration or inflammatory cell interaction with the vascular wall.

