BACKGROUND
within the cns, capillary blood vessels form a network of highly interconnected tubes that direct and maintain blood flow throughout the different regions. in the adult cns, the vascular supply is not homogenous and marked differences exist in the capillary density present within specific brain regions. since blood glucose represents the major metabolic support of neurons, it has been proposed that the density of the vasculature network is related to the different levels of the metabolic activity  <cit> . it is generally admitted that the adult vasculature is essentially quiescent and that adjustment of blood supply to increased metabolic activity occurs locally via modifications of the diameter of blood vessels  <cit> . however previous studies have suggested that chronic stimulation of specific neuronal systems was able to locally modify the blood supply via angiogenesis. for instance, rearing rats in a complex environment was found to increase the capillary density within the visual cortex  <cit> , whereas prolonged motor activity was reported to induce angiogenesis within the cerebellar cortex  <cit>  and primary motor cortex  <cit> . the magnocellular nuclei of the hypothalamus have long been shown to contain a particularly high density of capillaries  <cit> . these hypothalamic nuclei contain two populations of magnocellular neurons that synthesize two peptidic neurohormones, vasopressin  and oxytocin  that play major roles in the control of body fluid balance. since these magnocellular neurons synthesize huge amounts of vp and ot throughout life span, it has been admitted that hypervascularization of these nuclei facilitates the supply of circulating glucose needed for sustaining a high metabolic activity  <cit> . moreover, the activity of hypothalamic magnocellular neurons is directly regulated by changes in plasma osmotic pressure and their metabolic activity can be chronically stimulated by prolonged osmotic stimuli  <cit> . interestingly, it has been reported that proliferation of glial and endothelial cells could be observed within the hypothalamic magnocellular nuclei in animals submitted to prolonged osmotic stimulus  <cit> . in this context, the aim of our study was to determine whether prolonged metabolic activation of magnocellular neurons was able to modify the vasculature throughout the hypothalamic nuclei via local angiogenesis. our results show that hyperosmotic stimuli induce local proliferation of son capillary endothelial cells, leading to a reversible increase in the density of the capillary network within the nuclei. we also show that contrasting with most cns neurons, magnocellular hypothalamic neurons continue to express high levels of vegf throughout adulthood and that this endogenous cytokine is at least in part responsible for the local angiogenesis induced by hyperosmotic stimuli.

RESULTS
in the present study, the observations were restricted to brain sections passing through the hypothalamus that contained the different magnocellular nuclei, including the supraoptic , paraventricular , and accessory  nuclei. as compared with the other hypothalamic magnocellular nuclei, the son essentially contains vp and ot neurons and has a clearly defined anatomical localization . for reasons of clarity, the data reported here will therefore mostly concern the son, although the present findings apply for all the hypothalamic magnocellular nuclei.

hyperosmotic stimulus induces reversible angiogenesis within the son
the kinetics of cell proliferation
to determine the kinetics of the proliferative response to hyperosmotic stimulus adult rats were provided with  <dig> % saline drinking water during  <dig> ,  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days. at the end of the stimulation, animals were injected with brdu and fixed  <dig> hours later. in control rats, brdu-labeled nuclei were never detected within the son , although they were constantly detected within the germinative zones including the dentate gyrus of the hippocampus  <cit>  and the subventricular zone of the lateral ventricle  <cit>  . in all the stimulated rats by contrast, brdu-labeled nuclei were detected within both the germinative zones and the son  and other magnocellular hypothalamic nuclei including the pvn and accessory nuclei . the quantification of brdu-labeled nuclei in the son indicated that this proliferative response was maximum after to  <dig> days of osmotic stimulation, and then slightly decreased . the same protocol was used to study the proliferative response within the son of  <dig> days osmotically stimulated rats that were rehydrated for  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days: in all these animals, only scarce brdu-labeled nuclei could be detected within the son after  <dig> day rehydration , indicating that cell proliferation was rapidly stopped at the end of the stimulus.

the nature of proliferating cells
in this part of the study, brdu was injected to stimulated rats provided with 2% saline drinking water during  <dig> days and the animals were fixed  <dig> hours later. in order to identify the nature of the cells that proliferate within the son, we looked for the possible association of brdu-labeled nuclei with the main cell types contained in the hypothalamic nucleus, including the neurons, glial cells and capillary endothelial cells.

neurons
the son essentially contains magnocellular neurons that were labeled by specific antibodies against vp or ot. a mixing of both antibodies was used to label the whole population of son neurons. in all sections double immunostained for vp + ot and brdu, brdu-labeled nuclei never appeared associated with vp- or ot-labeled neuronal cell bodies .

glial cells
the son contains three main glial cell types including 1) astrocytes that were labeled by the means of an antibody against gfap, an intermediate filament protein specifically expressed by this cell type  <cit> , 2) oligodendrocyte precursor cells that were labeled by an antibody against the proteoglycan ng <dig>  <cit> ), and 3) microglial cells that were labeled by the isolectin b <dig> from griffonia simplicifolia . these different glial cells markers produced typical labeling patterns within the son: 1) gfap-labeling was associated with astrocytic cell bodies localized to the ventral surface of the nucleus and with their elongated processes extending dorsally throughout the core of the nucleus , 2) ng2-labeling was associated with small cells exhibiting numerous radiating processes that were homogeneously dispersed throughout the son and the surrounding regions , and 3) isob <dig> labeling was associated with both typical ramified microglial cells dispersed throughout the nucleus and with a number of capillary vessels . in double labeled sections, brdu-labeled were rarely associated with the gfap-labeled astrocytic cell bodies located in the ventral portions of the nucleus  and with the isob4-labeled isolated microglial cells dispersed throughout the nucleus . on the other hand, labeled nuclei were frequently associated with isob4-labeled capillary vessels  and to a lesser extent with ng2-labeled cells bodies dispersed throughout the son .

capillary endothelial cells
in addition to the isolectin b <dig> , the endothelial cells composing the son capillary vessels were labeled with specific antibodies against either nestin   <cit> . in all the adult rats examined , the phenotypic expression of son capillary vessels markedly differed from those located in the surrounding brain regions: son capillaries always exhibited moderate to intense immunoreactivity to both eba and nestin, whereas all the vessels located in the surrounding regions were eba-positive but nestin-negative . the examination of double labeled sections indicated that, a large majority of the brdu-labeled nuclei detected throughout the son was associated with capillary-like processes labeled for eba  or nestin . these data indicate that the cell proliferation occurring within the son following osmotic stimuli preferentially concern the capillary endothelial cells.

hyperosmotic stimulus reversibly modifies the organization of son vessels
since proliferation of endothelial cells generally results in the formation of new vessels, we then examined the consequences of prolonged osmotic stimuli on the son vascularization. to do this, we compared the anatomical organization and the phenotypic expression of son capillaries in normally hydrated rats , and in stimulated rats drinking 2% saline for various periods .

anatomical organization of son vessels
in this part of the study, the rats were decapitated and brains were incubated in a 4% paraformaldehyde solution in order to fix the serum proteins contained within blood vessels. the organization of capillary vessels was then visualized on 50-μm-thick vibratome sections, by labeling the intra-vascular content by an antibody against rat igg conjugated to alexa-fluor  <dig>  the examination of anti-rat-igg-labeled sections indicated that 1) in control, normally hydrated adult rats, the density of capillary vessels was significantly higher within the son area  than in the surrounding brain regions , and 2) in  <dig> days osmotically stimulated rats, this density was significantly increased within the son area but not in the surrounding regions . moreover, during the osmotic stimulation, the size of the individual vp and ot neurons was progressively increased, leading to an extension of the son area . a quantitative analysis of the rat-igg-labeled sections indicated that after  <dig> days of stimulation, the surface occupied by son capillaries was dramatically increased  as compared with the son of normally hydrated rat. these modifications were reversed by the rehydration of stimulated animals: the density of son capillaries progressively decreased when  <dig> days stimulated rats were rehydrated, and was reestablished to control levels in animals rehydrated for  <dig> days .

phenotypic expression of son vessels
in a second step we looked for the expression by son vessels of nestin or vimentin, two intermediate filament proteins that are expressed by the endothelial cells constituting newly formed capillary vessels in the developing cns or in brain tumors  <cit> . in control adult rats, the large majority of the capillary vessels present throughout the brain exhibited intense eba immunostaining, but faint if any immunostaining for nestin or vimentin. by contrast, son capillary vessels always exhibited moderate to intense immunostaining for eba and nestin, whereas vimentin immunostaining was essentially associated with son astrocytic cell bodies and processes  <cit>  . in osmotically stimulated rats, the son was found to contain an increased amount of nestin-immunostained vessels, frequently exhibiting higher staining intensity than in the control rats . contrasting with control rats, vimentin immunostaining was now associated with both son astrocytes and capillary vessels, whereas vessels located in the surrounding brain regions remained vimentin-negative . as observed for their anatomical organization, rehydration of  <dig> days osmotically stimulated rats induced progressive modifications of the phenotype of son vessels, and their expression of nestin and vimentin was reestablished to control levels after  <dig> days of rehydration . the examination of sections double immunostained for eba and either nestin or vimentin further indicated that, as compared with control or rehydrated rats, the son of osmotically stimulated rats contained an increased amounts of capillary processes that were immunostained for either nestin or vimentin but appeared eba negative .

son angiogenesis is related to neuronal vascular endothelial growth factor
son neurons maintain the expression of vegf throughout adulthood
among a variety of identified angiogenic factors, vegf is generally considered to play a major role in the processes of angiogenesis, maintenance of cerebral vasculature and permeability  <cit> . it has recently been reported that neuronal vegf plays important role in the process of angiogenesis in the developing cns  <cit> . in full agreement with these data, we observed that throughout extra-hypothalamic regions, vegf-immunostaining was essentially associated with neun-labeled neurons in newborn rats of less that  <dig> days postnatal , , and with gfap-labeled astrocytes in adult  rats . in the hypothalamus by contrast, intense to moderate vegf-immunostaining was associated with magnocellular neurons labeled for vp or ot in both newborn and adult rats .

osmotic stimulus increases the expression of vegf within son neurons
in osmotically stimulated rats, vegf immunostaining pattern was unchanged within astrocytes located within the son or the surrounding brain regions whereas it was dramatically modified within son neurons: whereas faint to moderate vegf immunostaining was associated with perinuclear, golgi-like structures in son neurons of control rats, intense vegf immunostaining was detected throughout the neuronal cell bodies of stimulated rats .

in situ hybridization experiments for vegf mrna further indicated that the mrna labeling detected within son neurons was highly increased in  <dig> days stimulated rats as compared with control rats .

inhibition of endogenous vegf impedes osmotically induced angiogenesis
dexamethasone inhibits both neuronal vegf expression and son angiogenesis
dexamethasone, a potent agonist of glucocorticoid receptors, has previously been shown to inhibit the expression of vegf in various cell types  <cit> . in the present study, we thus evaluated the effects of chronic dexamethasone treatment of adult rats both on the expression of vegf by magnocellular hypothalamic neurons and on the local angiogenic response induced by osmotic stimulus. our data clearly show that in all dexamethasone-treated rats, vegf immunostaining of magnocellular neurons was dramatically decreased as compared with control, untreated rats . in order to test whether dexamethasone treatment influenced the local proliferative response induced by osmotic stimulus, dexamethasone-treated adult rats were osmotically stimulated during  <dig> days, injected with brdu, and sacrificed  <dig> hours later. our data indicate that dexamethasone-treatment nearly abolished the angiogenic response to hyperosmotic stimulus within the son and other magnocellular hypothalamic nuclei . on the other hand, dexamethasone treatment was found to only poorly modify the cell proliferation detected within the germinative zone of the lateral ventricle .

local application of a blocking antibody to vegf inhibits son angiogenesis
in order to inhibit endogenous vegf, we then used a goat igg vegf neutralizing antibody. an intracerebral cannula connected to an osmotic minipump containing the blocking antibody or an igg isotype was implanted in close vicinity to the son of rats submitted to prolonged osmotic stimulus. in the implanted rats, the distribution of vegf neutralizing antibody and of the igg isotype was determined by the immunocytochemical detection of goat igg: in all the implanted rats examined, infused igg was found to diffuse throughout a  <dig> mm wide area surrounding the lesional cavity induced by the cannula, thus including the whole son and part of the pvn homolateral to the cannula, whereas no diffusion could be detected within the magnocellular hypothalamic nuclei contralateral to the cannula . our data indicated that in rats osmotically stimulated for  <dig> days, the cell proliferation  was strongly inhibited in the son adjacent to the cannula and, to a lesser extent, in the homolateral pvn, as compared with the magnocellular nuclei contra-lateral to the cannula . by contrast, a similar high rate of cell proliferation was detected in the hypothalamic magnocellular nuclei of both sides in control rats unilaterally infused with goat igg . in all the rats infused with either the vegf neutralizing antibody or the goat igg, strong cell proliferation was detected throughout the area bordering the lesional cavity .

discussion
in mammals, the terminal cns vascularization occurs postnatally via active angiogenesis, and thereafter this vasculature remains essentially quiescent under basal, non pathological conditions. in the present study we show that 1) the vascularization of hypothalamic magnocellular nuclei can be modified throughout adulthood via local angiogenesis induced by hyperosmotic stimuli and 2) such local angiogenic events are related to the expression of high levels of vegf by magnocellular vp and ot neurons.

osmotic stimuli induce proliferation of son capillary endothelial cells
more than  <dig> years ago, it has been established that prolonged stimulation of hypothalamic vp and ot neurons by hyperosmotic stimuli induced substantial proliferation of glial and endothelial cells within the supraoptic nucleus  <cit> . although they fully confirm these previous data, our present data indicate that the cell proliferation occurring locally within hypothalamic magnocellular nuclei mostly involve endothelial cells, whereas proliferation of both endothelial cells and astrocytes was previously reported. a first explanation for such discrepant data is that the proliferation rate of astrocytes has been underestimated in the present study. proliferative astrocytes were identified here as those cells immunostained for the astrocytic marker gfap that exhibited a brdu-labeled nucleus. since newly formed astrocytes only express very low levels of gfap <cit> , it is thus possible that proliferative astrocytes appeared gfap-negative. in all the sections examined however, brdu-labeled nuclei were preferentially located within the core of the son, whereas the son astrocytic cell bodies are localized to the ventral border of the nucleus. the differential evaluation of astrocytic proliferation may rather be related to marked differences in the methods used to label proliferative cells. in the present study, brdu was injected  <dig> hours before the fixation of the rats , while 3h-thymidine was previously injected twice daily during the whole duration of the hyperosmotic stimulation . it is thus very likely that under the present conditions, only those cells exhibiting high rate of proliferation were brdu-labeled, whereas all the cells that have proliferated all along the period of osmotic stimulation were 3h-thymidine-labeled in the previous study. this clearly indicates that, in the son of osmotically stimulated rats, the rate of proliferation of son endothelial cells highly surpasses that of astrocytes.

we also show that within the son of osmotically stimulated rats, high rate proliferation of capillary endothelial cells is accompanied by lower proliferation rate of ng2-labeled cells. interestingly, the proteoglycan ng <dig> has been found to be expressed by vascular pericytes surrounding the nascent vessels  <cit> . although the numerous ng2-labeled cells dispersed throughout the adult rat brain were initially identified as oligodendrocyte precusors  <cit> , it is now generally admitted that these cells represent multipotent progenitor cells  <cit> . it can thus be assumed that at least part of these cells differentiate into vascular pericytes that participate in the formation and/or stabilization of new capillaries  <cit> .

son angiogenesis reversibly modifies the local vasculature
the proliferation of endothelial cells, occurring either under physiological or pathological conditions, is generally associated with angiogenesis that leads to the formation of new capillary vessels. the idea that the proliferative response detected within the son corresponds to local angiogenesis is strongly supported by the present data demonstrating that prolonged osmotic stimulation induced 1) pronounced modifications of the anatomical organization of son capillary vessels, with both an expansion of a capillary network throughout the increased son volume and an increase in the network density, and 2) an increased expression by son capillaries of nestin and vimentin, two intermediate filament proteins highly expressed by newly formed endothelial cells  <cit> . since prolonged osmotic stimuli induce strong activation of the functional activity of vp and ot magnocellular hypothalamic neurons  <cit> , it can reasonably be assumed that the formation of new vessels within the son will increase the circulating metabolic support to these neurons. a particularity of magnocellular neurons is that the size of their cell body increases during prolonged osmotic stimulation, leading to a progressive expansion of the volume occupied by the corresponding hypothalamic nuclei  <cit> . newly formed vessels may thus also contribute to the vasularization of the expanded nucleus.

an intriguing question raised by the present findings concerns the fate of that son new vessels formed during the period of osmotic stimulation. our data clearly show that the density of the capillary network and the phenotypic expression of son capillary vessels returned to control levels several days after the cessation of the osmotic stimulus. it is thus very likely that newly formed vessels are progressively deleted following rehydration. in control, normally hydrated rats, the son vascularization however always remains particularly dense as compared with the surrounding regions, and the son capillary vessels always express high levels of nestin. it can thus be assumed that, even under basal physiological conditions, new vessels are continuously added to the son vasculature via sparse angiogenic events.

neuronal vegf is the major stimulus for son angiogenesis
the fact that osmotic stimulus induces reversible angiogenesis within the hypothalamic magnocellular nuclei strongly suggests that local secretion of potent angiogenic factor occurs within these nuclei. although a variety of angiogenic factors have been identified in the cns, vegf is generally recognized as the major factor involved in the processes of angiogenesis  <cit> . that endogenous vegf plays a major role in the osmotically induced angiogenesis was suggested by the present findings that 1) contrasting with most cns neurons, hypothalamic magnocellular neurons continue to express vegf throughout adulthood, 2) this expression is highly increased by osmotic stimulation, and 3) osmotically induced angiogenic events are impaired when vegf is inhibited by dexamethasone or by a blocking antibody.

dexamethasone has been shown to inhibit vegf expression in a large variety of tissue  <cit> . we show here that dexamethasone treatment of osmotically stimulated rats dramatically decreases the vegf immunostaining associated with magnocellular neurons and, to a lesser extent, astrocytes. our data further indicate that such decreased vegf immunostaining of hypothalamic magnocellular neurons correlates with both a potent inhibition of cell proliferation within these nuclei, and a strong decrease of the nestin immunostaining of capillary vessels . this obviously supports the idea that endogenous vegf is at least partly responsible for the local angiogenic events occurring within the hypothalamic magnocellular nuclei of hyperosmotically stimulated rats. since hypothalamic magnocellular neurons of the adult rat express the glucocorticoid receptor  <cit> , it is very likely that the dexamethasone effect observed here directly results from a direct repression of the vegf gene. glucocorticoids are however known to repress a variety of genes  <cit> , which may also interfere with the angiogenesis described here. in order to demonstrate that endogenous vegf is directly responsible for son angiogenesis, we lastly performed a local infusion of a neutralizing antibody to vegf that has been successfully used in previous studies to block endogenous vegf activity in the rodent, both in peripheral organs  <cit> and within the brain  <cit> . an advantage of this antibody raised in the goat is that its diffusion throughout the brain parenchyma can easily be controlled. in the present study we show that the proliferative response to hyperosmotic stimulus was strongly inhibited within those hypothalamic nuclei that were located within this diffusion zone, but was not affected within the nuclei contra-lateral to the implanted cannula. moreover, numerous proliferating cells were always detected along the border of lesional cavity induced by the cannula implantation, strongly suggesting that the blocking antibody specifically abolishes the vegf-dependent cell proliferations, but has only poor effect on the proliferation of glial cells induced by cns injury  <cit> .

although vegf was also detected within son astrocytes, our present observations suggest that the angiogenesis described here is preferentially related to the cytokine of neuronal origin. within the son of osmotically stimulated rats, brdu-labeled proliferating cells were indeed always restricted to the core of the son containing the vegf-labeled neuronal cell bodies, and were scarce in the ventral portion of the nucleus containing the labeled astrocytes . moreover, osmotic stimulus was found to increase the expression of vegf mrna in the only son neurons. in a series of previous studies, astrocytic vegf has been associated with the angiogenesis occurring in various cns pathological processes  <cit> . it could thus be assumed that, in the son as in the other brain regions, neuronal vegf constitutes the stimulus for physiological angiogenesis, whereas astrocytic vegf is essentially involved in those angiogenic events occurring under pathological or traumatic conditions.

CONCLUSIONS
in mammals, the final cns vasculature is established during late postnatal development via active cerebral angiogenesis that is closely correlated with the neuronal expression of vegf. thereafter, neuronal vegf is down-regulated parallely to an increased expression by glial cells, and under basal, non pathological conditions, the vasculature remains essentially quiescent  <cit> . in the present study we show that, a simple physiological stimulus can induce reversible angiogenesis within specific hypothalamic nuclei containing neurons that maintain vegf expression throughout adulthood. given the importance of angiogenic processes in a number of cns diseases, these hypothalamic nuclei may thus provide a suitable model to elucidate the cellular and molecular mechanisms that control angiogenesis within the adult cns.

