BACKGROUND
reproduction is the highest priority of all living things, and involves a complex combination of processes whose variability between species has long puzzled evolutionary biologists. in angiosperms, reproduction for the most part culminates in the formation of male and female gametophytes, whose union leads to a new sporophyte generation that will begin from seeds. in the flower, male and female sporogenesis and gametogenesis generate two types of gametes that are either enclosed in an embryo sac , or pollen grain .

despite the enormous complexity and heterogeneity of flower morphology existing within angiosperms, a number of recent publications focusing on the genes involved in flower development suggested that the biological basis of flower development is actually highly conserved among plants  <cit> . accordingly, the genetic and epigenetic bases of gamete formation have been studied in model species, such as arabidopsis, snapdragon and maize, using a number of different approaches. the production and characterization of mutants defective for their ability to set seeds  <cit> , in addition to expression studies  <cit> , led to the identification of several genes that are potentially or effectively associated with sporogenesis and gametogenesis  <cit> . a number of mutations affecting the normal progression of meiosis  <cit>  and gametophyte development  <cit> , as well as double fertilization and seed development  <cit> , have been studied in great detail . interconnections between the ovule and the developing embryo sac have emerged in a number of studies in which sporophytic mutations directly affecting gametophytic development were studied  <cit> . more recently, the mutation of genes involved in the production and action of srnas in the ovule have been shown to have dramatic effects on the development of the embryo sac  <cit> , thus supporting the idea that srna-related mechanisms residing in the sporophyte are critical for cell-fate determination in the ovule and the formation of gametes  <cit> .

increasing interest has been focused on hypericum perforatum for the study of apomixis, a naturally occurring form of asexual reproduction whereby progeny inherit the entire maternal genome through the seed  <cit> . hypericum spp.  have x =  <dig> chromosomes: individuals are mainly tetraploid with 2n =  <dig>  but diploid and hexaploid individuals have been found. h. perforatum is an invasive perennial herb that is widely distributed in a variety of habitats and is regarded as a serious weed in many countries  <cit> . several compounds produced by hypericum species have stimulated the interest of the scientific community for their biological activity  <cit> , and h. perforatum has been studied for the identification of potential genes involved in the biosynthesis of active metabolites  <cit> . from the reproductive point of view, h. perforatum reproduces via aposporic apomixis, a gametophytic variant  whereby the alternative differentiation of a somatic cell gives rise to a functional, unreduced embryo sac. in principle, aposporic initial cells in apomictic plants are somatic cells belonging to the nucellus, which change their fate by being able to mitotically divide and develop functional embryo sacs through mimicking sexual gametogenesis development  <cit> . the mode of reproduction in h. perforatum is highly dynamic, and biotypes span from almost complete sexuality to nearly obligate apomixis. in particular, apomixis is mostly found in tetraploid individuals and is characterized by complete penetrance and variable levels of expressivity, ranging from 20% to 97% . the occurrence of diploid and hexaploid individuals reflects a dynamic reproductive system because haploidization and polyploidization are mediated by parthenogenesis of meiotic egg cells and fertilization of aposporic egg cells, respectively  <cit> . as with other asexual plant complexes, apomixis and hybridization are closely linked in h. perforatum  <cit> , and interestingly the dosage of genetic factors has been proposed to influence the penetrance of apomixis, as tetraploid and hexaploid genotypes tend to be more apomictic and sexual respectively, regardless of geographic origin  <cit> . these observations are in agreement with the hypothesis that apomixis might relies upon spatial or temporal mis-expression of genes acting during female sexual reproduction  <cit> .

hypericum perforatum is considered an attractive model system for the study of apomixis because it is characterized by a relatively small genome size, the availability of morphologically distinct ecotypes, self-compatibility and easy cross-ability, high degree of molecular polymorphisms, along with a versatile mode of reproduction, a relatively short generation time and an abundant seed set  <cit> . genotypes that produce embryos either from aposporic fertilized egg cells or from parthenogenesis of meiotically reduced egg cells have been identified, suggesting that apospory and parthenogenesis may be developmentally uncoupled  <cit> . it is now well known that parthenogenic capacity is preferentially expressed by aposporic egg cells . nevertheless, aposporic egg cells can frequently occur in non-parthenogenic individuals, and parthenogenic development of meiotic egg cells can also take place. genotypes that almost exclusively express only one component of apomixis while suppressing the other support the hypothesis that two distinct genetic factors control apospory and parthenogenesis in this species . recently, the genetic basis of apomixis in h. perforatum was uncovered by mapping and then sequencing a locus  associated with apospory, demonstrating that distinct genetic factors are associated apospory and parthenogenesis in this species  <cit> .

recently, next generation sequencing  technologies have been used to investigate gene expression changes associated with sperm development  <cit> , differentiation of the megaspore mother cell  <cit>  and specific cell types of the embryo sac  <cit>  in arabidopsis. in an alternative approach, high-quality single nucleotide polymorphisms  were mined from ngs libraries sequenced from a number of sexual and apomictic ranunculus genotypes in order to elucidate the origin and evolution of apomixis  <cit> . taken together, the availability of reference dna and rna datasets are increasing the ease at which complex phenotypes and processes in non-model organisms can be analyzed. here we sequence and annotate the flower transcriptome of h. perforatum with particular reference to processes related to reproduction. the annotation and comparative investigation of the flower transcriptome is a critical step for better understanding the genetic control of apomixis, and provides valuable information on gametophyte determination and gamete formation in hypericum.

RESULTS
de novo assembly and annotation of the hypericum flower transcriptome
we analyzed two sexual and three apomictic accessions . flower buds and flower organs were collected at different developmental stages corresponding to arabidopsis flower stages 1- <dig> and spanning meiosis and gametogenesis processes . samples were collected to include the entire developmental pathway of gamete production, whose critical steps in sexual ovules include megaspore mother cell differentiation , its meiotic division to form a functional megaspore  and mitotic divisions giving rise to a functional eight-nucleate embryo sac with an egg cell apparatus . conversely, aposporic ovules  are frequently characterized by a failure of the meiotic program and differentiation of one or multiple unreduced embryo sacs from the somatic cells  of the ovule .table  <dig> 
information on the
h. perforatum
accessions used for flower transcriptome analyses



accession
description
genealogy
origin
ploidy
apospory
reproduction
for each plant accession, the origin, ploidy and degree of apomixis are indicated. accessions marked with *were used for  <dig> sequencing, while those with °were used for real-time rt-qpcr. apospory expressed as percentage was determined by flow cytometric screening of  <dig> single seeds. for details on the origin and composition of experimental populations please refer to  <cit> .
developmental stages of
h. perforatum
ovules sampled and analyzed in this research. a: schematic representation of key aspects of sexual and apomictic reproductive pathways in h. perforatum and key developmental stages. b-g: ovules at developmental stages spanning meiosis, aposporic initial formation and development, and gametogenesis. b: megaspore mother cell ; c: tetrad showing a functional megaspore  along with three degenerating megaspores ; d: aposporic initial  cell; e: enlarged aposporic cell equivalent to an aposporic one-nucleate embryo sac ; f: oangic apparatus showing in focus one synergid  and the egg cell ; g: detail of a central cell  from a mature embryo sac. in each photograph the yellow area mark a given germinal cell type .



all full-length enriched cdna libraries were successfully normalized  in order to avoid over representation of the most commonly transcribed genes and to maximize sequence diversity. roche  <dig> sequencing of two full plates yielded a total of  <dig>  million sequences, and an average number of sequenced reads from each library of  <dig>  .

high quality sequences from all libraries were pooled and assembled to create a single global reference transcriptome, and yielded  <dig>  isotigs with an average length of  <dig>  bp and an n <dig> of  <dig>  bp . following the assembly procedure, the quote of singletons was equal to 2% . as a result, the assembly pipeline produced  <dig>  assembled sequences - from now onward defined as unigenes - that were composed of  <dig>  isotigs  and  <dig>  singletons .table  <dig> 
descriptive statistics related to the reference assembly



assembled reads
 <dig> , <dig> 
the reference assembly was built starting from the pool of reads sequenced from each library.



blastx analysis aligned approximately 61% of the hypericum unigenes to a protein present in the non-redundant  database . the remaining 39% of assembled unigenes  did not yield significant matches at this level of stringency. the relative contribution of assembled and non-assembled reads to the annotation of the hypericum flower unigenes was also computed with a blastx-based procedure .table  <dig> 
number of hits resulting from blastx analyses of the assembled
hypericum
sequences



species
hits
blast 

ricinus communis

populus trichocarpa

vitis vinifera

glycine max

medicago truncatula

arabidopsis thaliana

arabidopsis lyrata

lotus japonicas

jatropha curcas

hypericum perforatum
blast  is referred to the total number of sequences having at least one blast hit, with reference to the whole set of assembled sequences.



as shown in table  <dig>  90% of the best hits produced by blastx were concentrated in  <dig> species, whereas the remaining 10% of blastx hits were distributed over  <dig> taxonomic entities. roughly 86% of the most significant alignments were made with proteins deduced from ricinus communis , populus trichocarpa , vitis vinifera , glycine max  and medicago truncatula .

alignment of unigenes on the happy locus and the use of this resource for the identification of allele/splice variants
screening for the identification of putative homologs in the nr database produced a number of matches with proteins encoded by genes located in the bac clone hm <dig>   containing the genetic loci associated with apospory in h. perforatum . blastn searches of all  <dig>  unigenes over the sequence of the bac clone produced  <dig> relevant matches,  <dig> of which aligned to multiple unigenes . overall sequence identity shared by unigenes and the corresponding regions of hm <dig>  was on average 95%. moreover, blastn searches did not produce reliable matches for the retrotransposons located in the bac clone. the fact that the truncated genes ari-t, hk <dig> and gh <dig> did not match none of the unigenes from our collection  may indicate that these genes were not expressed or were expressed at levels below our detection threshold. alternatively, divergence between the genetic loci of the investigated plants  may have hampered the production of blast matches .figure  <dig> 
unigenes aligned to the bac clone hm <dig> , containing the
happy
 locus  <cit> . a: gene composition of the bac clone. the grey boxes indicate genes located in the chromosome  <dig> of poplar , while white boxes indicate genes located in other chromosomes. gene names are indicated in black if aligned to one or multiple unigenes and in red if any unigenes aligned to the corresponding sequence. b: alignments of multiple unigenes to the sequence extracted from hm <dig>  and the corresponding predicted cds. c: distribution of the average number of nucleotide substitutions per site , calculated between unigenes and the aligned region of hm <dig> .



blastx matches from the nr protein database  also revealed possible synteny between the hypericum sequence hm <dig>  and the chromosomal region located between the loci poptr_0014s <dig>  and poptr_0014s <dig>  of poplar . one exception to this was the region containing ari and a number of other genes, which had truncated forms of ari-t, nph <dig> and tk that are not located in the same chromosome  in poplar . positive matches of flower transcripts with nucleotide sequences of hm <dig>  further suggested the presence of some additional coding regions in the bac clone, including psp <dig> and air <dig> 

since distinct unigenes are the product of different assembly output, it is possible that the finding of multiple unigenes matching the same bac portion reflects the existence of duplicated genes  or allelic variation existing in our pool of genotypes. to test this hypothesis we selected  <dig> regions of the bac clone hm <dig>  that shared high similarity with multiple unigenes , aligned the sequences in multiple alignments and analyzed the nucleotide diversity existing between unigenes and reference sequence extracted from hm <dig> . as external controls, the same statistics were made for the three single copy regions its or internal transcribed spacers, matk and ndhf . nucleotide diversity displayed by unigenes when compared to their reference sequences extracted from hm <dig>  was an average  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . conversely, the nucleotide diversity estimated for the control regions its, matk and ndhf was much lower and averaging  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . the average nucleotide diversity measured in the bac regions surrounding ari7-like was as low as  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . nucleotide diversity for sequences aligning to the ari7-like gene was equal to  <dig>  . for a number of unigenes, the nucleotide diversity shared with genes encoding for wrky-like protein, hnrnp, riml/acetyltransferase-domain protein, pg was equal to  <dig>  . despite the low genetic diversity, the unigenes aligned to the genes: exp <dig>  dgcr-like protein, hnrnp, riml/acetyltransferase-domain protein, and mo25-like protein displayed alignment variants featuring a possible lack or insertion of sequence traits in their cds, coding sequences . the distribution of the average number of nucleotide substitutions per site  calculated between unigenes and corresponding regions of hm <dig>  showed that nucleotide substitutions were concentrated in the 3’-end of the alignments in at least 50% of investigated regions .table  <dig> 
diversity statistics for the unigenes aligning to the
hypericum
bac clone hm06166



gene product
accession
unigenes
s/al
pi/al
s/u
pi/u
hn/alu
statistics are based on multiple unigenes aligning to unique coding sequences predicted from the bac clone hm <dig>  containing the happy locus associated to apospory . for each coding region , the unigene id, the number of polymorphic sites  and measured nucleotide diversity  are reported. the number of polymorphic sites  and nucleotide diversity  calculated among unigenes are also indicated. the number of haplotypes emerging from the alignment of the multiple unigenes to coding sequences predicted from the bac clone hm <dig> is indicated as hn/alu. **locus not included in the bac clone hm <dig>  which was used as external reference for statistics on sequence genetic diversity. unigenes were deposited as tsa project under the accession gbxg <dig> 



the distribution of sequences between single libraries
of the  <dig>  unigenes composing our reference assembly, and identified from different flowers and flower parts,  <dig>  sequences were assembled with reads derived from one or multiple libraries. calculation of the number of raw reads assembled in each unigene from each library allowed us to estimate the presence of each unigene in each sequenced library. these data were used to infer the overlaps existing between the two sequencing reactions  and independent libraries . about 92% of the assembled unigenes were composed of sequences shared between the two independent sequencing experiments . as much as 86% of unigenes were identified from the flowers of at least three sexual or apomictic individuals . similarly, 78% of unigenes were shared by at least three libraries made from the different flower parts. taken together these results indicate that most transcripts were detectable at the flower-transcriptome level, regardless of reproductive mode or specific flower organ, while numbers of transcripts detectable in single libraries were low .figure  <dig> 
statistics on the composition of libraries and distribution of unigenes. venn diagrams that graphically represent the number of h. perforatum unigenes whose presence was shared among libraries, as indicated by the contribution of each library to the assembly. all possible intersections between libraries, as well as library specific sequences, are shown. a: sequences shared by the two sequencing approaches; b: sequences derived from whole flowers of two apomictic  and two sexual  individuals; c: sequences derived from single flower parts collected from a facultative apomictic accession. sep|pet: sepals and petals.



the existence and abundance of overlaps between the libraries derived from flowers collected from sexual and obligate apomictic accessions were also measured . a total of  <dig>  transcripts were present in both apomictic libraries, but were not found in the sexual libraries. moreover, a total of  <dig> sequences  were observed in the two sexual samples, but not in the apomictic samples.

when we considered the different flower parts collected from a facultative apomictic accession , and hence showing either apomictic or sexual reproduction, we could identify  <dig> unigenes  exclusive to young flower buds at stages preceding micro- and mega-sporogenesis . moreover,  <dig> and  <dig>  sequences were sequenced only in carpels and stamens, respectively  . the overlap between carpels and stamens consisted of  <dig>  single unigenes. similarly,  <dig>  and  <dig> transcripts were found in the overlapping regions of young buds with carpels and stamens, respectively.

finally, most genes residing on the genomic region comprised in the bac clone hm <dig> , thus surrounding the happy locus, were expressed in the different flower parts as well as in both sexual and apomictic flowers analyzed in this study, as indicated by the production of multiple sequence reads matching the cds predicted from the genomic sequence hm <dig>  .

ontological annotation of sexual and apomictic specific sequences
for the annotation of gene products with a possible key role in plant reproduction and seed formation, we checked the ontological annotation associated to all unigenes identified only in sexual and apomictic libraries . metrics concerning the full ontological annotation of the flower transcriptome are reported on additional file 1: table s <dig>  most annotations associated to unigenes identified only in sexual and apomictic libraries were shared between the two sequence collections, although some extent of variability was observed for single go annotations .figure  <dig> 
annotation of sequences detected only in apomictic and sexual libraries. annotation of apomictic- and sexual-specific sequences according to the go vocabularies. a: go terms associated with biological processes; b: go terms associated with molecular functions. overall annotations refer to  <dig> sexual-specific and  <dig> apomictic-specific unigenes that could be annotated with single or multiple ontological terms. the number of annotated sequences is shown as black bars for the apomictic libraries and gray bars for the sexual libraries.



highest scores were recorded for terms associated to the sensing and response stresses and stimuli as well as terms associated to metabolism of carbohydrate, lipids and secondary compounds . the annotations: cell differentiation , cell cycle  and embryo development  were also identified at lower extend. few sequences identified only in the sexual libraries could be annotated as regulation of gene expression, epigenetic , cell growth , flower development  and pollination . likewise, cell-cell signaling , cellular homeostasis , post-embryonic development  and reproduction  were associated to a small number of sequences specific of the apomictic libraries . as far as the molecular function of unigenes identified only in sexual and apomictic libraries is concerned, the most frequent annotations were dna binding , nucleotide binding , kinase activity  and transporter activity  .

identification of genes involved in flower development, gamete formation and plant reproduction
as flower organs were sampled in this study, we expected the libraries to contain genes involved in flower development, gamete formation and reproduction. to test this hypothesis and annotate the unigenes, we created a database of  <dig> arabidopsis genes whose function has been associated with plant reproduction sensu lato and used this set of data as a source of data specifically focused on reproduction . blast analyses indicated that  <dig>  hypericum unigenes were putative orthologs to  <dig> arabidopsis gene products .

an attempt to join the annotation of reproductive-related genes to their expression site was done by checking the distribution of sequences matching reproduction-related genes within the different flower parts. approximately 63% of the sequences matching reproduction-related genes were shared among all organs. of the remaining sequences, most were expressed in all flower tissues, with the exception of only the sepals and petals . to a lesser extent, sequences were present in carpels and young buds and stamens and young buds, followed by stamens and carpels alone . according to this finding, the distribution of apomictic- or sexual-specific unigenes in each plant organ revealed that nearly half of the annotated unigenes belonged to three groups: i) young buds, carpels and stamens; ii) carpels and young buds; and iii) stamens and young buds. approximately 10% of the apomictic- or sexual-specific unigenes could not be paired with any specific flower part .figure  <dig> 
abundance of sequences detected only in apomictic or sexual libraries. distribution of reproduction-related unigenes according to the different flower parts and reproductive behaviors of h. perforatum. legend: red, sequenced only in sexual libraries; blue, sequenced only in apomictic libraries; green, sequenced from both sexual and apomictic libraries. c: carpels; s: stamens; sp: sepals/petals; y: young buds; a-: present in all verticils but the one not assessed. sequences shared by two libraries are indicated with the name of the libraries separated by “|”.



among the sequences annotated as reproduction-related, we could effectively annotate numerous unigenes involved in sporogenesis, gametogenesis and embryogenesis . ncbi and tair searches yielded 89% of the annotations related to meiosis, gametogenesis and embryogenesis . sequences derived exclusively from sexual libraries produced almost double the number of reproductive related genes derived from the apomictic libraries . this difference was particularly evident for genes comprised in the two categories: “regulation of megasporogenesis”  and “female gametogenesis, fertilization and seed development”  .table  <dig> 
hypericum
matches to the plant reproductive database of
arabidopsis



unigenes
at loci
biological terms
apo
sex
common
 <dig> repl.
 <dig> repl.
 <dig> repl.
 <dig> repl.
the reproductive database was built upon tair and ncbi annotations and provides information on genes involved on reproductive processes. for each biological term or process, the number of hypericum unigenes having a significant match with entries on the reproductive database is shown . the number of reference arabidopsis genes matched by a hypericum unigene are also reported . for each biological term or process, the distribution of the hypericum unigenes among the apomictic and sexual  <dig> libraries are shown. apo: present only in apomictic libraries; sex: present only in sexual libraries; common: present in both apomictic and sexual libraries.  <dig> repl: detected from a single library;  <dig> repl: detected in either apomictic  or sexual  libraries.



with this approach, we were able to identify and annotate hypericum unigenes whose expression has been associated with phases of ovule development , along with transcripts whose activity is restricted or specific to cell fate in the ovule, such as in the nucellar tissue  and embryo sac  . similarly, we could associate  <dig> unigenes expressed in the hypericum flower to meiosis . among those, we detected and annotated a number of genes with known functions in meiosis , megaspore selection and gamete formation  . genes involved in the control of dna methylation in sporophytic and gametophytic plant tissues, such as met <dig> and dme, were also identified and annotated . similarly,  <dig> and  <dig> unigenes were linked to gametophyte and gamete development and embryogenesis, respectively . in these categories we could sequence and annotate a number of genes whose mutants are known to affect the embryo sac, embryo and endosperm development  .table  <dig> 
unigenes involved in key biological steps of ovule, gamete and seed formation



unigene
gene
biological process
db source
libraries of flower parts
apomictic libraries
sexual libraries
c
s/p
st
yb
mean 
mean 
genes were selected on the basis of their annotation. the number of reads, expressed as rpk , is displayed for each flower parts and for the two reproductive strategies . unigenes were deposited as tsa project under the accession gbxg <dig> 



expression analysis of reproduction-related genes in sexual or apomictic plant accessions
real-time rt-qpcr assays were used to verify whether apomictic plants are affected in the expression of genes that are expected to be involved in sexual reproduction-related processes . in particular, the expression of  <dig> unigenes was tested in pistils and stamens collected from sexual  and apomictic  accessions . a sample composed by sepals and petals was also included in the analyses, as external reference.figure  <dig> 
expression analysis of genes involved in meiosis, spore selection and ovule differentiation. quantitative real-time pcr results for a number of h. perforatum genes selected on the basis of their annotation and potentially involved in sporogenesis and spore selection  or ovule or cell differentiation . gene expression values are expressed in arbitrary units normalized against the level of expression detected in sepals and petals . c1a, c1s: flower stage 11; c2a, c2s: flower stage 12a, 12b; c3a, c3s: flower stage 12c- <dig>  c1a, c2a, c3a: apomictic carpels; c1s, c2s, c3s: sexual carpels. s: stamens at flower stages 11- <dig>  sp: sepals and petals at flower stages 11- <dig> 



the expression levels of genes involved in determination of cell and ovule identity was tested in apomictic and sexual pistils in order to investigate differences between meiotic and aposporic gametophyte development. in particular, we studied the expression of key genes involved in the generation and activity of small rnas and putatively involved in the determination of cell identity in pre-meiotic and meiotic ovules . the expression data of hprdr <dig> and hpsgs <dig>  two genes involved in the sirna formation in plants, did not show any differential pattern between apomictic and sexual pistils . noteworthy, hpago <dig>  which is implicated in the development and maintenance of mmc identity in the arabidopsis ovule, was down-regulated at early stages and up-regulated at late stages of pistil development in apomictic genotypes compared to sexual ones . some genes potentially involved in ovule and cell identity, like hpino, did not reveal any differential expression between sexual and apomictic genotypes. other genes potentially involved in cell identity, including hpant and hpbel <dig>  were down-regulated at early and late stages of pistil development in apomictic genotypes . the expression data of hpdmc <dig> , hpmnd and hpms <dig> did show that these three genes are down-regulated in apomictic genotypes at early and late stages of pistil development . while hpdmc <dig>  was differentially expressed between sexual and apomictic pistils, the related hpdmc <dig>  was expressed at comparable levels in apomict and sexual pistils .

two hypericum argonaute homologs of atago <dig>  both involved in megaspore selection and embryo sac development in arabidopsis, showed no significant differences in expression levels between apomictic and sexual pistils . concerning genes that in arabidopsis control dna methylation in sporophytic and gamethophytic tissues, hpdme <dig> was found up-regulated in apomictic genotypes at early and late stages of pistil development, and to a lower extent also hpdme <dig> was found up-regulated in apomictic genotypes . in addition, hpmet <dig> proved to be down-regulated in apomictic genotypes compared to sexual ones at both stages of pistil development . the expression of several genes that are involved in embryo sac and embryo, and endosperm development  was also tested in the same set of pistils from sexual and apomictic genotypes . it is worth mentioning that both hpserk <dig> and hpserk <dig> were differentially expressed in genotypes with antagonist reproductive features, being down-regulated at early and late stages of pistil development in apomictic genotypes . moreover, with the only exception of hpdvpe and hpila, whose expression in pistils appeared to differ in apomictic and sexual genotypes at late developmental stages, most of the tested genes did not reveal expression changes . the two genes hpmyb <dig> and hpagl <dig>  known in arabidopsis to be specifically expressed in ovule domains including the embryo sac and the endothelium, were found similarly expressed in apomictic and sexual pistils .figure  <dig> 
expression analysis of genes involved in gametogenesis, and embryo and embryo sac development. quantitative real-time pcr results for a number of genes selected on the basis of their annotation and potentially involved in gametogenesis  and embryo and endosperm development . gene expression values are expressed in arbitrary units normalized against the level of expression detected in sepals and petals . c1a, c1s: flower stage 11; c2a, c2s: flower stage 12a, 12b; c3a, c3s: flower stage 12c- <dig>  c1a, c2a, c3a: apomictic carpels; c1s, c2s, c3s: sexual carpels. s: stamens at flower stages 11- <dig>  sp: sepals and petals at flower stages 11- <dig> 



computational investigation of flower and seed-related genes based on arabidopsis microarray-based reference transcriptome
the possibility to discover additional genes involved in molecular pathways leading flower and seed development was addressed by comparative approaches focused on a. thaliana flower and seed transcriptomes as references . to do so we created an arabidopsis microarray-based reference transcriptome, based on the expression data of  <dig> published microarray experiments performed in a. thaliana by using flower tissues at developmental stages preceding pollination . in addition to these, the microarray-based reference transcriptome was enriched with the data of  <dig> publically available microarray experiments performed on a. thaliana pollinated flowers and seeds  .

based on the published data of the a. thaliana microarrays, our reference dataset contained  <dig>  genes expressed in at least one of the microarray experiments considered in our study, irrespectively of their expression values . this reference dataset was used to set the architecture of pollinated and non-pollinated flowers in mapman. on the other side, based on our blastx results, we could use approximately 60% and 63% of genes expressed in the a. thaliana flower and seed  as they produced significant matches with one or multiple hypericum unigenes .table  <dig> 
coverage estimates of the
hypericum
flower transcriptome by comparative analysis with
arabidopsis
data



plant organ 
experiments 
database size 
hits 
hits with array elements that are not expressed in the specific experiments 
the transcriptome coverage was estimated by comparing annotated hypericum sequences with publically available arabidopsis microarray data . for each plant component, such as flower and seed, the number of microarray experiments and replicates that were used to estimate the size of each database are reported. the recovered hits indicate the number  of database sequences that matched hypericum accessions. for each plant component, the number of array elements that are not expressed in the specific experiments , but that produced significant matches with hypericum sequences is also reported.



we found that  <dig> hypericum transcripts were expressed only before pollination in the arabidopsis flower . using the same approach, we could detect  <dig> hypericum unigenes, which appeared to be expressed upon fertilization in arabidopsis flowers . interestingly, a number of hypericum unigenes were shown to be specific to certain seed structures in arabidopsis . this was the case of hpagl80/fem <dig>  and hpemb <dig> , whose arabidopsis putative orthologs appeared to be expressed in the arabidopsis endosperm.

an overview of metabolic and regulative pathways active during flower development was defined by mapping the hypericum flower unigenes to the metabolic and regulative environments defined by mapman . particular emphasis was given to the maps: cell regulation overview and cellular response pathways . a total of  <dig> apomictic-specific and  <dig> sexual-specific gene transcripts, whose expression was restricted to hypericum flowers, had homologues in the arabidopsis flower transcriptome . sixty-five hypericum unigenes matched arabidopsis seed-specific genes  whose annotations were related to the following categories: transcription factors , protein modification  and degradation , receptor kinases , as well as the synthesis and metabolism of hormones . among the genes related to seed development in arabidopsis, the homolog of the b <dig> family transcription factor at1g <dig> was uniquely present in the sexual libraries in h. perforatum . similarly, the expression of the homolog of the embryo-specific zinc-finger transcription factor at5g <dig> , which is required for heart-stage embryo formation in the arabidopsis seed, was present in the apomictic, but not in sexual carpels .

discussion
de novo sequencing and assembly of the hypericum flower transcriptome
h. perforatum l. is a medicinal plant with reproductive behavior ranging from highly or nearly obligate apomixis  to complete sexuality  in natural populations  <cit> . even though h. perforatum is not a traditional model system for plant biology studies, it is a suitable system for the study of apomeiosis and parthenogenesis . to do so, we approached the flower transcriptome with two sequencing efforts conceived for better understanding how and where differential gene expression occurs between both reproductive forms. hence, we sequenced cdna collected from single flower organs  at different stages of flower development, and linked these data to rnaseq data from whole flowers collected from two different obligately-sexual genotypes and two different highly-apomictic genotypes. these efforts led to the assembly of  <dig>  million sequence reads to produce  <dig>  unigenes, which proved to be a valuable tool for the study of the hypericum flower transcriptome. starting from these data, we were able to annotate and characterize  <dig>  transcripts found expressed in male and/or female reproductive organs, including tissues or cells of sexual and apomictic flower buds. our approach of sequencing flowers from two fully obligate sexual genotypes and two unrelated highly apomictic genotypes, in addition to different flower parts dissected from a facultatively-apomictic accession, enabled us to approach the complexity of the flower transcriptome according to its main reproductive organs as well as for alternative reproductive behaviors.

the assembly of such a large number of unigenes provided the possibility of testing for the presence of alternative alleles or splicing variants that could have been sequenced and assembled independently. to verify this thesis we investigated the unigenes aligning to the genomic region comprised in the bac sequence hm <dig>  and surrounding the happy locus  <cit> . nine genes included in the bac clone aligned to multiple unigenes sequenced from the flower libraries. despite being sufficiently dissimilar to escape the assembly procedure, the fact that multiple unigenes aligned to the same region could indicate the sequencing of alternative alleles or splicing variants. this could be the case of the bac regions encoding for the gene products wrky, dgcr and ari <dig>  as well as exp <dig>  riml and pg. findings of nucleotide substitutions concentrated in the 3’-end of the alignments in at least 50% of investigated regions could be an additional clue that analyzed snps are robust and not attributable to sequencing artifacts.

on average, the nucleotide diversity of multiple unigenes mapping to the genomic window surrounding the happy locus  <cit>  was comparable to that estimated for the its regions used as external reference  <cit> . despite the limitation due to the absence of mapping and quantitative expression data, the finding of nucleotide diversity shared by unigenes and genomic reference stretches comparable to the extent showed by its regions suggests that most of the unigenes may resemble allele variants rather than long-lasting duplicated genes . we are aware that coverage provided by the technology used in the study is lower than that recommended for robust variant detection analysis  <cit> , and hence our estimates of nucleotide diversity could be affected by the presence of undetected of sequencing errors. nevertheless, if we consider that the error rate is dependent on the sequencing method, its distribution across all loci of the bac clone would be substantially uniform. hence, we believe that our finding that unigenes aligning on ari7-like displayed a nucleotide diversity largely exceeding that calculated on the surrounding regions of the bac clone  is worth mentioning. this finding is interesting as we consider that ari <dig> contains the actual marker co-segregating with apospory in h. perforatum and is among those few genes predicted from hm <dig>  .

finally, taking into account the low genetic diversity existing within unigenes and cds predicted from the bac clone hm <dig> , the finding of alignment variants displaying the insertion or deletion of gene sequence traits in the unigenes provides a first indication for the presence of splice variants in sequences encoded by genes surrounding the happy locus . the allelic nature of these unigenes will be eventually confirmed by the availability of mapping data.

genes related to plant reproductive organs and seed formation
de novo sequencing of the h. perforatum flower transcriptome was attempted to identify genes related to plant reproduction, including transcripts specifically or preferentially expressed in anthers and/or pistils, and possibly differentially expressed between sexual and asexual meiosis and gametogenesis. computational in silico annotation of flower transcripts provided us with an insight into the molecular mechanisms of various biological processes, including meiosis and gametogenesis.

particular attention was paid to the annotation of genes important for cell specification  <cit>  and genes whose mutants affect gametophyte development  <cit> . the orthologs of genes whose products are possibly involved in restricting cell-fate in ovules or gametophytes were detected . genes that are involved in regulation of the correct number of cell divisions occurring during megagametogenesis   <cit>  or the correct positioning of nuclei within the embryo sac   <cit>  were also detected in our datasets. accordingly, transcripts whose expression are thought to be crucial for selection of the functional megaspore and its cell identity   <cit> , or those involved in proper specification of gametes and cell fates, including lis  <cit> , clo  <cit>  and ato  <cit> , were sequenced and annotated.

overall, these findings demonstrated that our approach could successfully identify gene products whose expression is associated with ovule and seed development, and restricted to a few number of cells  <cit> . for example, we were able to identify the homolog of myb <dig> , which in arabidopsis is expected predominantly in the synergid cells and is considered to be critical for synergid differentiation in this species  <cit> . it is remarkable that hpmyb <dig>  a gene associated with proper differentiation of synergid cells  <cit> , was characterized by high levels of expression variation  in the pistils collected at late developmental stages from apomictic accessions . as the sexuals and apomicts compared here were of identical ploidy, elevated gene expression variation in apomicts could be consistent with a number of factors including genetic background differences between genotypes  <cit> , trans-acting regulatory variation in the hybrids or genomic differences having arisen due to sexuality versus apomixis  <cit> . assuming that pcr efficiency was comparable in the different tissues, the high level of variation recorded in apomictic pistils at stages of late gametogenesis could be the result of spatial or temporal mis-expression of some components of the genetic pathways acting during gametogenesis.

the orthologs of genes that were previously associated with seed and endosperm abortion and anomalies in zygote development, including iaa32/mee <dig>  dvpe, ilithyia, serk <dig> and serk <dig> among others  <cit> , were sequenced and studied in greater details by rt-qpcr. quantitative expression studies demonstrated that apomictic and sexual pistils have different relative abundance of transcripts encoded by these genes . the finding that multiple genes that are involved in seed and endosperm development are differentially expressed between sexual and apomictic pistils implies that entire reproductive gene pathways are modulated in their timing and levels during apomictic development.

validation using rt-qpcr assays confirmed that hpmet <dig>  <cit>  and hpdme  <cit>  are differentially expressed among the different flower parts  while only hpmet <dig> appeared to be differentially expressed in apomictic and sexual pistils at developmental stages corresponding to gametogenesis. in arabidopsis met <dig> absence leads to removal of the silencing methylation marks and the expression of genes  involved in the regulation of endosperm development  <cit> . accordingly,  <cit>  reported that met <dig> is implicated in the repression of endosperm development in the absence of fertilization in arabidopsis  <cit> , while  <cit>  provided data in support of the idea that a dna methylation pathway in maize likely plays a critical role in the differentiation between apomictic and sexual reproduction. hence, the reduction in the expression of hpmet <dig> in apomictic pistils further support that variations of dna methylation marks might be linked to gametophyte development in apomictic h. perforatum.

identification and expression analysis of candidate genes for apomixis
apomixis, a form of asexual seed production is characterized by i) meiotically-unreduced egg cell formation ; ii) development of an embryo without the fertilization of the egg cell ; and iii) endosperm development with  or without  fertilization of the central cell  <cit> .

the most abundant go terms found associated with the unigenes differentially expressed between sexual and apomictic accessions were those associated with transport, response to stress, biotic and abiotic stimuli, and dna metabolic process and dna binding . the number of enriched go terms specifically related to plant reproduction  was relatively low in either sexual or apomictic genotypes . nevertheless, our findings that unigenes found only in sexual or apomictic libraries were annotated as cell cycle, cell growth, cell differentiation, as well as embryonic and post-embryonic development  could provide some additional indications supporting the hypothesis that apomixis relies upon spatial or temporal mis-expression of genes acting during female sexual reproduction  <cit> . hence a better understanding of the genetic mechanisms underpinning the switch from sexual to apomictic reproductive strategies could be greatly facilitated by the study of genes primarily involved in the normal progression of sporogenesis, gametogenesis and embryo development. in light of this, we examined whether apomictic seed development was characterized by expression by genes known to be important for the regular progression of gametogenesis and seed development in sexual plants.

one critical finding was the observation that gene products involved in cell differentiation and cell growth, as well as embryonic and post-embryonic development were overrepresented in the two sexual libraries . a closer expression analysis of multiple genes involved in meiosis  or megaspore selection  indicates a relative decrease in mrna abundance in apomictic pistils . the analysis of two distinct hpdmc1-like unigenes indicated that their respective mrnas had contrasting expression patterns, and while hpdmc1b shows clear differential expression in all considered developmental stages of the pistil, the expression of hpdmc1a is similarly expressed in both apomictic and sexual pistils . since cytological and cytometric data  <cit>  indicate that apomictic plants in h. perforatum are characterized by a low occurrence of reduced embryo sacs, the decreased expression of critical genes for normal progression of meiosis supports the hypothesis that apospory in this species could be associated to a low rate of successful meiosis.

it has been hypothesized that the molecular switch from sex to apomixis is associated with gene-specific silencing mechanisms associated with chromatin remodeling factors or trans-acting and heterochromatic interfering rnas involved in both transcriptional and post-transcriptional gene regulation  <cit> . recently, a specific route for cell specification and embryo sac development was proposed to occur through the action of different argonaute  genes in arabidopsis  <cit>  and maize  <cit> . similarly, mutations in rdr <dig> or sgs <dig>  two genes involved in the small rna pathway, are known to result in a relaxation of gametic cell identity and fate in the ovule, leading to changes in cell fate of somatic initials in the nucellar tissue, which differentiate into gametic cells without undergoing meiosis and which can furthermore initiate female gametogenesis through the activation of tes  <cit> . the rt-qpcr analyses performed here did not demonstrate differences in the abundance of rdr <dig> and sgs <dig> in sexual and apomictic pistils collected at developmental stages spanning female meiosis and gametogenesis . similarly, no significant differences were detected in the expression of hpago <dig> in the same plant tissues . alternatively, since rt-qpcr analyses were performed on whole pistils, we cannot exclude the possibility that small expression differences consistent with gene expression in specific cell types of the ovule might have been lost. this could to be the case of hpago <dig>  whose expression in arabidopsis is expected in the nucellus, where it activates a non-cell autonomous mechanism by promoting the initiation of gametogenesis in the functional megaspore.

our rt-qpcr data indicated that mrna levels of hpago <dig> are significantly decreased in apomictic pistils at the earlier developmental stages . reduced expression of hpago <dig> in pistils retaining a high level of apospory is noteworthy since ago <dig> is involved in restricting the acquisition of gametophyte cell fate in the sub-epidermal layer of the ovule nucellus in arabidopsis  <cit> , and the phenotype documented for ago <dig> arabidopsis plants is remarkably similar to the aposporic gametophyte development  <cit> .

such considerations of the expression and activity of srnas and non-coding rnas would support the idea that the coding fraction of the transcriptome could be only one side of the coin, and that small and non-coding rna sequences could represent a meaningful component yet to be fully understood in the frame of gametes and seeds development.

CONCLUSIONS
the availability of ngs technologies is raising the ease at which complex phenotypes and processes in non-model organisms can be analyzed as a consequence of the increased of throughput and availability of reference dna and rna datasets. in our study we were able to annotate and characterize  <dig>  transcripts found expressed in male and/or female reproductive organs, including tissues or cells of sexual and apomictic flower buds. our approach of sequencing whole flowers at different developmental stages from two fully obligate sexual genotypes and two unrelated highly apomictic genotypes, in addition to different flower parts dissected from a facultatively apomictic accession, enabled us to analyze the complexity of the flower transcriptome according to its main reproductive organs  as well as for alternative reproductive behaviors .

our findings that unigenes found only in sexual or apomictic libraries were annotated as cell cycle, cell growth, cell differentiation, as well as embryonic and post-embryonic development provided additional indications supporting the hypothesis that apomixis relies upon spatial or temporal mis-expression of genes acting during female sexual reproduction. this hypothesis is further strengthened by our rt-qpcr data, demonstrating that genes expressed in sporophytic and gametophytic cell types and primarily involved in the normal progression of sporogenesis, gametogenesis and embryo development are differentially expressed between apomictic and sexual pistils.

overall, the results collected in this research represent a critical step toward a better understanding of the genetic and molecular mechanisms leading to gametophyte and gamete determination and development in our model species, in either sexual or apomictic plant genotypes. data presented here pave the way for whole transcriptome studies aimed at the identification and definition of transcriptome changes associated with the development of male and female reproductive organs by giving particular emphasis to meiosis, the formation of gametes and, more generally, to the processes associated with plant reproduction and seed formation in h. perforatum.

