BACKGROUND
the intron is a nucleotide sequence that is transcribed from the genome but finally removed in the process of maturation of the transcribed rna. the process of intron removal is called rna splicing. nuclear  introns are abundant in most eukaryotes and are processed by the machinery known as spliceosomes. in this article, we confine our attention to this type of intron. other types of introns, known as group i and group ii introns, are present in some archaea, bacteria, viruses, and plant and fungal organelles and are processed by auto-catalytic machineries  <cit> . under normal circumstances, splicing occurs only between the 5' and 3' ends of the intron on the same transcript, although exceptional trans-splicing is also observed in some organisms  <cit> . the basic process of splicing is conserved among eukaryotic species. three signals, the 5' splice site , the 3' splice site  and the branch point , are commonly used to directly conduct splicing  <cit> . another characteristic sequence is the polypyrimidine tract  that is located between bp and 3'ss, and is rich in pyrimidine bases. bp lies at less than dozens of nucleotides upstream of the ppt sequence. bp provides the means by which 3'ss is identified. in addition, broadly distributed exonic and intronic splicing enhancers/silencers are also involved in the correct recognition and regulation of a particular pair of 5'ss and 3'ss to be spliced. besides these signal sequences that are directly involved in splicing, other features are also related to intron recognition, including intron length and nucleotide composition within the intron  <cit> .

although the basic ability of eukaryotes to splice introns has remained conserved throughout evolution  <cit> , the splicing signals have considerably differentiated  <cit> , eventually to the degree that the splicing mechanisms of remotely related organisms are incompatible with each other. for example, animal introns are not properly recognized in transfected plant cells  <cit> . similarly, most mammalian introns are not recognized by the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae  <cit> . it is naturally hypothesized that the incompatibility is due to disparate changes in the splicing signals and their corresponding splicing factors. for example, ppt, which is recognized by u2af <dig> protein factor, shows highly variable lengths and signal strengths among species; although there is a certain bias for pyrimidines toward the 3' end of the intron among all organisms, this signal is weak among most fungi, stronger in plants and protozoans, and by far the strongest in vertebrates  <cit> . it is also known that the bp signal recognized by sf <dig> protein factor is highly conserved in yeast but variable in higher eukaryotes, although eukaryotes have a preference for purines or pyrimidines at each position and retain the target "a" nucleotide  <cit> .

it is important to investigate the conservation and variation of features relevant to splicing throughout the evolution of eukaryotes from two points of view. first, it provides us fundamental knowledge of the evolution of this very complicated cellular process that involves many factors and their recognition sites. second, the quantitative characterization of these features is indispensable for the development of accurate and efficient computational tools for gene recognition from the genomic sequence  <cit> . a few studies have been conducted along these lines  <cit>  with a relatively small number of species. however, more comprehensive studies on a much wider range of eukaryotic taxa are now feasible as many sequences of complete or nearly complete genomes together with their transcripts have become available.

in this study, we characterized and analyzed splicing signals in  <dig> eukaryotic species. first, we analyzed the evolutionary relationships of individual splicing features. we found that the five evolutionary trees thus constructed  roughly reflect the phylogenetic relationships among the species but sometimes extensively deviate from the species tree. second, we measured the relative contributions of the five splicing features to recognize correct splicing pairs of short introns by means of a method similar to that used by lim and burge  <cit> . by comparing the relative contributions of these splicing features, we determined similarities in the short intron recognition pattern among the  <dig> species. the results again show that there is some correlation between the relationships thus estimated and the species tree, although great deviations are also often observed. these results indicate that the rna splicing mechanism is rapidly evolving in some lineages. when confined to mammals, the overall pattern of intron recognition is well conserved. in particular, we found that the gt-ag, gc-ag, and at-ac subtypes of introns form independent categories among all the introns in mammals.

RESULTS
basic characteristics of intron data
we classified introns into three subtypes according to their terminal dinucleotide sequences. gt-ag introns represented  <dig> %, gc-ag introns,  <dig> %, and at-ac introns,  <dig> % of ca.  <dig>  ×  <dig> introns examined. however, these fractions show considerable variation among organisms . the fractions of gc-ag introns in aureococcus anophagefferens  and micromonas pusilla  are exceptionally high, respectively accounting for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of all introns of the species. the high g + c contents of the genomic sequences of these species may be related to these observations. in fact, the genomic g + c content of a. anophagefferens is  <dig> % and that of m. pusilla is  <dig> %, which are the highest and the third highest among the  <dig> species examined, respectively. the fraction of gc-ag introns in chlorella sp. with the second highest genomic g + c content is  <dig> % and the third highest among the  <dig> species. thus, it seems apparent that the high genomic g + c content is responsible for the high fraction of gc-ag introns. however, there must be other factors that affect the abundance of gc-ag introns, as the correlation between the genomic g + c content and the fraction of gc-ag introns is rather weak except for these three species as shown in figure  <dig>  moreover, the gc-ag fraction  of micromonas rcc <dig>  another picophytoplankton, is not as remarkable as that of m. pusilla despite their close taxonomic relationship and its relatively high genomic g + c content .

the fraction of at-ac introns is small in all species. although caenorhabditis elegans seems to lack snrnas u <dig>  u <dig>  and u4atac that comprise u12-type spliceosomes  <cit> , our automated procedure  identified  <dig> at-ac introns in c. elegans . by manually inspecting the alignments, we suspect that at least  <dig> of them are real at-ac introns, while the others can be non-canonical ones. the observed at-ac introns are probably processed by u2-type spliceosomes in this species.

we aggregated intron length data separately for each species and for each of the three subtypes of introns. however, no significant difference was observed in intron lengths categorized into the two subtypes of gt-ag and gc-ag in each species. as the contributions of at-ac type introns are negligible, we used the combined data in the following analyses. more primitive organisms tend to have shorter average lengths of introns, as has been often documented  <cit> . homo sapiens has the longest  average intron length and fungal phanerochaete chrysosporium has the shortest  one among the  <dig> species. when sorted by average intron length in descending order, all highly ranked species are occupied by animals , in particular, by mammals within animals . by contrast, lower ranked species are mostly fungi .

additional file  <dig> shows the percentage of introns having ppt, the average ppt length, and the percentage of pyrimidine nucleotides in ppts for each species . ppts are detectable in more than 99% of mammalian introns. both average ppt length and c + t content within ppt are well conserved among mammals: the average ppt length is approximately  <dig> bp and the average c + t content is approximately 87%. mammals have the longest ppt and the highest c + t content within ppt among the six groups defined in methods. the general features are conserved in other vertebrates, but become gradually divergent when we look at other metazoan species. outside animals, particularly in fungi and protists, ppts tend to shrink and have relatively low average c + t contents.

we analyzed the classical splicing signal motifs for each organism. the results of seven representative species from six groups, h. sapiens, danio rerio, drosophila melanogaster, p. chrysosporium, s. cerevisiae, phaeodactylum tricornutum, and arabidopsis thaliana shown in figure  <dig> reveal well-known motif profiles. although resembling one another, the motif profiles exhibit some specificity. for example, the preference of g for the +  <dig> position of 5'ss is very strong in fungi but marginal in plants. moreover, the motif profile of bp is highly conserved in s. cerevisiae and p. chrysosporium but less remarkably conserved in the other species. in this way, the motif profiles are characteristic to species or groups.

we also calculated the information contents of the motif profiles of all species as described in methods, and summarize the results in additional file  <dig>  from the viewpoint of information contents, the same tendency as that in the motif profiles could be observed. for example, in mammals, the information contents of 3'ss are high but those of bp are low, whereas the inverse applies to fungi . the information content of bp of s. cerevisiae is the highest of all the  <dig> species. when examined for all the  <dig> species, the information contents of 3'ss and bp show a strong negative correlation, whereas those of 3'ss and the percentage of ppt-containing introns show a strong positive correlation . these observations are in good agreement with the qualitative pattern of the motif profiles shown in figure  <dig> 

trees of  <dig> species constructed from individual intron features
we took up five features that are related to intron recognition as mentioned in methods. for each feature, we calculated the distance between a pair of species and built a dendrogram  of the  <dig> species using those distances . as stated in the previous subsection, considerably variable motif profiles could be observed for individual species. we naturally suspected that each lineage has a similar tendency with respect to a particular feature. this is in fact the case for the nine mammalian species; the mammalian species occupy nearby positions in all the five feature trees. the concordance between species tree and feature tree is most prominent for 5'ss, representing nearly monophyletic appearances among various animal phyla, among land plants, and among fungi. this tendency gradually weakens for 3'ss, intron length, bp, and oligomer composition in this order. remarkably, the feature tree for intron length does not show monophyletic topology even among mammals, suggesting the rapid evolutionary change of this feature.

feature trees of mammalian species
for the nine mammalian species, we classified the introns into three subtypes according to their terminal dinucleotide sequences. this is feasible as considerably large amounts of data are available for most of the nine mammalian species. we then made profiles for individual subtypes and features, calculated the distance matrices, and constructed a dendrogram for each feature. as the number of at-ac introns is small, we could not fit the observed length distribution of at-ac introns to a superposition of two frechet distributions  <cit> . hence, we did not construct the feature tree for length distributions of at-ac introns.

as shown in figure  <dig>  gt-ag, gc-ag, and at-ac introns form respectively monophyletic groups in the feature tree for 5'ss across the mammalian species. note that the difference in the terminal dinucleotides was disregarded in calculation of the distances. a similar topology was also observed in the 3'ss profiles although gc-ag introns are not perfectly monophyletic. it is rather surprising that gt-ag and gc-ag introns form separate quasi-monophyletic groups, albeit their sharing the same 3' terminal dinucleotides. this observation probably reflects the mechanism in which 5'ss and 3'ss cooperate to find specific counterparts in the process of splicing.

it is obvious that at-ac 5'ss and 3'ss boundary signals are clearly distinct from those of the other subtypes. this difference is certainly related to the fact that at-ac introns are mainly processed by u12-type spliceosomes, whereas gy-ag introns are mainly processed by u2-type spliceosomes. it is reported that u12-type spliceosomes can also process gy-ag introns  <cit>  and conversely, u2-type spliceosomes can potentially process at-ac introns. although some operational rules were proposed to discriminate u12-type and u2-type introns based on sequence characteristics  <cit> , we did not distinguish u2-type and u12-type introns, as we considered that more experimental verification would be needed to apply the rules to a large volume of data obtained from diverse species. we will return to this issue later in discussion.

the feature tree for bp motif shows that at-ac introns form a monophyletic group, while gt-ag and gc-ag introns are not clearly separated from each other. this observation is consistent with the report that u12-type introns possess a well-conserved bp motif  <cit> .

for the other feature, oligomer composition, the terminal dinucleotide types are even less correlated with the branching patterns of the feature trees. for oligomer composition, the same species rather than the same terminal dinucleotide type tend to make a cluster.

the above observations suggest that gt-ag, gc-ag, and at-ac introns comprise distinct functional groups that are conserved among various mammals. the 5'ss and 3'ss signals are most influential and bp may also be involved in the functional differentiation. in contrast, the contribution of the other features is minimal.

relative contributions of intron features to short intron recognition
to study the individual contributions of various intron features, we examined only short introns, because long introns are likely to be recognized by much more complicated mechanisms than the five features considered here. for example, exonic and intronic splicing enhancers/silencers, secondary structure of pre-mrna, and epigenetic modulation of coding genes are likely to be involved in exon and intron definition mechanisms  <cit>  but are out of consideration in this investigation. the histograms of intron lengths revealed the presence of distinct populations of short introns in individual organisms. by fitting the observed length distribution to a superposition of two frechet distributions  <cit> , we might be able to determine the natural cutoff length for short introns for each species . however, the varying cutoff lengths would introduce additional variability to our analysis and hence, we preferred to use a fixed value as the threshold of short and long introns. to determine the threshold, we averaged the short intron distributions of the  <dig> species and defined the threshold as  <dig> bp, which is the 95% quantile of the average distribution. the total numbers of short introns determined by this procedure are listed in additional file  <dig>  the fraction of introns classified as short is approximately 15% in mammals. by contrast, high fractions exceeding 80% are often found in fungi and protists.

to analyze the contributions of the five features to the recognition of short introns, we employed a variant of the method of lim and burge  <cit>  . note that the features used for the analysis were obtained not only from short introns but from all introns of a species. in this analysis, the amount of contribution of each feature is estimated from the gain in intron recognition accuracy achieved by that feature. additional file  <dig> shows the amount of contribution of each feature in each species and additional file  <dig> shows the absolute and fractional values measured in bits in each species. the sum of the relative contributions of 5'ss and 3'ss exceeds 50% in most species. the contribution of bp is generally low. the contribution of intron length is also generally low except for fungi and plants, which have significantly higher contributions than the other groups . a. anophagefferens has the highest fraction  of information deficit among the species. by contrast, the fraction of information deficit is the smallest  in dictyostelium discoideum. when the  <dig> species are sorted by the information bit score of the information deficit, the nine mammals and the  <dig> vertebrates are ranked high , indicating that the intron splicing of higher eukaryotes requires more information other than the five features, compared with splicing in the other species.

as the relative contributions of the features including information deficit vary considerably among species, we conducted cluster analyses of the patterns of these contributions among the  <dig> species. we tried the k-means clustering method. prior to applying this method, we used principal component analysis  to obtain the first and second principal components , and then ran self-organization map  on this coordinate system. as the som resulted in six major clusters , we specified six as the number of clusters in the k-means clustering method. figure  <dig> shows the results of the k-means clustering method applied to the  <dig> species. in cluster , the ratio of information deficit is large, amounting to nearly 40%. concomitantly, the fractions of bp, intron length, and oligomer composition are relatively small. cluster  resembles cluster  except for the significant contribution of oligomer composition . in cluster , the contribution of intron length is considerably large while that of information deficit is relatively small. cluster  is rather uncharacteristic; here, the five features moderately contribute to intron recognition, leaving an information deficit of approximately 20%. cluster  is the smallest cluster and is composed of only one species, a. anophagefferens. the ratio of information deficit is the largest of the six clusters. this is probably related to the unusually high fraction of gc-ag introns found in this species as mentioned earlier in this section. in the last cluster , the contribution of oligomer composition is the largest and the percentage of information deficit is the smallest among the six clusters.

of the six k-means clusters, some are well characterized by specific groups of species. for example, cluster  consists of  <dig> species,  <dig> of which are fungi, while two fungal species phycomyces blakesleeanus and s. cerevisiae are outside this cluster. we also found that all vertebrates except xenopus tropicalis belong to cluster , and all chordata except branchiostoma florida belong to cluster  or cluster . likewise, five land plants belong to cluster  or cluster ; populus trichocarpa and vitis vinifera are in cluster , and sorghum bicolor, oryza sativa, and a. thaliana are in cluster . thus, evolutionarily close species tend to use similar strategies for intron recognition.

however, it should also be noted that every cluster except cluster  consists of more than one group of species of distant evolutionary origins. for example, clusters , , , and  individually contain both animal and plant species. from the distribution of plant species over the clusters, we speculate that plants have adopted divergent strategies for intron recognition in the course of evolution.

discussion
this work involves large-scale computational analysis of pre-mrna splicing that has been enabled by taking advantage of recent progress in massive genomic and transcriptomic sequencing efforts. our analysis is unique in that it uses only experimentally verified, high quality, and least redundant data collected by the use of our own mapping and alignment tool, spaln  <cit> . note that spaln is one of the most accurate alignment tools currently available  <cit> , and reportedly outperforms tools that are used for annotation in major databases, such as ncbi  <cit>  or ensembl  <cit> .

our observations are largely consistent with and reinforces those reported previously  <cit>  with respect to the following points.

first, the five features that are involved in intron recognition are differentially conserved in the evolution of eukaryotes; 5'ss and 3'ss motifs are better conserved than bp, intron length, and oligomer composition. on one hand, this is revealed by the larger values of the information contents of 5'ss and 3'ss motifs than those of bp  and the other features. on the other hand, this tendency is also shown by the persistence of individual features across various species. to measure the degree of evolutionary persistence of the five features, we built a dendrogram using the distances between species with respect to each of the five features, and then evaluated how much the feature trees deviate from the species classification. as shown in figure  <dig>  the information contents of the motifs that reflect intra-species conservation are well correlated with the inter-species evolutionary persistence of the corresponding features. in this study, we used phylogenetic trees derived from 18s rrnas and u <dig> snrnas as reference. although we also examined u <dig> snrna sequences, the results are omitted here as the structures of fungal u <dig> rnas extremely deviate from those of the other groups  <cit> .

second, ppt signals and bp signals compensate each other. typically, mammals have strong ppt signals and weak bp signals, while the opposite is true in fungi. this compensating effect is further confirmed in other phyla of eukaryotes, as revealed by the strong negative correlation between ppt and bp signals . like schwartz and silva et al.  <cit> , we also found a gradual increase in ppt signal strength along the metazoan lineages ; protists and fungi have short ppts and low c + t contents in ppt, whereas mammals have the longest ppts and the highest c + t contents in ppt among the six groups. insects and chordata other than mammals have intermediate strengths with regard to these properties. in protists, ppts are short but c + t contents are high, whereas ppts are long but c + t contents are low in plants. thus, ppt signals are ubiquitous but evolutionarily variable in both strength and constitution.

third, some correlation is observed between the relative contributions of the splicing features to intron recognition and the genealogical relationships among the species. typically, mammals and vertebrates exhibit similar patterns. however, the correlation seems to be valid for relatively small groups of species. we evaluated the contribution of each feature with a variant of the method of lim and burge  <cit> . our method differs from that of lim and burge in two major points:  choice of the threshold between short and long introns, and  collection of false exon-intron junctions. these modifications are necessary to automate large-scale comparisons with as little bias and noise as possible. the large average number of false junctions  relative to a true one tends to complicate our examinations, which leads to relatively large fractions of information deficits. moreover, some of the false junctions may actually be real ones if alternative splicing is taken into account. thus, there remains considerable room for improvement in the quantitative evaluation of the relative contributions of various features to intron recognition.

for the nine species of mammals, we classified the introns into three subtypes according to their terminal dinucleotide sequences. we constructed feature trees for each of the three subtypes of introns. figure  <dig> shows that gt-ag, gc-ag, and at-ac introns form respectively monophyletic groups in the feature tree for 5'ss. the feature tree for 3'ss also shows quasi-monophyletic groups between gt-ag and gc-ag introns. these results indicate that in rna splicing, gt-ag and gc-ag introns use distinct 5'ss and 3'ss motif profiles despite the identical 3' end dinucleotides "ag". at-ac 5'ss and 3'ss boundary signals are clearly distinct from those of the other subtypes.

at-ac introns are generally considered to be the u <dig> type  <cit> . to better characterize this minor type of introns, we investigated at-ac introns in five species, h. sapiens, mus musculus, d. melanogaster, a. thaliana, and o. sativa, whose genomic sequences are of high quality. figure  <dig> shows 5'ss and bp motif profiles constructed from only at-ac introns in these species. the observed motif profiles of 5'ss for the five species, in particular o. sativa, are consistent with the previously reported consensus sequence of u12-type introns "atatcc"  <cit> . the motif profiles of bp even better match the reported consensus sequence of u12-type introns "ccttaac"  <cit> . we employed the weight matrix approach  <cit>  to identify u12-type introns among at-ac introns. the empirically derived rules were  5'ss motif scores >  <dig> bits,  bp motif scores >  <dig> bits, and  intron lengths <  <dig> kb, where the weight matrix was constructed from a set of  <dig> experimentally verified u12-type introns  <cit> . the results summarized in additional file  <dig> somewhat underestimate the frequencies of at-ac u12-type introns relative to those of all introns, compared with the results of sheth and roca et al.  <cit> . in our analysis, more than half of the at-ac introns satisfied the bp motif criterion in human, while only approximately 30% of the at-ac introns satisfied the 5'ss motif criterion. similar tendencies were also observed for the other species except d. melanogaster . we speculate that the threshold of  <dig> bits for the 5'ss motif score is too high, and the fraction of u12-type introns among at-ac introns would actually be larger than the present estimates. however, more detailed experimental studies would be necessary to confirm this idea.

the origin of the exceptionally abundant gc-ag introns in a. anophagefferens and m. pusilla is an enigma. to see some peculiarity in the splicing machinery of these species, we retrieved putative snrna u <dig> genes from the genomic sequences of these two species and another picophytoplankton, m. rcc <dig>  as reference. despite the high overall genomic g + c contents, a. anophagefferens, m. pusilla, and m. rcc <dig> putative u <dig> rnas have g + c contents of  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> %, respectively, which are comparable to the average  of  <dig> u <dig> rnas represented in the rfam rf00003_seed alignment. the three putative u <dig> rnas have the same 5'-terminal 11-nucleotide sequence that is perfectly identical to the consensus "auacuuaccug" that is directly involved in base pairing with the pre-mrna donor site  <cit> . m. pusilla and m. rcc <dig> putative u <dig> rnas exhibit  <dig> % nucleotide identities in their entire ranges of  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides, and these two sequences are equally divergent  from the a. anophagefferens sequence. altogether, it is unlikely that the very different fractions of gc-ag introns,  <dig> % and  <dig> %, in the two picophytoplanktons could be ascribed to the difference in the primary sequences of u <dig> rna. either rna base modifications or the protein components of the u <dig> snrnp complex may be responsible for the peculiar 5' intron end selection in a. anophagefferens and m. pusilla.

CONCLUSIONS
we have characterized representative features involved in rna splicing in divergent eukaryotic species from the viewpoints of evolution and information theory. the quantitative characterization of these features is indispensable for the development of accurate and efficient computational tools for gene recognition of various types, such as ab initio, transcript-dependent, and comparative genomes, from the genomic sequence. as generally conceived and confirmed in this study, the 5'ss and 3'ss signals are the most important for the recognition of introns. therefore, in many tools, exon-intron boundaries are recognized by position-specific weight matrix  or similar methods  <cit> . our results indicate that the contributions of intron length and oligomer composition are also significant to varying degrees depending on the species or group. for example, additional file  <dig> indicates that intron length considerably contributes to intron recognition in fungi and protists. in the latter, the contribution of oligomer composition is also comparable to that of intron length. hence, a gene-finding program would benefit from incorporation of these features with an appropriate set of parameters adjusted for each species to achieve better performance.

however, it must be said that the present study has posed additional puzzles about the splicing mechanisms. namely, the nearly monophyletic distribution of gt-ag, gc-ag, and at-ac subtypes among mammalian introns with respect to 5'ss and 3'ss signals and the extraordinarily abundant gc-ag introns in some species are not easily explained by our present knowledge. our results also suggest that u12-type introns may account for a larger fraction of at-ac introns than existing estimates  <cit> . more detailed experimental studies on major- and minor-type introns would be necessary to reveal the mechanisms underneath these phenomena.

