BACKGROUND
continuing technological advances are providing rich data sets quantifying an increasingly broad range of biological processes. obvious examples include the use of microarrays for the quantification of mrna levels and mass spectroscopy for the identification of protein states and their interactions. coinciding with these technological developments are computational approaches for the extraction, organization and analysis of these data. the application of improved experimental methods in combination with tailored computational approaches is providing a major driving force in the development of a more global, systems perspective of biological function and disease.

metabolomics, also referred to as metabonomics, similarly provides a comprehensive picture of biological function by focusing on quantitative measurement of metabolites in biological fluids, cells or tissues  <cit> . the two major analytical platforms used in metabolomics are nuclear magnetic resonance  spectroscopy and mass spectrometry , the latter typically being preceded by either liquid or gas chromatography . the ultimate goal of these methods is to extract accurate and quantitative information as to the identity, state and amount of detected metabolites. increasingly common in metabolomic studies is the analysis of a large number of samples, where the resulting data is analyzed using multivariate methods such as principal components analysis . such analyses typically require significant preprocessing of the data. in particular, it is imperative that signals for a given compound appear at the same location in all spectra. signal locations can vary significantly, however, as in the case of lc/ms where small deviations in the chromatographic retention time can arise from variation in instrumental parameters such as flow rate, gradient slope and temperature. in nmr spectra, the peak location can vary due to differences in ph, ion content and the concentration of metabolites. for both of these methods, this variability has to be overcome in order to provide a consistent set of spectra for analysis.

the most common method of addressing variability across spectra is through binning, a procedure that involves dividing the spectra into small windows and taking the area under the curve for each window as the final intensity  <cit> . ideally, these windows will be large enough to encompass the peak drift, but not so large as to include many peaks in a single bin. the latter consequence is unavoidable in crowded spectra and thus there is the potential for significant loss of information when binning, for example by including peaks belonging to multiple compounds within a single bin. alternatives to binning typically involve some form of peak alignment procedure. for lc/ms methods, a number of algorithms have been developed to align similar peaks across a set of chromatograms . similarly, several algorithms have also been recently developed to align peaks in sets of nmr spectra  <cit> . in this paper we describe a novel peak alignment method for nmr that is specifically tailored to the demands of large and disparate metabolomics datasets.

current advanced nmr alignment methods such as fuzzy warping  <cit> , bayesian alignment  <cit> , recursive segment-wise peak alignment  <cit> , peak alignment by fft  <cit>  and peak alignment using reduced set mapping without recursive target update  <cit> , are based on the use of a template spectrum to help align a set of spectra. choosing a template typically involves either selecting a single sample spectrum that appears most like the others as determined by some measure of similarity, creating an "average" spectrum, or by choosing a reference spectrum not contained within the sample. all remaining sample spectra are then aligned to this selected template using some form of pairwise alignment algorithm. a significant problem with the template approach is that there can be a great amount of variability between any two spectra. part of this difference arises due to the previously described chemical shift variation. in addition, significant differences arise due to the existence of disparate groups within the data; for instance, inter-group variation between control and treated groups, subpopulation differences within these groups, etc. there may often be a priori knowledge of general subgroups, but one of the goals of metabolomics is to discover new subgroups such as different types of responders in drug or toxicity studies; by definition, templates for such groups are not known beforehand. thus in such cases, the use of a template can significantly complicate downstream analyses.

here we describe a novel approach for the alignment of nmr spectra that is based on the creation of a consensus spectrum alignment through integration of pairwise spectrum comparisons and referred to as pcans hereafter . to our knowledge, this is the first such consensus approach applied to the alignment of nmr spectra. this approach has several advantages that include the ability to align spectra with significant amounts of noise in chemical shift position, peak height and peak width. by using peaks as the basis for alignment we maintain the maximally informative set of information existing within a set of spectra. as a result, the existence of subgroups within a set of spectra can be identified since group-specific peaks are maintained in the final alignment.

we characterize the performance of this approach by aligning simulated nmr spectra which have been provided with user-defined amounts of chemical shift variation as well as inter-group differences as would be observed in control-treatment applications. moreover, we demonstrate how our method provides better performance than either a template-based alignment or binning. finally, we further evaluate this approach in the alignment of real mouse urine spectra and demonstrate its ability to improve downstream statistical analyses such as pca and opls models commonly used in metabolomics analyses.

RESULTS
while the alignment method we propose consists of several steps which are described in detail in methods, we provide a brief overview here. as outlined in figure  <dig>  our approach begins by first characterizing each individual spectrum by defining its peaks. the process of picking peaks can be done through a variety of methods and we have used a straightforward approach that uses the derivative of the spectrum, and other associated properties for discerning peaks. the resulting set of peaks contains the location, height and width of all peaks in a spectrum, referred to as the peak profile. these features comprise the main information content that is used in the interpretation of nmr spectra. this approach allows each nmr spectrum to be represented by a much smaller collection of data points than if we used the full resolution of the acquired spectrum. for example, our experimental urine spectra were collected with  <dig> points, but the peak picking process found that the spectrum contained less than  <dig> significant peaks. it must be noted that peak picking may result in loss of information if some peaks are not picked. the peak picking algorithm is under active development to insure that peak information is not lost due to features such as low signal to noise or spectral crowding. future work will also consider spectral features such as multiplet structure to provide more accurate peak profiles.

in the next step of the process, pairs of peak profiles are chosen for alignment, where the most similar profiles are determined through pair-wise statistical correlation . thus we start by aligning the most similar pairs of profiles to each other first. each of these pairs of profiles is then aligned through a series of progressively more rigorous steps that begins with the naive alignment of the most highly similar peaks . this naive alignment establishes aligned regions of high identity separated by segments that cannot be so readily aligned. these segments, bordered on either side by high-confidence aligned regions, are then aligned through a dynamic programming algorithm where the alignment score is based on chemical shift position, peak height and peak width. note that only the peak location is altered throughout the alignment process and that peak height and width remain unaltered. following this first pairwise alignment, a single consensus profile is created . this process is then repeated, first for each set of pairs and then progressively for all of the generated consensus profiles. at the end of this process a single representative consensus profile is generated which defines the final alignment . the final output consists of the set of input profiles with their respective peaks aligned to this final consensus alignment.

alignment of simulated spectra
as "gold-standard" completely characterized nmr spectra for use in validation are not available, we used a simulation approach for generating peak profiles that could then be used to assess the performance of the alignment methods. in particular, the use of simulated profiles allows us to determine whether or not two or more peaks aligned through our algorithm should actually be aligned with each other, and if not, which other peaks they should be aligned to. it also allows us to introduce defined amounts of noise, either in the form of chemical shift variation, peak height, peak width, or randomly introduced "noise" peaks into each profile and measure their effect on alignment accuracy. as we wished to generate nmr profiles that were as realistic as possible, our simulated profiles were composed of a subset of peaks picked from an actual mouse urine spectrum .

as a test of our alignment approach, we attempted to align simulated profiles under a variety of noise conditions. in these tests we generated two sets of profiles consisting of  <dig> profiles each, where each set was based on a different template. each template consisted of a total of  <dig> peaks,  <dig> of which were unique to each group, allowing us to look at the effectiveness of alignment in the presence of inter-group variation. in addition to the differences derived from the peaks specific to each group, predefined amounts of chemical shift, peak height and peak width variation were also introduced before alignment. finally, 50% of the profiles in each group had from  <dig> to  <dig> additional noise peaks inserted at random positions within each profile.

the effects of chemical shift variation on alignment accuracy are shown in figure  <dig> where, in addition to chemical shift variation, 25% of peaks were subject to noise of ± 10% in peak height and/or peak width at half-height. the contribution of chemical shift, peak height and width to the alignment score were kept equal in this and all other tests as this combination was found to be highly robust. sensitivity to the choice of these weighting parameters is shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  in figure  <dig> we see that the accuracy of alignment is highly robust to chemical shift variation as can be seen by the slow decrease in accuracy with increasing variation. here, alignment accuracy is calculated by dividing the number of peaks correctly aligned by the total number of peaks. alignment is similarly robust to increases in the proportion of peaks subjected to such variation. in fact, a nearly 90% accuracy is maintained despite 50% of peaks experiencing variation of up to ±  <dig>  ppm. the maximum standard deviation is ±  <dig>  and the corresponding map of deviations is shown in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  while we used a window of ±  <dig>  ppm in the alignment of individual peaks, this is a user-defined quantity that can be changed to suit the underlying data.

we also compared the accuracy of our alignment method between our consensus approach and the use of a template. again, we started with two sets of profiles, with each set consisting of  <dig> profiles and  <dig> peaks, with  <dig> peaks unique to the set. variation in chemical shift position  was introduced for 50% of the peaks. peak height and width noise  was also independently introduced. as before, 50% of the profiles in each group had  <dig> to  <dig> noise peaks inserted at random chemical shift positions.

we iteratively chose one of the sixty-four peak profiles as the template to which all the other profiles were aligned. thus this approach differs from the pcans alignment method only in the fact that it uses a representative profile as a template for use in aligning the other peak profiles; all other steps are identical including the dynamic programming alignment of peaks. over all  <dig> possible templates, the average accuracy using this approach was  <dig> % with 99% confidence intervals of  <dig> % and  <dig> %. the best single template had an accuracy of  <dig> %. in contrast, pcans had a  <dig> % accuracy .

a representative region of an alignment is shown in figure  <dig> where the template generating the highest accuracy  was used to generate the shown template-based alignment. differences between the template, unaligned and pcans alignments can be readily observed. for example, three regions are highlighted that have peaks unique to group  <dig>  in region  <dig> of the unaligned spectra , it is possible to pick out by eye the existence of two likely peaks in group  <dig> with no nearby corresponding peaks in group  <dig>  in addition, a peak unique to group  <dig> is also visible in this region. in the template alignment  the two peaks of group  <dig> could not be aligned, as the best overall template did not contain associated peaks in these locations. in addition, the template did have a peak in group  <dig>  but at the wrong location, forcing alignment of the unique group  <dig> peak to a shifted location. in contrast, pcans correctly aligned the group  <dig> peak . furthermore, the two peaks unique to group  <dig> were also successfully aligned. note that the rightmost peak of the pair appears to be shifted to the right. this is due to the variation present within the unaligned set of peaks. aligning noisy spectra containing peaks with varying chemical shift position with pcans results in the alignment of peaks at their median chemical shift position. this provides a robust estimate of peak position despite potentially significant amounts of spectral noise.

in region  <dig> of the template alignment, we see a well-aligned peak for group  <dig>  however, as we are using simulated data, we know that the position of this alignment is centered at a nearby noise peak within the template profile and inspection of the unaligned profiles also shows no obvious peak. the correct result is shown in region  <dig> of the pcans alignment. this incorrect alignment occurs because the "best" template happens to contain a nearby noise peak that is used as the basis for alignment of all other profiles.

finally, in region  <dig>  we see strong indications of a peak in group  <dig> as well as alignment of this peak with pcans. however, in the template alignment we see no obvious change relative to the unaligned profiles. this is due to the fact that the template profile had no peaks in this region and thus none of the identified peaks could be aligned. the fact that they are present at all in the final alignment is due to the pcans-portion of the algorithm , which allows these orphan peaks to pass through to the final alignment regardless of whether or not they are found in the template. overall, this example demonstrates the inherent pitfalls and challenges that arise with any alignment method that is based on the concept of a template or standard spectrum.

pca analysis of simulated spectra
to further demonstrate how spectral alignment with pcans can improve downstream data analysis, we performed a pca analysis of unaligned, binned, pcans-aligned and template-aligned peak profiles . this data set consists of  <dig> unique peaks when unaligned,  <dig> unique peaks after template alignment,  <dig> unique peaks after alignment with pcans and  <dig> chemical shift position bins. pca analysis of a perfect alignment of the data would show two tightly clustered groups with the only variance due to the small number of noise peaks added to each of the groups. the scores plot resulting from a standard binning procedure with uniform  <dig>  ppm bin widths is shown in figure 5a. this plot displays three distinct groups along with several outliers on the bottom half of the plot. the simulated peak profiles contain two large peaks that were modeled after the creatinine peaks that are found in urine. thus the separation of the three clusters, as well as the outliers in this model, are largely due to inclusion of the creatinine peaks into four separate bins. the corresponding loadings plot for this scores plot is given in the supplemental information . figure 5b shows the scores plot that results from excluding those four bins. the separation between the groups is clearer, but the clustering is still rather diffuse.

similarly, figure 5c shows the pca scores plot of the unaligned peak profiles. in this case the four clusters do not distinguish the groups, and are again based upon differences in the peak positions of two large creatinine peaks. as with the binning example, removal of these two peaks leads to a clearer discrimination of the groups, but again with a diffuse clustering as observed in figure 5d.

in contrast, figure 5e shows the results of pca analysis after alignment with pcans. the separation between the groups along the first principal component is complete and the clustering is very tight. the outliers from each group near the top of the plot are again due to one creatinine peak that did not get aligned with the rest. removal of this peak from the analysis lead to the scores plot in figure 5f. although there are still a small number of outliers, the separation between the groups along the 1st principal component is excellent and this pc explains nearly fifty percent of the variance in the data.

the final comparison is with the template aligned peak profiles. figure 5g displays a very good discrimination of the groups, with the control groups being very tightly clustered. this is reasonable as the template was chosen from that group. if, as with the other plots, the creatine and creatinine peaks are removed, the separation looks quite similar but the percent variation explained by the first principal component decreases by nearly half. compared with the pcans plot, the control group is more tightly clustered, but the treated group is less well so. furthermore, the first principal component of the pcans alignment explains  <dig> % as opposed to  <dig> % of the variation. in this rather simple example of only two groups, the pcans alignment does have some advantages, but the benefits would be expected to be much greater in a more complex situation which has more than two groups.

alignment of mouse urine spectra
to demonstrate the utility of pcans on real data, we applied our approach to the alignment of twenty-two mouse urine spectra from a recent study of ethanol toxicity  <cit> . in this study, half of the samples were taken from mice receiving chronic ethanol treatment and the other half were from controls, with results from pca analysis shown in figure  <dig>  in figure 6a, the data was analyzed using standard binning with  <dig>  ppm bins, resulting in  <dig> bins across the spectrum. as can be seen, the correct separation of the data into two groups is discovered, largely due to the presence of ethanol and ethylglucuronide in the spectra of dosed mice . this positive result indicates that the chemical shift drift amongst these peaks is generally smaller than the applied bin width . figure 6b shows the data prior to alignment. in its unaligned form, this dataset consists of  <dig> unique chemical shifts. in this case the control samples are very tightly clustered  and the major variation in the data appears in the dosed spectra. again, the corresponding loadings plot shows that the separation of the dosed group into two clusters is predominantly due to the small differences in the ethanol and ethylglucuronide peaks . after peak alignment with pcans, the number of unique chemical shifts is reduced to  <dig>  the scores plot looks remarkably similar to that generated from the binned data and the percent variances for both of the pcs in these models is very similar .

given the similarity between the binned and aligned data, the advantage of alignment with pcans may not be obvious. however, it should be emphasized that the information content of the pcans-aligned data is over three-fold larger than that of the binned data. more specifically, the intensity of  <dig> individual peaks is represented in the pcans-aligned data, while the binned data encodes only  <dig> variables, many of which are influenced by  multiple peaks. we can better observe the advantage that pcans alignment provides through this added information by looking at the results of a supervised opls analysis.

in contrast, figure 7d shows the loadings coefficients after pcans alignment. as can be seen along the x-axis, data density , is significantly higher than with binned data. in addition, the signals from ethanol and ethylglucuronide are all very strong with colors indicating a very high confidence. also note that while template alignment would perhaps perform similarly with regard to generating strong correlations for aligned peaks, it suffers from the earlier described difficulties that will lead to loss of peaks defining group/inter-group differences, loss of unique peaks, and alignment of different, but close peaks to nearby peaks within the template. these results demonstrate the value alignment with pcans and its ability to enhance the information content relative to the standard binning protocol.

CONCLUSIONS
the increasing scale and complexity of metabolomics studies is driving the need for improved computational tools for data integration and analysis. we have described our pcans approach which was developed to address the need for multiple spectrum alignment where noise in the form of chemical shift variation and deviations in peak properties is present, along with significant sample complexity.

in metabolomic analyses there are often multiple groups of spectra, such as control and treated groups, which may not be appropriately aligned with any algorithm that is primarily based upon the use of a template. for instance, the peaks from the exogenous metabolites that are present in the treated group may not be well aligned using a template from the control group. similarly, alignment of the control spectra could be confounded by the presence of the exogenous peaks in the template. even when a specific group  can be reasonably well aligned by a representative template spectrum, metabolomics is also being increasingly used to determine multiple responder phenotypes wherein the treated group may contain several subgroups characterized by distinctly different spectra. thus a significant advantage of pcans over the use of template-derived methods is that it is a fully unsupervised method and can be used to align spectral data containing multiple disparate groups that may not/cannot be anticipated. furthermore, as both aligned and unaligned peaks are incorporated into the final consensus, we minimize the amount of data lost in this process while enhancing the signal within alignable regions.

this algorithm uses peaks rather than full resolution spectra as the basis for alignment. we consider this to be a general advantage as the datasets are much smaller while having no loss of real spectral information, as peak location, height and width are all maintained. a primary goal of the pcans process is to provide better input data for multivariate statistical analysis that will help identify significant groups in the sample set. as shown in the opls loadings coefficients plots in figure  <dig>  the peak profiles provide an ample representation of the nmr spectra so that specific compounds can be identified. it could be argued that these peak profiles are even easier to interpret than real spectra as they are free from spectral noise and have perfectly uniform linewidths. but, should a more traditional representation of nmr spectra be desired, the information has been maintained to regenerate such a spectrum. in general, the use of peak profiles as input to pcans allows us to maximize the amount of high-quality information available for alignment and further downstream analysis. we are further investigating the use of more sophisticated peak picking algorithms that will include recognition of peak multiplets and advanced recognition of shoulder peaks that are often present in samples such as serum that displays large, broad peaks due to the presence of macromolecules. while we have used a robust peak picking algorithm, improvements in this step will help minimize issues of inconsistent peak selections across samples. continued incorporation of more sophisticated scoring schemes as well as more realistic handling of multiplets , is expected to further enhance the effectiveness of our approach. finally, while pcans was developed specifically with nmr data in mind, it has the potential to be applicable to the alignment of other types of data with similar properties. in particular, chromatographic data which is composed of peak positioned along a time axis would be amenable to pcans alignment. future work will attempt to further extend these capabilities.

