BACKGROUND
the activity of g protein-coupled receptors  is regulated by a sophisticated balance between molecular mechanisms governing receptor signalling, desensitization and resensitization. an important role in the regulation of gpcrs functions is played by the agonist-mediated internalization of receptors into intracellular compartments from which they may be sorted into specific endosomal pathways . thus, the characterization of the molecular events involved in the regulation of the intracellular trafficking of receptors is a fundamental question in cell biology.

over the past several years, the agonist-promoted internalization of β2-adrenergic receptor , a prototypic member of the gpcr superfamily, has become the subject of intensive studies. several investigations established that, in response to agonist stimulation, β2ars undergo rapid phosphorylation by both second messenger-dependent protein kinases and g protein-coupled receptor kinases   <cit> . this event targets receptors for the binding of arrestin proteins, which sterically uncouples receptors from their cognate heterotrimeric g proteins and favours the receptors endocytosis via clathrin-coated vesicles into endosomal compartments  <cit> . as a consequence of this, β2ars are exposed to dephosphorylation, following which receptors are recycled back to the plasma membrane surface as fully sensitized receptors  <cit> . although many of the molecular mechanisms described for β2ar might apply equally well to other gpcrs, the diversity in receptor structures corresponds to important differences in the intracellular trafficking patterns, as well as to the functional signal transduction of distinct gpcr subtypes. for example, regarding beta-subtypes of adrenergic receptors , it is known that, unlike β2ar, β3ar does not internalize in response to agonist; likewise, human β1ar is more resistant to agonist-mediated down-regulation and, although it uses the same endocytosis mechanism as human β2ar, it is sorted to different endosomal compartments  <cit> . other gpcrs that internalize following agonist activation are targeted to lysosomes for degradation, or are retained within endosomal compartments  <cit> . moreover, relatively little is known about the mechanisms that determine the specificity of gpcr trafficking after endocytosis. it is established that the sorting of internalized β2ar between recycling and degradative endocytic pathways is controlled by a protein interaction involving the distal carboxyl-terminal cytoplasmic domain of the receptor. mutations of this sequence inhibit efficient recycling and cause the missorting of internalized receptors to lysosomes, thereby increasing the down-regulation  <cit> .

important advancements in the knowledge of intracellular trafficking of β2ar have been reached through studies that used powerful tools, such as real-time optical-analysis, to visualize the dynamics of receptor trafficking in living cells. at first, the sub-cellular redistribution of epitope-tagged β2ar in response to agonist activation was observed by confocal fluorescence microscopy, and then by direct visualization of β2ar-green fluorescent protein  chimeras in cells transiently or stably expressing the fusion protein  <cit> . importantly, experiments employing this technical strategy have suggested that sequestered β2ars undergo processing through endosomal compartments in a similar way to that observed for constitutively internalized receptors, such as the transferrin receptor  <cit> . after internalization, β2ar rapidly colocalizes with transferrin into recycling endosomal vesicles, but following prolonged exposure to agonist, it traffics through lysosomal vesicles as part of a down-regulation process  <cit> .

moreover, relevant information about gpcr endocytosis emerged from studies that used gfp fusion proteins to provide the opportunity not only to observe β2-adrenergic receptor trafficking, but also to study the functional dynamics of g proteins in real time. it was reported that, using a gαs-gfp construct, stimulation of cos- <dig> cells with isoproterenol resulted in the movement of the gαs-gfp fusion protein from the plasma membrane to the cytoplasm  <cit> . moreover, hynes et al. recently employed strategies that allowed the simultaneous imaging of the α and βγ components of heterotrimeric g proteins in live cells. they showed that gs and β2ar dissociate upon agonist stimulation, internalize via different mechanisms and traffic to distinct sub-cellular localizations  <cit> . to further address this question, we report here a study on agonist-mediated internalization and intracellular sorting between the wild type adrenergic receptor, β2ar, compared to that of the chimeric receptor, β2ar-gαs, resulting from the fusion of β2-adrenergic receptor with the amino-terminal of the g protein α-subunit  <cit> .

although the β2ar-gαs exhibits an unaffected ability to transduce adrenergic signals and an increased sensitivity to agonists as compared to wild type receptor, here we show that the fusion of β2ar to gαs slows down agonist-induced internalization and strongly affects the recycling of receptor to the plasma membrane, even if β2ar-gαs is targeted into endocytic compartments similar to those observed for the non-fused receptor.

RESULTS
mapks activation by β2ar-gαs in hek <dig> cells
gpcrs activate mapks by multiple converging mechanisms  <cit> . to test the ability of the fusion protein β2ar-gαs to induce mapk signalling, the agonist-mediated activation of extra cellular signal-regulated kinases , also known as p42/ <dig> mapk, was analysed by western blotting. hek <dig> cells stably expressing the β2ar-gαs  or wild type β2-adrenergic receptor  were treated for increasing times with the agonist isoproterenol , then cell extracts were subjected to sds-page and blots were probed with a monoclonal antibody specific for the phosphorylated erk1/ <dig> proteins. as shown in figure  <dig>  the isoproterenol stimulation of hek293/β2ar-gαs resulted in both erk- <dig>  and erk- <dig>  phosphorylation, whose activities were enhanced following  <dig> min of agonist treatment and then rapidly declined without other activation peaks within  <dig> hours. a similar time-course of erk activation was observed in the cells stably expressing the wild type receptor.

in agreement with previous findings, this result confirms that the fusion of the g protein α-subunit to β2ar does not alter the functional properties of the receptor, which retains its ability to activate cellular signalling.

β2ar-gαs and β2ar show different internalization kinetics following agonist stimulation
the exposure of cell surface β2ars to agonist results in a time-dependent internalization of receptors. internalization properties of the β2ar-gαs fusion protein were investigated using both qualitative and quantitative experimental strategies. immunofluorescence experiments were performed on hek <dig> cells stably expressing the flag-tagged chimeric  or wild type  receptors following visualization with an epifluorescence microscope. figure 2a shows a typical experiment in which the cells were treated with  <dig> μm isoproterenol for the indicated times, fixed in formaldehyde and subjected to indirect immunofluorescence using an anti-flag antibody, as described in the methods section. as shown in figure 2a, the wild type receptor rapidly disappeared from the plasma membrane within  <dig> minutes of agonist treatment. the same amount of time was not sufficient to induce a significant internalization of the chimeric receptor, as indicated by the high immunoreactivity to flag-antibody retained on the plasma membrane of cells expressing the fusion protein. an appreciable decrease in the surface levels of the fusion protein started at  <dig> minutes, but the extensive loss of plasma membrane β2ar-gαs was only observed after  <dig> minutes of agonist stimulation. at this time, indeed, the permeabilization of samples with a non-anionic detergent, performed before the immuno-staining procedure, allowed for the observation of an intracellular redistribution of the wild type as well as the chimeric receptor . to quantify the internalization rates of the chimeric and wild type proteins, we performed a fluorimetric assay. hek <dig> cells stably expressing β2ar-gαs or native receptor were seeded onto multiwell plates and treated with  <dig> μm isoproterenol for the indicated times . after fixation, the surface receptors were immuno-stained with an anti-flag antibody and labelled with alexa fluor 488-conjugated anti mouse igg. the fluorescence measured by a multi-label counter clearly indicates that the chimeric protein has a lower rate of internalization than the wild type receptor. the computed t1/ <dig> was  <dig> and  <dig> min for β2ar and β2ar-gαs, respectively.

inefficient recycling of internalized β2ar-gαs
to investigate whether the fusion of β2ar to g protein α-subunit also affects the recycling processes of the receptor, we used the same technical approach used for the internalization studies. first, hek293/β2ar or hek293/β2ar-gαs cells were exposed to  <dig> μm isoproterenol for  <dig> hours to induce the maximal agonist-mediated internalization, as shown in figure 2c. then we added the antagonist propranolol and incubated the cells for an additional hour, to allow the cell surface recovery of the receptors. finally, an immunofluorescence assay was performed to visualize the recycling of epitope-tagged receptors via fluorescence microscopy . flag-epitopes immuno-staining revealed that, after  <dig> hours of incubation with isoproterenol, both receptors disappeared from the cell surface . however, following an additional hour of incubation with the antagonist propranolol, native β <dig> ar was almost completely returned to the cell surface, in sharp contrast with the β2ar-gαs protein, which showed only a slight plasma membrane redistribution . the inability of the chimeric receptor to recycle back to the plasma membrane was also confirmed by a fluorimetric assay performed to estimate the cell surface recovery of receptors upon antagonist incubation . hek293/β2ar or hek293/β2ar-gαs cells were cultured on  <dig> multiwell plates and exposed to isoproterenol  for  <dig> hours. the agonist-mediated recruitment of receptors to intracellular compartments was stopped by the addition of propranolol  for increasing times, after which an immunofluorescence assay was performed to visualize the surface receptors . at each time point, the cell surface recovery of either epitope-tagged β <dig> ar or β2ar-gαs was evaluated by the measurement of cell surface fluorescence by a multi-label counter. as shown in figure 3b, upon addition of the antagonist, the wild type receptor rapidly relocalized to the plasma membrane, in a time-dependent fashion. approximately 50% of internalized β2ar returned to the plasma membrane within  <dig> minutes, thus showing a fast component of recycling. over this time, the further exposure of cells to antagonist favoured a nearly complete recycling of β2ar by a slow component. as expected, the difference in the recycling rates between fused and non-fused receptors was dramatic. in fact, the fluorimetric measurement performed on cells expressing the β2ar-gαs resulted in a slow as well as modest relocalization of receptors to the plasma membrane, and no significant recycling of the fusion protein was observed until after  <dig> minutes of antagonist treatment. moreover, to exclude the membrane exposure of newly synthesized receptors from analysis, we also performed the same experiments in the presence of cycloheximide , a protein synthesis inhibitor. under this condition, we observed that the recovery of the wild type receptor occurred by both recycling  and resynthesis . in contrast, the recovery of the fused receptor occurred only by new synthesis.

β2ar-gαs and β2ar co-localization with endocytosed transferrin
in order to investigate the failure of the chimeric receptor to recycle back to the plasma membrane in more detail, we compared the agonist-mediated sub-cellular localization of β2ar and β2ar-gαs receptors with that of endocytosed transferrin, a well-established marker of early and rapid recycling endosomes  <cit> . the extent of co-localization between endocytosed transferrin and either native or chimeric receptors was examined by dual-label confocal microscopy . as indicated by the yellow spots in the merged panel of figure 4a, most of the wild type β2ar co-localized with the tracer transferrin, consistent with the typical rapid recycling of the β2ar, whereas β2ar-gα trafficked through transferrin-positive endosomal compartments, with an apparent lower grade compared to the wild type receptor. the fraction of vesicles showing transferrin-receptor co-localization was approximately 43% and 37% for the wild type and chimeric receptors, respectively . this slight difference could be explained by the different kinetics of internalization displayed by the two receptors . as the above experiment demonstrated,  <dig> minutes corresponds to the agonist-exposure time at which β <dig> ar, but not β2ar-gαs receptor, shows maximal agonist-mediated internalization. thus, the resistance to agonist-induced endocytosis showed by the fusion protein could also result in a different kinetic rate of transfer into and out of specific vesicles, without, however, changing its endosomal targeting. taken together, these data support the hypothesis that the failure of β2ar-gαs to undergo recycling is not linked to it sorting into endosomal compartments distinct from those that efficiently translate their cargo to the plasma membrane.

β2ar-gαs and wild type receptor are targeted to the same endocytic vesicles
the experiments reported above do not exclude the possibility that, following agonist-mediated internalization, β2ar-gαs and wild type β2ar may traffic through similar endosomal compartments. to better understand this, we carried out experiments in which the endocytic trafficking of β2-adrenergic receptors was analyzed in a co-expression system using a different tagged version of the native receptor.

hek293/β2ar-gαs cells were transiently transfected with an amino-terminus ha-tagged β2ar , were incubated with or without  <dig> μm isoproterenol for  <dig> hours to induce maximal internalization without affecting the recycling of the native receptor, were fixed, and were then subjected to confocal microscopy. in the absence of agonist stimulation, the immunoreactivity of flag-β2ar-gαs, as well as that ha-β2ar, was typically localized at the plasma membrane. in response to agonist, each receptor redistributed from the cell surface to a population of cytoplasmic vesicles that resulted in complete overlapping in the merged colour images . these results, in addition to the transferrin co-localization experiments, confirm that the fusion of the g protein α-subunit to the wild type β2ar does not target the chimeric receptor to endosomal compartments distinct from those observed for the wild type protein. next, using the same experimental strategy, we also examined whether or not the inability of the chimeric receptor to recycle back was affected by the presence of the wild type receptor.

analysis by epifluorescence microscopy of hek293/β2ar-gαs cells transiently expressing the wild type β2ar, and treated for five hours with  <dig> μm isoproterenol, confirmed that both receptors were recruited into the same endocytic vesicles . however, when the antagonist propranolol was added to stop receptor internalization, we observed an almost complete recovery of the wild type receptor on the cell surface, whereas the β2ar-gαs was entirely retained in the intracellular vesicles. moreover, an intracellular pool of both receptors continued to co-localize, probably in correspondence of compartments that drive them to a common degradative pathway.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have investigated the effect of a c-terminally tethered g protein α-subunit on the recycling rate and post-endocytic fate of the β2ar receptor. we observed two important differences between the fused and non-fused receptors.

the first is a substantial reduction in the internalization rate of the receptor-gα fusion protein compared to the native β2-adrenergic receptor . therefore, depending on the extent to which intracellular recruitment in a given cell contributes to the attenuation of receptor responsiveness, these results suggest that β2ar-gαs may be less susceptible to desensitization. this also explains previous reports indicating an increased resistance to desensitization and an enhanced anti-proliferative effect of isoproterenol in s <dig> cells transfected with this type of fusion protein  <cit> .

the reduced rate of internalization was apparently not due to a divergent process of endocytosis, since β2ar-gαs was targeted to the same endosomal compartment where the wild type receptor was translated . this might reflect a reduced ability of the fused receptor to interact with g protein receptor kinases , since receptor-gα fusion proteins were found less capable of interacting with gβγ subunits, which play a crucial role in recruiting grks to the receptor  <cit> . a detailed study on the ability of β2ar-gαs to undergo grk-mediated phosphorylation and β-arrestin docking will obviously be necessary to address such questions.

the second and more remarkable difference between gα-fused and non-fused receptor is the total inability of β2ar-gα to undergo recycling, which makes endocytosis an essentially irreversible process for the fusion protein. in fact, the fast chx-insensitive component of receptor recovery to the cell surface was absent in cell expressing the fused receptor and no recovery of fusion protein was observed in cells treated with chx , suggesting that fusion proteins coming slowly back to the membrane after internalization are only those derived from de novo protein synthesis . direct labelling in pulse-chase experiments will be necessary to verify such possibility. moreover, multiplexed immunofluorescence staining of differentially tagged fused and wild type receptors co-transfected in the same cell clearly showed that, unlike native receptors, the fused protein is selectively retained in an intracellular compartment following the reversal of internalization .

it is known that, upon agonist activation, β2-adrenergic receptor and the gα-subunit dissociate and leave the plasma membrane to traffic through distinct endosomal compartments, both of which result in recycling  <cit> . moreover, unlike β <dig> ar, gαs does not colocalize with internalized transferrin, indicating that it does not traffic into common recycling endosomes  <cit> .

thus, it is reasonable to suppose that, in the β2ar-gα construct, the receptor sequence played a critical role in dictating the intracellular trafficking of the fusion protein in response to agonist. on the other hand, the undissociable covalent bond that ties together the two sequences appears to be a sufficient modification to block the natural recycling mechanisms of both proteins. while more investigations will be necessary to identify the exact nature of the endocytic vesicles that irreversibly trap the fusion protein inside the cell, our study allows us to pinpoint which step of receptor endocytosis is most crucially dependent on the physical separation of receptor from gα. the lack of dissociation, in fact, can reduce the efficiency but does not prevent the initial phase of receptor endocytosis. it does however disrupt the post-endocytic fate of both receptor and gα subunit.

