BACKGROUND
micrornas  are evolutionary conserved, small, non-coding rnas that post-transcriptionally control the expression of protein coding genes  <cit>  in diverse cellular processes such as differentiation  <cit> , proliferation  <cit>  and apoptosis  <cit> . differential mirna expression has been detected in human malignancies  <cit>  and thus, specific changes in mirna expression may provide valuable diagnostic and prognostic information  <cit> . the ability to reliably quantify mirna expression in archived tissue collections would simplify retrospective studies by allowing correlations between a given disease state with a specific mirna signature. large numbers of clinical samples are preserved either in liquid nitrogen  or as formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded blocks . for these samples, the clinical history and the clinical outcome  are frequently known. unfortunately, rna integrity is not always preserved in these archived tissues, with studies indicating that rna extracted from ffpe blocks is particularly highly degraded  <cit> . however, the mirna profiles obtained from ffpe extracted and snap-frozen extracted total rna are comparable  <cit> , suggesting that mirnas may escape the chemical degradation induced by formalin fixation.

to our knowledge, rna integrity and its effect on mirna detection has not been studied in snap-frozen specimens. we therefore addressed the question to what extent total rna degradation affects mirna profiles. our data show that total rna degradation in defrosted tissues significantly affects mirna integrity. the lower the quality of total rna, the higher the proportion of mirnas that show aberrant signal intensities in microarray and qpcr based approaches. importantly, we could not identify any systematic effect on the degradation of specific mirnas that would allow for appropriate correction. based on these findings, we concluded that reliable mirna expression profiles using microarrays and qpcr are only achieved if total rna with rna integrity number  equal to or above seven is used.

RESULTS
rna degradation in archived snap-frozen tissues
rna can be readily damaged by heat, uv, acid or base catalyzed hydrolysis and by enzymatic degradation. however, individually these approaches do not replicate the diverse insults that occur during the extraction of total rna from frozen tissues. to mimic total rna degradation in snap-frozen livers and duodenums from mice, tissues were stored in a -80°c freezer and then transferred to dry ice. each frozen tissue was sliced into five identical pieces which then were transferred into eppendorf tubes. at time point zero , all samples were placed on ice and total rna was extracted immediately from  and at later time points . rna integrities were assessed using the agilent bioanalyzer  <dig> which calculates rin values of assayed rnas . the rin is the computational output of an algorithm which ranks several parameters obtained from the electropherograms, assigning a numerical value to rna integrity  <cit> . we found that at t <dig>  the rna integrity for both tissues was above  <dig>  indicating good quality total rna. however,  <dig> min on ice was sufficient to reduce rna integrity, indicated by the decrease in rins . these findings indicate that rna degradation can take place in defrosted tissue at low temperature .

rna degradation in freshly harvested tissues
for comparison, we assessed the extent to which rna integrity is preserved in freshly harvested tissues when tissue processing is delayed. liver and duodenum samples were collected from mice and either processed immediately or maintained on ice, as described above. bioanalyzer electropherograms of the liver samples did not indicate any significant total rna degradation even when samples remained on ice for up to  <dig> hrs . by contrast, duodenal samples  do show high susceptibility to degradation similar to the snap-frozen defrosted material . these findings suggest that tissues such as duodenum or pancreas should either be processed immediately or snap-frozen and processed individually.

mirnas are degraded in low integrity total rna
a commonly held belief is that small rnas, including mirnas, are only marginally affected by degradation, compared to larger mrnas. to evaluate if mirna integrity is affected by total rna degradation, we analyzed mir- <dig> expression in previously frozen hepatic samples  by northern blotting. northern blotting offers both quantitative and qualitative information about individual mirnas  <cit> . visual inspection of the bands and phosphoimager quantitation of the signals clearly show a decrease in mir- <dig> intensity in those rna samples with lower rin values. by design, all analyzed rnas were prepared from the same liver and in consequence differences in mir- <dig> signals are attributable to rna degradation. total rna samples with the lowest rin values exhibit the lowest mir- <dig> signals. for example, following  <dig> min incubation on ice, total rna prepared from liver shows a rin value of  <dig>  and has  <dig> -fold less mir- <dig> signal compared to t <dig> control. based on this result, we predict that mirnas are indeed susceptible to degradation and that mirnas within degraded samples are affected by the degradation process.

mirna expression profiling of degraded rnas
the introduction of microarray technology has allowed the analysis of the complete transcriptome of a given cell-type or tissue in a single experiment. we have recently established a novel microarray platform  that accurately and sensitively monitors the genome-wide expression of known mature mirnas and that discriminates between closely related mirna family members  <cit> . to assess to which extent total rna degradation affects mirna expression profiles, we hybridized total rnas extracted from liver and duodenum to the michip microarray. hierarchical clustering , by pearson correlation, was used to cluster samples based on their mirna expression profiles . these analyses show that even samples with the most degraded rnas still preserve a tissue-specific mirna signature. based solely upon michip array data analysis with hcl, we can conclude that rna degradation does not significantly compromise mirna tissue-specific signatures.

hcl is a robust, global, analytical technique that clusters expression profiles but does not reflect changes in expression of individual mirnas. to evaluate changes in expression of individual mirnas we organized the data into scatter plot matrices . a scatter plot matrix presents multiple variables by pair-wise evaluation. comparison of samples with high versus low rins  shows that samples with degraded total rna increase the proportion of mirnas classified as significantly regulated. this is also true when comparing degraded samples with similarly low rins  which generate a significant number of falsely positive regulated mirnas. for comparison we have hybridized to michip rnas extracted from freshly harvested livers and duodenums . our data show that mirnas extracted from freshly harvested liver is less degraded, as evident from the matrix plot analyses . consistent with high level of rnases present in duodenum, mirnas from freshly harvested duodenum are extensively degraded . based on these data, we conclude that samples with low rin values  do not merit analysis on mirna arrays.

degradation of total rna randomly affects mirnas
next, we assessed if total rna degradation systematically affects mirna profiles and if so, to devise methods to correct for systematic errors. for this purpose we filtered scatter plot matrices  and selected those capture probes which show regulation by at least two fold in any of the scatter plots . to identify whether any capture probe was systematically affected by the degradation, we calculated the overlap between the probe lists . our analysis shows that, within each tissue  we could not identify over-represented capture probes, indicating that under our experimental conditions mirna degradation occur randomly and therefore cannot be systematically corrected.

mirna analysis by qpcr
we next tested whether degradation of total rna also affects expression profiles of mirnas by using mirna specific qpcr. for this purpose, we synthesized cdna from hepatic total rna  and analyzed it by the miqpcr method . the abundance of seven liver-expressed mirnas  and of rnu <dig> was analyzed by using sybr green and the crossing threshold value  determined for each condition . these analyses indicate that despite the fact that mirnas have short amplicons the relative amount that we can detect by miqpcr is compromised by rna degradation. different mirnas are compromised to different extents within the same rna sample, again indicating that degradation is random and cannot be corrected by post-analytical processing.

discussion
correlation of mirna expression patterns with clinically relevant information is greatly facilitated by the retrospective analysis of samples archived in tissue banks. unfortunately, the quality of samples stored in tissue banks is variable due to heterogeneity in pre-analytical preparation of clinical specimens. collectively, these variables will impact the reliability of the results of the analysis. while total rna extracted from ffpe blocks is severely degraded, several studies suggest that the mirna profiles are not significantly compromised despite total rna degradation arisen from formalin fixation  <cit> . these reports strengthen the commonly held misconception that the short size of mature mirnas allows them to escape degradation.

to date no systematic studies have been performed to investigate the relationship between total rna degradation and mirna profiles determined from snap-frozen tissue collections. to investigate this question, we compared mirna expression profiles generated through delaying the extraction of rna from liver and duodenum, to generate different rna integrities as defined by rin values. northern blot analysis shows that the amount of mir- <dig> decreases in those samples with lower rin values . in addition, we observe that signal intensities determined by michip microarray are significantly affected when total rna degradation is observed . correlation of the rin numbers  with the number of "degradation-regulated" capture probes  show that mirnas in the duodenal tissue are affected more severely by degradation compared to mirnas in the liver.

previous studies indicate that low rna integrity still permits the use of short amplicons to reliably monitor mrna expression by qpcr  <cit> . by contrast, our data clearly demonstrate that this does not apply to mirna expression profiling by qpcr. we show that extracted rna samples that are highly degraded, as characterized by low rins, containing between two to eight fold less mirna than compared to the control  rna .

collectively, our findings demonstrate that total rna degradation affects mirnas as detected by northern blot analysis, array-based mirna profiling and by mirna-specific qpcr. inclusion of samples with degraded total rna in mirna expression profiling experiments reduces the analytical power of the analysis through increasing the variation within the experiment, rendering it more difficult to detect biologically significant mirna signatures reliably.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that there is no suitable methodology for the reliable and reproducible analysis of mirna expression of poor quality rna samples. in order that mirna expression profiles reflect true biological differences and not variation imposed by rna integrity, we propose that only total rna with integrity equal to, or higher than rin seven should be included for mirna expression analysis.

