BACKGROUND
ever since a seminal paper on mutation rate evolution by a. h. sturtevant  <cit> , two modes of selection on the genomic mutation rate have been recognized: i) indirect selection resulting from associations between mutation-rate-modifying alleles at certain loci and fitness-modifying alleles at other loci, and ii) direct selection resulting from the fitness effects of mutation-rate-modifying alleles themselves. in the absence of significant evidence for direct selection, most theoretical studies of mutation rate evolution have focused on the indirect selection experienced by mutation rate modifiers and its contrasting effects in sexual and asexual populations .

it has long been argued that because the majority of new fitness-affecting mutations are expected to be deleterious, there should be continual selection pressure toward a lower mutation rate  <cit> . however, in asexual populations, modifiers that increase the genomic mutation rate  can rise in frequency if associated with beneficial mutations, and a substantial experimental literature in support of such mutator hitchhiking has developed  <cit> . in contrast, in sexual populations recombination is expected to erode associations between beneficial mutations and mutator alleles, preventing mutator hitchhiking and leading to mutator decline due to persistent deleterious mutational pressure .

surprisingly, the fate of mutator alleles in sexual populations has yet to receive experimental attention. here, we investigate mutator dynamics in sexual and asexual populations of s. cerevisiae. the mutator allele  was constructed by replacing the coding sequence of msh <dig>  a component of the yeast mismatch repair system  <cit> , with a kanamycin resistance cassette  <cit>  previously shown to have minimal fitness effect  <cit> . we established sexual and asexual experimental populations initially polymorphic for this mutator allele and followed mutator frequencies in these populations through time. in light of the results, we discuss the nature of selection experienced by msh2Δ in these populations.

RESULTS
mutator dynamics in asexual populations
mutator-carrying strains declined in all haploid asexual populations, approaching extinction in approximately  <dig> generations . in contrast, mutator strains rose in frequency at the expense of wild-type strains in all diploid asexual populations after a short initial lag ; furthermore, the mutators appeared to approach fixation in seven of the ten diploid asexual populations by  <dig> generations of propagation. in asexual populations, the combined strength of both direct and indirect selection acting on the mutator can be very roughly estimated from the change in mutator frequency during the course of the experimental propagation . selection coefficients estimated in this way were shap =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , against the mutator in haploid populations, and sdip =  <dig>  ±  <dig>   in favor of the mutator in diploid populations. importantly, these selection coefficients were calculated based on deviations from the initial mutator-to-wild type ratios and not on the dynamics of the actual fitness-affecting mutations that arose in the two subpopulations: therefore, they provide only a very crude measure of the total selection strength acting on mutators. below, we address how these selection coefficients may nevertheless allow for inferences about the nature of selection experienced by msh2Δ in our populations.

mutator dynamics in sexual populations
in all populations propagated with sexual reproduction, the frequency of the msh2Δ allele declined from about 50% towards loss over the  <dig> generations of propagation . estimating the strength of selection against msh2Δ based on its rate of decline depends on the assumed degree of dominance of its fitness effect. assuming that the deleterious effect of the msh2Δ allele is recessive , we can estimate the strength of selection against it over the full duration of propagation of the sexual populations as srec =  <dig>  ±  <dig>   .

competitive fitnesses of mutator and wild-type strains before and after propagation
as measured in short-term competition assays , the fitness of the haploid mutator strain  relative to that of the wild-type strain  was  <dig>  ±  <dig>   before propagation, which is significantly different from one . the fitness of the diploid mutator strain  relative to the wild-type strain  was  <dig>  ±  <dig>   before propagation; the difference from one is marginally non-significant . in diploid asexual populations, the relative fitness of mutators increased significantly  during the experimental propagation, rising to approximately  <dig>  based on assays of three different mutator clones isolated at generation  <dig>  in haploid populations, two of three assayed mutator clones showed a significant  increase in relative fitness, rising to approximately  <dig>  in the  <dig> generations of propagation; the third mutator clone had a relative fitness of  <dig>  which was statistically indistinguishable from  <dig>  .

discussion
mutator dynamics and the predicted qualitative effect of recombination
in line with previous studies demonstrating mutator hitchhiking  <cit> , we observed episodes of substantial mutator increase in all diploid asexual populations. direct competitions between the ancestral diploid mutator and wild-type strains revealed no fitness advantage that could account for the mutator rise in the experimental populations. to assess whether sweeps of beneficial mutations that could facilitate mutator hitchhiking occurred in the diploid asexual populations, we also measured relative fitnesses of mutator clones isolated after experimental propagation. the evolved mutator clones were substantially and significantly more fit than the ancestral mutator strain, strongly suggesting that mutators rose in frequency by hitchhiking with beneficial mutations.

in sexual populations, the msh2Δ mutator allele never experienced bouts of hitchhiking similar to those observed in asexual populations, instead declining almost uniformly toward loss. given the evidence of hitchhiking and fitness evolution in our diploid asexual populations as well as previously published reports of rapid adaptation and high beneficial mutation rates in experimental populations of diploid yeast  <cit> , the failure of msh2Δ to hitchhike in sexual populations is consistent with the predicted qualitative effect of recombination in separating mutators from beneficial mutations  <cit> .

however, the swift decline of msh2Δ in these populations also reveals a strong cost of the mutator allele in the sexual populations that was not observed in the asexual diploid populations. this realized cost of msh2Δ in the sexual populations  was greater than its realized benefit in the asexual diploid populations and was alone sufficient to explain mutator decline in the sexual populations. importantly, our diploid asexual and sexual populations differed in more than the presence of meiotic recombination. sexual diploid populations produced haploid spores, while asexual diploid populations never went through a haploid stage.

the realized cost of msh2Δ
in an effort to distinguish between potential direct costs of the msh2Δ allele and an indirect cost due to an increased influx of deleterious mutations, we compared relative fitnesses of ancestral wild-type and mutator strains in both diploid and haploid populations before and after propagation. in diploids, the fitnesses of the two strains were statistically indistinguishable before propagation. in haploids, the mutator strain was slightly less fit than the wild-type strain before propagation, and the difference was consistent with the observed decline of msh2Δ during the propagation experiment. these results could be interpreted as supporting a direct fitness cost of msh2Δ applying only in haploids. alternatively, given that the majority of strongly deleterious mutations are recessive  <cit> , indirect selection against msh2Δ could account for our observation that mutators declined only in populations with a haploid growth stage . such an indirect cost of msh2Δ would be consistent with previous studies that have inferred a high rate of recessive deleterious mutation in msh2Δ-carrying strains  <cit> . an indirect cost of msh2Δ operating mostly through recessive strongly deleterious mutations could also explain why the mutators were able to spread in our asexual diploid populations, as also previously observed by thompson et al.  <cit> . in our experiments, fitness measurements of haploid mutators isolated after propagation showed that two out of three clones increased in fitness significantly, suggesting that mutator decline in these populations was not due to gradual accumulation of mildly deleterious mutations; however, an immediate cost of msh2Δ could have been a consequence of highly deleterious or lethal mutations, which do not accumulate in populations.

the nature of any direct fitness effects of msh2Δ that could explain our results is somewhat unclear. in addition to its role in mismatch repair  <cit> , wild-type msh <dig> has been shown to prevent homeologous recombination and associated chromosomal rearrangements  <cit>  and to remove nonhomologous dna during genetic recombination initiated by double-strand breaks  <cit> . these findings hint at a possible meiosis-specific direct fitness effect of msh2Δ. consistent with this notion is the finding of reenan and kolodner  <cit>  that not all spore mortality in msh2Δ homozygotes can be accounted for by recessive deleterious mutations. it is worth noting, however, that a meiosis-specific effect of msh2Δ could only have contributed to the fitness cost of the mutator in our sexual populations and would not account for the mutator decline in our asexual haploid populations.

implications
whether the realized cost of msh2Δ in our sexual populations was direct or indirect, our results have some implications for both theoretical studies of mutator dynamics and the understanding of mutation rate evolution in natural populations. most studies of mutation rate evolution have adopted the simplifying assumption that mutator alleles are themselves neutral in the short term. obviously, if a mutator allele were directly deleterious as a consequence of some pleiotropic effect, it would be intrinsically disfavored in both asexual and sexual populations. notably, mismatch repair alleles that are involved in meiotic recombination may be particularly likely to have a direct effect on fitness in addition to their effect on mutation rate.

on the other hand, if we are correct in positing that the cost of msh2Δ is primarily indirect rather than direct, then our results suggest that, similarly to a direct cost, an indirect cost of a mutator allele may apply immediately in some situations. if strongly deleterious mutations are rare, then indirect selection against a mutator in an asexual population will develop only gradually after a shift in mutation rate  <cit> . however, if strongly deleterious mutations are common, then indirect selection against a mutator can act over the short term to inhibit mutator hitchhiking in situations where recessive deleterious mutations are expressed.

the notion that recombination is perhaps not the only factor that can prevent mutator hitchhiking in sexual populations has implications for mutation rate evolution in natural populations that can reproduce sexually but go through a prominent haploid phase: for example, fungi, algae and some plants. consistent with effective selection against higher mutation rates, there are no reports to date of mutator strains at substantial frequencies in natural yeast populations, despite the low rates of outcrossing inferred in such populations  <cit> . while mutation rate data are scarce in plants, it seems likely that mutators could also carry a high and immediate indirect cost in plant species with a prominent gametophyte phase . in contrast, haploid stage selection against mutator alleles should be weaker in populations where haploids are less important and act primarily to transport genetic material, as in multicellular animals. to our knowledge, this idea that the efficacy of selection against higher mutation rates may depend on population life cycle was first suggested by sturtevant  <cit> .

current estimates of genomic deleterious mutation rates  range from a low value of  <dig>  in the bacterium e. coli  <cit>  to potentially above  <dig> in many sexually reproducing species  <cit> . in light of studies demonstrating mutator hitchhiking in experimental bacterial populations  <cit>  it may seem surprising that genomic mutation rates in natural bacterial populations have not evolved to higher levels. one possible explanation for low genomic mutations rates in bacteria is that mutator hitchhiking is inhibited in haploid bacterial populations by the associated deleterious load. another potential explanation, however, is the prevalence of horizontal gene transfer  <cit> , which could act similarly to sexual recombination in preventing mutator hitchhiking. currently available evidence suggests that horizontal gene transfer in bacteria is rather widespread, as it might have accounted for anywhere between  <dig>  -  <dig> % of some bacterial genomes  <cit> . interestingly, despite regular recombination, most multicellular eukaryotes have strikingly high genomic mutation rates, potentially suggesting a role for nonadaptive forces in shaping mutation rates in these species  <cit> .

assuming that selection acting on msh2Δ in our haploid yeast populations was primarily indirect, we can roughly estimate the minimum deleterious mutation rate in yeast as ud =  <dig>  × 10- <dig> . current published estimates of ud in s. cerevisiae range from  <dig>  × 10- <dig> to  <dig>  × 10- <dig>  <cit> ; the deleterious mutation rate in our populations was probably closer to the high end of this range  <cit> , because the indirect cost of msh2Δ in our populations would have been reduced somewhat by the mutator's association with new beneficial mutations. moreover, the high percentage of haploid lethal mutations demonstrated in  <cit>  is consistent with the observed immediate fitness effect of msh2Δ in our experiments.

CONCLUSIONS
our study raises the potential importance of haploid phase selection and high deleterious mutation rates on mutator success in sexually reproducing populations. we suggest that the interaction of recombination with these factors is an important area for further theoretical and empirical research. we have shown that a mutator allele of msh <dig> declines rapidly in frequency in experimental populations of sexually reproducing yeast while nearly hitchhiking to fixation in isogenic asexual populations. the realized cost of the msh2Δ allele could be due to an increase in strongly deleterious and lethal mutations, and it could also be due to an unknown direct effect that operates only in haploids and sexually reproducing populations. whatever its cause, the magnitude of the fitness effect of msh2Δ is sufficient to obscure the expected qualitative effect of recombination on mutator dynamics. further research will be necessary to unambiguously demonstrate the theoretically expected effect of recombination on mutation rate evolution in sexual populations.

