BACKGROUND
birds famously show great variation in their plumage colouration, and this variation is thought to be the product of a range of selective pressures. conspicuous colours are considered to be useful for intra-specific communication, such as competition for mates, resources, and courtship , while selection for crypsis and camouflage may favour the evolution of less conspicuous colours  <cit> . there is evidence that plumage colouration can vary greatly in response to pressures associated with habitat type  <cit> . for instance, species of warblers  with brighter markings live in darker habitats  <cit> . bright and contrasting colours may be favoured in dark habitats, to maximize conspicuousness to conspecifics  <cit> , while dull and pale colours may be favoured in open habitats to maximize crypsis, since predation rates may be elevated when vegetation cover is reduced .

the interplay between sexual and natural selection may result in the evolution of differences in colour between species as well as differences between the sexes in the same species  <cit> . in several species, cryptic plumage appears to have evolved in more exposed habitats in one sex only. for instance, in eclectus parrots , females are secure inside their nest hollow for up to 11 months/year and have evolved bright red plumage that advertises nest hollow ownership, whereas males spend most of their time foraging in the rainforest canopy and have evolved cryptic, green plumage  <cit> . similarly, in the barn owl  there is selection for cryptic plumage in open habitats, but this is true only for females and not for males  <cit> . by contrast, bright plumage has been sexually selected in male grackles , but only in open habitats  <cit> . also, drury & burroughs  <cit>  found a link between how exposed nests were  and sexual dichromatism across new world blackbirds, where higher predation risk was associated with higher differences in colour between males and females. all these studies suggest that natural selection plays an important role in generating plumage colour differences between males and females. however, contrary to what had been previously thought, phylogenetic analyses now show that sexual dichromatism across species can often result from changes in plumage in females, not males . selection on females may be important in explaining colour differences between males and females.

several studies suggest that the selective pressures behind the evolution of plumage in birds are different for males and females  <cit> . males and females often have different pathways to fitness, hence the relative costs and benefits of bright plumage in each sex are also likely to change according to habitat  <cit> . australasian fairy-wrens and emu-wrens  are widely recognized for their bright and conspicuous colouration. males of many species and females of a few species exhibit patches of striking structurally-based plumage  or bright red to orange carotenoid-based colouration  <cit> . fairy-wrens occur in a wide range of habitats, from rainforest in new guinea to grasslands and deserts in australia, and there is high variation in plumage not only across species and subspecies, but also between males and females  <cit> . in fairy-wrens, it has been proposed that sexual selection pressures may have driven the evolution of conspicuous colours in male fairy-wrens and the closely related emu-wrens  <cit> . however, the evolution of colouration in female fairy-wrens has received less attention. the available studies, based on qualitative colour assessments, show a positive link between latitude and dichromatism; relatively duller females and conspicuous males are usually, but not always, found at higher latitudes  <cit> . johnson et al.  <cit>  suggested that environmental differences associated with changes in latitude could play an important role in the evolution of female colouration. for instance, variables that change with the latitudinal gradient, such as habitat structure or seasonality could be important in determining how conspicuous individuals are.

in this study we use a comparative framework to test for the first time whether habitat characteristics, specifically vegetation cover, can explain the observed variation in colour and contrast among fairy-wren species with special emphasis on female colouration. fairy-wrens are an ideal group to study the evolution of plumage, because, although there is high variation in colouration, all fairy and emu-wren species have similar life-history traits . we measured plumage reflectance in more than  <dig> museum specimens and used published vegetation indices to calculate a principal component that describes vegetation cover in each of the distributions of these species . using this information, we test whether differences in vegetation cover can explain  <dig>  the level of contrast of plumage against common natural backgrounds and  <dig>  the percentage of structural  colouration. we predicted that, if there is selection for increased crypsis, less conspicuous phenotypes will be found in more open habitats, where species are more exposed to visual predators. we test this hypothesis for both males and females.

RESULTS
the principal component used to describe vegetation cover  was significantly correlated to latitude , to the average annual rainfall in each location  but not average temperature . we used this principal component for all posterior analyses.

colouration was measured in males and females in seven body patches. contrast between the colour and two common backgrounds was calculated for both males and females using visual modelling. in females, vegetation cover was positively and significantly related to the amount of contrast for the head, throat and cheeks, after controlling for the effect of latitude and regardless of the type of background or phylogenetic tree used . the heads, throats and cheeks of females from species in open habitats contrasted less with backgrounds than those of females from species in closed habitats. contrast of the back was also positively correlated with the amount of vegetation cover, but only when latitude  was removed from the model . since vegetation cover is significantly correlated with latitude  we believe that the lack of association between back contrast and vegetation cover when latitude is present could be a statistical artefact, due to the collinearity of the predictor variables. this means that there is a link between latitude  and back contrast but we cannot be sure which one is driving this association. contrast of the breast, belly and tail was not correlated with vegetation coverage or latitude . overall, effects were stronger when using the brown than the green background. the phylogenetic signal of contrast against background varied greatly between phylogenies .table  <dig> results of association between habitat type  and different measures of colour contrast for different body patches in females  and males , against green and brown backgrounds. intervals represent variation in β  across phylogenetic trees. a significant association between colouration and habitat type is considered when the intervals presented do not overlap with zero . average level of contrast per patch in jnds and standard deviation is also shown for  <dig> taxa in females and  <dig> taxa in males


fig.  <dig> association between habitat type  and the contrast of the female  and male  head plumage against a brown background. phylogenetic relationships are represented by branches and grey points represent ancestral states connecting black points . results remain qualitatively similar when the contrast is against a green background. drawings of species made by hilary burn and used with permission from del hoyo et al. 




for males, there was no association between vegetation cover and the level of contrast of the species in any of the patches . the phylogenetic signal in this association was also very low . on average, all patches in males were more contrasting than the patches in females , but there was also greater variation in contrast in males. the least contrasting patches in females were the belly and the breast, and in males the tail and the belly.

females had a lower percentage of structural colours than males . the percentage of the body covered by structurally coloured plumage was significantly and positively associated with vegetation cover in females , but not males . females in open environments had a lower percentage of their body covered by structural colours.fig.  <dig> association between habitat type  and the percentage of structural colour in the body of females  and males  for different species. phylogenetic relationships are represented by branches and black points represent ancestral states connecting blue points 




discussion
the idea that sexual selection has driven the evolution of elaborate colouration and ornamentation in male birds is a well-established paradigm in animal behaviour  <cit> , but the evolution of female bird colouration has received much less attention  <cit> . it has been shown  <cit>  that latitude could explain variation in colouration in female fairy-wrens. however, relationships with latitude are usually a result of associations with other variables that vary latitudinally, such as habitat or seasonality. our aim here was to determine more precisely whether variation in colouration could be explained by differences in habitat structure across species. we show that, for female fairy-wrens and emu-wrens, species and subspecies living in open habitats are less likely to exhibit plumage colours that contrast less with the background colour of the environment than species living in closed habitats. the percentage of the body covered by structural colouration was also lower in species living in open habitats. we found no such pattern in males, suggesting sex-specific selective pressures. thus natural, rather than sexual selection, may be a stronger force driving colour evolution in female fairy-wrens.

we found that in female fairy-wrens and emu-wrens, habitat was a strong predictor of head, throat, cheek  plumage contrast, and that species in closed habitats had more contrasting body patches. this suggests not only that the balance of natural and sexual selection pressures is different for males and females, but also that natural and sexual selection may interact in different ways on different body patches. in females, patches that showed a higher association with vegetation type were mostly dorsal, and they were also the most contrasting ones . on the other hand, ventral patches such as the belly and breast presented overall lower contrast and lower variation  across species and the lack of an effect in these patches maybe due to lack of variation in contrast . where the primary predators are aerial, dorsal patches  are likely to be most strongly influenced by natural selection, whereas facial/frontal patches are likely to be most relevant for intra-specific communication  <cit>  and thus more influenced by inter- and intra-sexual selection . while contrasting facial patches in female fairy-wrens could function in intra-specific communication, natural selection appears to have selected against conspicuousness in these patches in species that live in open habitats. our results highlight the value of analysing different components of plumage, because it enables detection of anatomically localised patterns, which may be missed if body plumage is assumed to evolve as a whole  <cit> .

our finding that female conspicuous colouration was more common in closed habitats corresponds with that of marchetti  <cit>  in phylloscopus warblers, where species breeding in darker and closed habitats had brighter colours than those breeding in open habitats. however, marchetti  <cit>  argued that dull birds evolve in open habitats because birds are easily visible to each other even without the presence of bright colours. accordingly, social selection favours changes in plumage colouration in order to maintain adequate and similar levels of visibility   <cit> . contrary to this, we found that the contrast of female fairy-wrens to background colours changed among habitats. species that live in closed habitats have higher contrast against the background  while species in open habitats tend to be less contrasting. our findings do not support a scenario where selection for conspicuousness leads to plumage variation. instead, our results could suggest a scenario where selection favours cryptic phenotypes in open habitats. predation risk might be higher in such habitats due to greater exposure to visual predators  <cit> . it has been shown in other systems that colour  can significantly increase predation rates  <cit> . parental care at the nest might make it more advantageous for females to have cryptic plumage and might constrain plumage brightness if females spend more time at the nest than males  <cit> . moreover, because male plumage varies seasonally while female plumage is constant year-round, conspicuousness might impose higher costs on females  <cit> . strong selection for crypsis in females could have led to the reduction of conspicuous colouration, and it may be that the sexually selected benefits of expressing colourful breeding plumage in males are much greater than the naturally selected costs. it would be interesting to test whether non-breeding plumage in male-fairy wrens is also subject to the same predation pressures as that of female fairy-wrens. hofmann et al. <cit>  showed that in new world orioles  elaborate plumages have been consistently lost in females through evolutionary history, with convergent selection for more cryptic plumages. our results show a similar pattern, although the low phylogenetic signal in our analyses prevents us from making inferences about the ancestral colouration in female fairy-wrens. loss of bright plumage has also been observed in ducks , and this has resulted in loss of sexual dichromatism in many duck species  <cit> . another interesting possibility is that predators with different visual systems might be prevalent to different degrees in types of habitats, and this could drive plumage differences between habitats  <cit> . in open habitats, raptors  could be an important predation pressure, while in closed habitats mammals may represent a larger threat. mammals have lower sensitivity to ultraviolet light  <cit> , and thus animals with uv patches could be inconspicuous to mammalian predators.

given that our measure of ‘vegetation cover’ was a composite of several environmental layers, it is also possible that this variable encompasses other habitat characteristics, besides the openness of the environment. for instance, this variable was also correlated with higher precipitation and measures of plant productivity. producing structural plumage is presumed to be costly  <cit>  . areas with reduced plant productivity may have more limited food resources . if females benefit less than males from expressing structural colouration, then female trait expression may be reduced in resource-poor environments. the sexual selection benefits of expressing structural colouration could still make it worth expressing this trait in males, but not in females in poor environments. under this scenario, environmental productivity, and not predation rates, would be responsible for the evolution of plumage in female fairy-wrens. in blackbirds it has been suggested that increased productivity in marshes may have led to brighter colour patches, although in such case these were all carotenoid-based colourations, not structural  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we provide evidence suggesting that the evolution of conspicuous colouration in female, but not male, fairy-wrens is tightly linked to the habitat type. our findings are consistent with previous suggestions regarding the selective pressures influencing the evolution of plumage colour in fairy-wrens, where selection to maximize conspicuousness to conspecifics may be driving the evolution of male colouration  <cit> , while natural selection may constrain the evolution of female colouration. this constitutes an important addition to the body of literature suggesting that female and male ornamentation can be under different selective pressures, and that both natural and sexual selection are important drivers of sexual dichromatism. our results also reveal differential evolution of colour patches, and show that different parts of the body may be under different types of selective pressures. we encourage future experiments to test whether females in open habitats suffer higher predation pressures, which might lead to increased selection for cryptic plumage in open environments. moreover, it would be interesting to explore whether more contrasting females within a population actually suffer higher levels of predation.

