BACKGROUND
stem cells are highly attractive and valuable candidates for biomedical applications including the development of cell and gene therapy. of the various stem cells, mesenchymal stem cells  show a particular potential for clinical use because of their high proliferative capacity, ability to differentiate into multiple lineages  <cit> , and ability to migrate into injured organs  <cit>  and cancers  <cit> . moreover, mscs are not immunogenic, and so do not elicit a proliferative response of allogeneic lymphocytes in vitro  <cit> . therefore, mscs have become a major focus of research for potential therapeutic applications for various diseases.

in recent years, efforts have been made to improve the therapeutic efficacy of mscs through combination approaches using mscs and genes. additionally, a new therapeutic strategy has been developed that uses mscs for the targeted delivery and local production of biologic agents in tumors  <cit> . viruses are commonly used as vehicles to deliver transgenes into stem cells that can be available to effectively infect dividing or nondividing cells. integrating virus, including retrovirus or lentivirus, can insert their viral dna into the host genomic dna, which allows for stable genetic modification for the life of the host cells. so, they are very efficient for long-term gene expression  <cit> . alternatively, nonintegrating viruses, including adenovirus or herpes saimirii virus, are preferentially used to obtain the expression of a therapeutic gene for a short time, although these viruses are less efficient at transferring genes into cells  <cit> . overall, virus systems permit efficient gene delivery into cells; however, they have safety concerns that are critical when considering clinical applications  <cit> . furthermore, their use sometimes causes significant changes in the characteristics of genetically modified cells  <cit> .

to overcome these problems, nonviral methods are receiving increasing attention because they have several potential advantages over recombinant viruses. they are noninfectious, relatively nonimmunogenic, have low acute toxicity, can accommodate large dna plasmids, and can be produced simply on a large scale  <cit> . there are various types of nonviral systems used for gene transfer, such as the liposome-based method  <cit> , electroporation  <cit> , and calcium phosphate techniques  <cit> . electroporation, which permeabilizes the cell membrane by an electric pulse, has been widely used  <cit> . however, these methods are limited by their low gene transfer efficiency compared with viruses and their transient gene expression  <cit> . in addition, high cell mortality is still a problem in electroporation. low levels of gene transfer continue to be a major obstacle in the use of nonviral systems because gene delivery and efficient gene transfer are prerequisites for the development of msc therapy using various beneficial genes in clinical trials.

in contrast to conventional electroporation methods, microporation is a unique electroporation technology that uses a pipette tip as an electroporation space and a capillary type of electric chamber instead of a cuvette, which counteracts the harmful effects of cuvette-based electroporation gene transfer techniques such as ph variation, increasing in temperature, and metal ion generation.

the present study reports a nonviral, high-efficiency method of transfecting human umbilical cord blood-derived mscs  using the new electroporation-based gene transfer technique of microporation. microporation was utilized to introduce enhanced green fluorescent protein  as a reporter gene and a plasmid expressing the gene of interest, brain-derived neurotrophic factor , into hucb-mscs with significant efficiency, and investigated the stem cell potentiality of engineered hucb-mscs through their phenotypes, proliferative capacity, ability to differentiate into multiple lineages, and migration ability towards malignant glioma cells.

RESULTS
microporation of hucb-mscs induces high transient transfection efficiency
to investigate the gene transfection efficiency of the microporation technique, hucb-mscs were transfected with egfp-n <dig> plasmid  by various transfection methods including liposome-based reagent, established electroporations, and microporation. for electroporation,  <dig> ×  <dig> cells were resuspended in phosphate buffered saline  or resuspension buffer, mixed with  <dig> μg dna and electroporated as described previously  <cit> . for microporation,  <dig> μg dna was mixed with resuspension buffer. then,  <dig> ×  <dig> cells were electroporated with a preoptimized square pulse condition . figure 1a showed the brightfield and green fluorescence images of cells. in addition, the percentage of egfp-positive cells  <dig> hr after transfection was determined by fluorescence-activated cell sorting  analysis . the percentage of egfp-positive cells was 30%-50% for the established electroporators, nucleofector®, ecm  <dig> or micropulser™. by comparison, the microporator™ microporation device achieved a transfection efficiency of 83% under the conditions tested. in addition, microporation-based transfection of hucb-mscs showed a higher cell survival rate compared with other systems . although gene porter2-based transfection of hucb-mscs demonstrated a high cell survival rate, egfp expression was too low .

we further examined the survival of microporated cells during  <dig> days culture of actively dividing cells. cell viability was about 80%  <dig> days after microporation, and viability was sustained for more than  <dig> days . to increase the application performance of microporation, transfection efficacies were examined in different hucb-mscs from different donors. similar transfection efficiencies were obtained .

to assess the stability of the microporation-based transfection, the time course and the level of egfp expression were determined over a period of  <dig> weeks under conditions of restrained cell division  containing 2% fetal bovine serum  and no passaging). fluorescence images and facs analysis at different time points after transfection revealed that egfp expression was sustained at high levels  for the first  <dig> days and began to decline after  <dig> weeks . we also examined the egfp expression level in actively dividing cells under standard culture conditions . similarly, egfp expression was sustained at high levels  for the first  <dig> days and began to decline after  <dig> days . by comparison, egfp expression was decreased markedly  <dig> days after nucleofection-based transfection, and its expression level was weak . these results indicate that transfection by microporation is an efficient way of obtaining successful gene delivery into mscs.

multiple stem cell traits of egfp-expressing hucb-mscs by microporation
to investigate the stem cell potentiality of hucb-mscs according to transfection by microporatot™, cell proliferative capacity was evaluated by a trypan blue exclusion assay. both non-transfected hucb-mscs and hucb-mscs transfected with pegfp-n <dig> grew in a similar fashion in a time-dependent manner . the in vitro culture of cells appeared to be unaffected by transfection using the microporation.

to further study stem cell potentiality, the expression of msc-related cell surface antigens was evaluated by flow cytometry . like hucb-mscs, transfected hucb-mscs were strongly positive for the cd <dig>  cd <dig>  cd <dig>  and cd <dig> markers. however, both cells stained negatively for hla-class ii  and the hematopoietic marker cd <dig> 

the ability to differentiate into a variety of cell types is an important characteristic of mscs  <cit> . to evaluate the influence of microporation on multilineage differentiation of hucb-mscs, hucb-mscs and hucb-mscs transfected with pegfp-n <dig> by microporation were induced into osteogenic and adipogenic differentiation. both cells showed similar differentiation into the osteogenic and adipogenic lineages when grown in culture with the appropriate differentiation medium. osteogenic differentiation was determined by von kossa staining . adipogenic differentiation was apparent in the cells by cellular accumulation of lipid-rich vacuoles that were stained with oil red o . egfp expression was maintained in hucb-mscs during the osteoinductive conditions .

migration capacity towards cancer cells is an important characteristic of mscs. recent studies have indicated that mscs exhibit potent tropism for malignant glioma cells  <cit> . to test this in hucb-mscs transfected with pegfp-n <dig> by microporation, in vitro migration assays using transwell plates were conducted. conditioned medium  from normal human astrocytes was used as a control to mimic the normal brain milieu. only a few cells migrated toward serum-free medium  and cm from normal human astrocytes, whereas the migration of cells was significantly stimulated by cm from the human glioma cell line u-87mg compared with cm from astrocytes. we also confirmed that transfected hucb-mscs migrated towards cm from u-87mg cells in a similar pattern to hucb-mscs . in addition, the expression of egfp was observed in migrated hucb-mscs. thus, the migratory ability of hucb-mscs was not affected by microporation.

characterization of bdnf-expressing hucb-mscs by microporation
to investigate the potential for application of microporated hucb-mscs for cell therapy, the gene of interest harbored in a bdnf expression plasmid  was transfected into hucb-mscs and the transgene expression and its effects for promoting in vitro differentiation of hucb-mscs into neural cells were examined. bdnf regulates the survival, development, and function of neurons, and is important for differentiation of neural precursor cells  <cit> . our previous report demonstrated that bdnf stimulates in vitro differentiation of mscs into neural cells  <cit> . in addition, mscs genetically modified with the bdnf gene effectively promote axonal regeneration in transected adult rat spinal cord  <cit> . therefore, if hucb-mscs could be successfully modified with bdnf gene by microporation, it would be a valuable cell source for the treatment of neurological disease.

enzyme-linked immunosorbant assay  analysis at different time points after transfection revealed that the concentration of secreted bdnf in vitro remained fairly constant for  <dig> days and then began to decline in transfected hucb-mscs . additionally, immunocytochemical analysis showed strong staining for bdnf in the transfected cells . the levels of bdnf protein and its longevity in vivo were quantitatively measured. elisa analysis on different days after transplantation of cells into rat brain revealed that the bdnf protein expressed in brain tissues was detectable on day  <dig>  peaked on day  <dig>  and persisted for two weeks. in control groups, expression levels of bdnf were low throughout the experimental period . in addition, immunohistochemical analysis  <dig> days after transplantation showed strong staining for bdnf in the injection site or areas around the injection site of bdnf-expressing hucb-mscs .

to investigate the effect of bdnf in promoting in vitro differentiation of hucb-mscs into neural cells, cell morphology was observed when hucb-mscs were treated with neural induction medium , with or without transfection of bdnf expression plasmid by microporation non-transfected or transfected hucb-mscs were incubated overnight in preinduction medium containing bfgf. next, they were transferred to nim, and then maintained for up to  <dig> days. hucb-mscs transfected with bdnf expression plasmid progressively assumed neuronal morphological characteristics. the cytoplasm in the flat hucb-mscs retracted toward the nucleus, resembling a typical neuronal soma, and the process became thinner because of continuous shrinkage of the cell body. the morphological changes progressed to yield network-like structures and many long processes. however, these morphological changes were weak for the non-transfected hucb-mscs, and only a few cells showed pyramidal or spherical cell bodies with multiple processes . in addition to their neural morphological differentiation, the effects of bdnf were investigated by western blot analysis. in the proliferating medium, mscs highly expressed the intermediate filament protein nestin. but, the expression of nestin decreased dramatically after induction. mscs were negative for several neural proteins including the differentiating neuron marker tuj- <dig>  the mature neuron marker neun, gfap typical of astrocytes, and the oligodendrocyte marker mbp. conversely, expression of tuj- <dig> and neun increased significantly after neurogenic stimulation in bdnf-transfected hucb-mscs. in addition, expression of gfap and mbp increased after induction in transfected cells. however, these increases were marginal for those non-transfected cells treated with nim .

next, the neural differentiation-related molecules in the hucb-mscs and bdnf-transfected hucb-mscs were examined after neural induction. mitogen-activated protein kinases are expressed abundantly in the central nervous system, and extracellular signal-regulated kinases  participate in various activity-dependent processes, including neuronal maturation, survival, and synaptic functions. the phosphorylation levels of raf- <dig> and erks were dramatically increased in bdnf-transfected hucb-mscs at  <dig> days of induction .

discussion
mscs therapy using therapeutic transgene holds the potential as a powerful means of disease treatment. for example, mscs genetically modified with the bdnf gene effectively promote axonal regeneration in transected adult rat spinal cord  <cit>  and also protect against injury in a cerebral ischemia model in adult rats  <cit> . mscs genetically modified with bone morphogenic protein- <dig>  gene show good results in treating bone defects, and engineering mscs with bmp- <dig> has recently been the focus for research into the treatment of a variety of bone defects  <cit> .

many advances have been achieved in the field of gene transfer; however, some problems such as poor efficiency and maintenance of cell characteristics remain. transfection of hard-to-transfect cells, including primary neuron cells, primary blood cells, and stem cells through common methods such as the use of a liposome-based reagent or electroporation is problematic because of low transfection efficiency and low cell survival rates.

genetically modified cells should maintain the transgene wherever and whenever they are treated, as well as their cell characteristics. if mscs can be successfully modified, more potential cells will be available for use in treatment. therefore, technology and methodology that enables efficient gene transfer is needed.

in this study, we obtained successful transfection efficiency with only minimal cell damage by the microporation-based transfection with the egfp reporter plasmid in hucb-mscs. moreover, a plasmid expressing the gene of interest, bdnf, could be successfully transfected into hucb-mscs, and in vitro and in vivo experiments showed that bdnf expression remained fairly constant for the first  <dig> weeks . these results show that gene delivery by microporaton is a safe and efficient means for prolonged transgene expression.

recently, wang et al.  <cit>  demonstrated that microporation allows a highly efficient transfection of human adipose tissue-derived stem cells, without impairing their stem cell properties. their results echo our data that transfection by microporation is an efficient way of obtaining successful gene delivery into hucb-mscs.

more importantly, microporation of bdnf gene into hucb-mscs presently promoted in vitro neural characteristics . mscs can differentiate into neurons in vitro under special experimental conditions  <cit>  and in vivo after transplantation into the brain and spinal cord  <cit> . in addition, transplanted mscs promoted functional improvement in a spinal cord injury rat model  <cit> . our previous results demonstrated that bdnf stimulates in vitro differentiation of mscs into neural cells  <cit> . furthermore, engineered mscs with the bdnf gene effectively promote neural differentiation and also protect against injury in transected spinal cord or ischemia animal models  <cit> . therefore, microporation-based successful genetic modification of hucb-mscs with bdnf makes them potential candidates for the treatment of neurological diseases.

additionally, microporation-mediated transfection of pegfp-n <dig> into hucb-mscs and egfp overexpression did not affect the multiple potential of stem cells. this effect was demonstrated by cell phenotype characterization, proliferative activity, ability to differentiate into multiple lineages, and potent migration ability for malignant glioma cells . maintenance of these multiple properties of modified stem cells is critical for improving their therapeutic potentials. otherwise, stem cells may not be effective in a combination therapy of stem cells and therapeutic genes. therefore, questions regarding the efficacy of gene transfection as well as safety and maintenance of multiple stem cell traits after gene modification need to be answered in greater detail for the effective utilization of stem cells in treating human diseases.

this study has established a reliable and efficient method for introducing a transgene into stem cells. transfection by the microporation method led to 83% successful expression of transgene in hucb-mscs. in addition, multiple stem cell traits of hucb-mscs were unaffected by transfection. successful genetic modification of stem cells requires achieving efficient dna transfer into cells and maintaining their multiple cell characteristics. therefore, transfection by the microporation is an efficient way of obtaining successful gene delivery into mscs and gene delivery by microporation may enhance the feasibility of transgenic stem cell therapy.

CONCLUSIONS
successful transfection efficiency was obtained with only minimal cell damage by the microporation-based transfection with the egfp reporter plasmid in hucb-mscs without changing their multiple properties. moreover, a plasmid expressing the gene of interest, bdnf, could be successfully transfected into hucb-mscs. more importantly, microporation of bdnf gene into hucb-mscs promoted their in vitro neural characteristics. therefore, transfection by the microporation is an efficient way of obtaining successful gene delivery into mscs and gene delivery by microporation may enhance the feasibility of transgenic stem cell therapy.

