BACKGROUND
pregnancy and fetal development are periods of rapid growth and cell differentiation when mother and offspring are vulnerable to changes in dietary supply. adverse environmental conditions during fetal development provoke an intrauterine adaptive response termed 'fetal programming', which may lead to both persistently biased responsiveness to extrinsic factors and permanent consequences for the organismal phenotype  <cit> . due to developmental plasticity, environmental factors induce altered expression of the genome and ultimately modify the offspring's phenotype  <cit> . in various human and animal studies a gestational low protein intake during pregnancy was accompanied by low birth weight offspring, which was subsequently predisposed for metabolic disorders and alterations in body composition  <cit> . interestingly, epidemiological studies in women showed that maternal malnutrition during pregnancy can result in fetal growth retardation  <cit> .

in order to contribute to a comprehensive inventory of genes and functional networks that are targets of nutritional programming initiated during fetal life, we applied whole-genome microarrays for expression profiling in a longitudinal experimental design covering prenatal, perinatal, juvenile and adult ontogenetic stages in a porcine model. on an isoenergetic basis, pregnant sows were fed either a gestational low protein diet  or an adequate protein diet  to investigate the effects on hepatic gene expression in their fetuses and offspring. the experiment comprises a valuable model especially for 'fetal' programming, because cross-fostering enabled assessment of solely the nutritional effects during gestation. moreover, due to the similarity in metabolism, physiology, anatomy and genome the study is also a beneficial model for nutritional programming in humans  <cit> . thus the experimental data will complement previous findings from rodent models and epidemiological human data. in particular, the low protein diet provides a model for prenatal dietary undersupply and exposure to famine that regrettably still burdens a considerable proportion of the human population.

in our experiment the porcine offspring, which was exposed to an undersupply of protein during fetal development but had appropriate postnatal dietary conditions, was able to broadly adapt in terms of their body weight. in fact, newborns from sows that received a low protein supply during gestation had a significantly lower birth weight, a lower body fat content, reduced size and number of adipocytes and muscle fibres than newborns of the control group. at weaning  offspring of the lp group showed slight but significant higher fat content and adipocyte size, and still lower muscle fibre numbers. but neither body weight at weaning nor body weight at  <dig> dpn differed significantly among offspring of the lp and the ap group, whereas visceral and subcutaneous fat content remained higher in lp than in ap during postnatal life  <cit> . here the focus is on the hepatic transcriptomic response. we present that the hepatic expression profiles showed considerable modulation during prenatal and postnatal stages, i.e. in acute and delayed response to the nutritional stimulus. nutritional fetal programming becomes apparent as an altered hepatic expression of genes related to cell cycle and cell maintenance, and lipid, ketone body, and amino acid metabolism, indicating different functional demands and replies of the liver in both experimental groups under identical nutritional conditions post natum.

RESULTS
we performed a longitudinal holistic study of the hepatic transcriptome of offspring of dams fed either an experimental low protein diet  or an adequate protein diet  throughout gestation, in order to obtain a comprehensive picture of genes and functional networks that are sensitive to fetal nutritional programming using a porcine model. we investigated the offspring's hepatic gene expression at  <dig> dpc,  <dig> dpn,  <dig> dpn and  <dig> dpn by  <dig> k-microarray analysis. in total we found  <dig>  probe-sets expressed at stage  <dig> dpc  according to mas <dig> analysis. further filtering based on the variability of expression of probe-sets revealed  <dig>  probe-sets for further analysis at stage  <dig> dpc . these probe-sets represent  <dig>  genes at stage  <dig> dpc , according to the recent annotation  <cit> . in order to identify molecular pathways affected by the gestational diets we first analysed differential expression between the dietary groups within each stage separately. the different dietary exposure of the offspring during prenatal development can be expected to cause slight shifts of the developmental age of the offspring that may be reflected by subtle changes of the transcriptome and could hamper the identification of direct effects of the gestational diets on the hepatic expression. secondly, we analysed the differences among both experimental groups regarding the more long-term and more pronounced changes of expression patterns between the adjacent stages. in total we found  <dig>  probe-sets expressed within  <dig> dpc and  <dig> dpn  according to mas <dig> analysis . after the filtering steps described above,  <dig>  probe-sets were detected within  <dig> dpc and  <dig> dpn . these probe-sets represent  <dig>  genes within  <dig> dpc and  <dig> dpn . notably, q-values between ontogenetic stages within diet were remarkable lower  than between diets within stage .

developmental period  <dig> indicates the comparisons between stages  <dig> dpc and  <dig> dpn; developmental period  <dig> indicates the comparisons between stages  <dig> dpc and  <dig> dpn; developmental period  <dig> indicates the comparisons between stages  <dig> dpc and  <dig> dpn; 'up' indicates higher expression values of later stages, 'down' indicates lower expression values at later stages.

comparisons between lp and ap within stages
expression of mrna was compared in lp and ap offspring within each ontogenetic stage . at stage  <dig> dpc  <dig>  probe-sets differed significantly between lp and ap fetuses . ingenuity pathway analysis indicates enrichment of molecular routes related to genetic information and nucleic acid processing and cell cycle that were found to be diminished, whereas the 'wnt signaling' was found to be increased in lp offspring . in perinatal piglets   <dig> probe-set differed between lp offspring and ap offspring . therefore, no significant regulated metabolic pathway was determined.

the comparison between the dietary gestational protein diets  is shown in dependence of the regulatory direction .

in juvenile piglets   <dig> probe-sets differed between lp and ap offspring. the expression of  <dig> probe-sets was increased in the lp offspring compared with ap offspring. genes associated with the 'complement system' showed increased mrna expression levels, whereas the canonical pathway 'g1/s checkpoint regulation' was found to be decreased in lp offspring.

at adult age   <dig>  probe-sets were significantly different between lp and ap offspring. of these,  <dig> probe-sets showed higher expression and  <dig>  probe-sets showed lower expression in lp than in ap offspring. the mrna expression levels of genes associated with metabolic processing of ketones, fatty acids, bile acids, and hydrophobic amino acids  as well as 'mtor signaling', 'vegf signaling', and 'glucocorticoid receptor signaling', were increased in lp offspring at stage  <dig> dpn, whereas 'biosynthesis of steroids' was found to be diminished.

no genes were found consistently differentially expressed between the groups along all examined stages. however, at  <dig> dpc and  <dig> dpn  <dig> probe-sets were differentially regulated in both stages between lp and ap.

differences of longitudinal ontogenetic regulation among lp and ap offspring
considering two adjacent ontogenetic stages within one treatment group, significantly regulated transcripts were determined. the resulting gene lists were compared between lp and ap offspring at the corresponding ontogenetic periods. the intersection of commonly regulated genes between those comparisons was discarded because regulation of these genes was likely due to physiologically developmental processes. consequently, only genes whose regulation between two consecutive ontogenetic stages  was private to either the lp or the ap group were analysed . these genes display diet-dependent longitudinal transcriptomic regulation . thus, genes and pathways identified as regulated in one offspring group were either unregulated or showed an opposite direction of regulation in the corresponding ontogenetic period within the other dietary group.

between fetal and perinatal stages , there were  <dig>   probe-sets showing levels and directions of regulation in the ap group that were different from the lp group. genes associated with 'ampk signaling' were found to be increased at stage  <dig> dpn, while expression of genes associated with 'g2/m dna damage checkpoint regulation', 'mitotic roles of polo-like kinase' and 'pyrimidine metabolism' were decreased . in lp offspring  <dig>  probe-sets showed ontogenetic regulation  during the corresponding time period that was group-specific. the mrna expression level of genes associated with cell cycle, mitosis, and metabolism of purines and pyrimidines was increased in lp offspring. furthermore, genes participating in 'wnt signaling' were found to be decreased in lp perinatal piglets.

the comparison between the dietary gestational protein diets  is shown in dependence of the regulatory direction .

comparing perinatal and juvenile piglets   <dig> probe-sets were regulated in a different manner in ap offspring and in lp offspring. of these,  <dig> probe-sets were up-regulated and  <dig> probe-sets showed lower expression at a higher age. expression values of genes participating in 'ampk signaling' and 'mtor signaling' were increased, whereas genes associated with the 'degradation of valine, leucine and isoleucine' were decreased in ap offspring. in the same period  <dig> probe-sets exhibited ontogenetic regulation that was specific to lp offspring. of these,  <dig> probe-sets showed an increased mrna expression. genes involved in 'fatty acid metabolism', 'biosynthesis of steroids', 'synthesis and degradation of ketone bodies', 'glucocorticoid receptor signaling' as well as the 'degradation of valine, leucine and isoleucine' were found to be up-regulated in lp offspring, while genes associated with 'g1/s checkpoint regulation' were down-regulated.

when juvenile and young adult pigs  are compared,  <dig>  probe-sets differed significantly  in ap offspring. genes participating in 'ampk signaling' and 'fatty acid metabolism' were found to be up-regulated while genes associated with 'mitotic roles of polo-like kinase' and 'vegf signaling' were found to be down-regulated in ap offspring. in lp offspring  <dig>  probe-sets were differently expressed . in lp offspring, genes involved in 'mtor signaling', 'fatty acid elongation in mitochondria' as well as the 'degradation of valine, leucine and isoleucine' were up regulated. furthermore, genes involved in 'actin cytoskeleton signaling', 'rhoa signaling', 'rac signaling' and 'complement system' were found to be down-regulated. figure  <dig> gives a comprehensive overview of the pathways found regulated between stages and diets. for all genes exemplarily analysed, qrt-pcr confirmed the direction of differential regulation as obtained by microarray analysis. in 90% of the genes that we validated by qrt-pcr, significant expression differences in mrna levels between the treatment groups were identified by both qrt-pcr and microarray analysis . correlations between expression values of microarray and qrt-pcr of positive validated transcripts ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig>  and were highly significant. this suggests that our microarray data are reliable.

ccnd <dig> - cyclin d2; ncapg - non-smc condensin i complex, subunit g; mgmt - o-6-methylguanine-dna methyltransferase; gadd45b - growth arrest and dna-damage-inducible, β ; sdhb - succinate dehydrogenase complex, subunit b, iron sulfur ; ppargc1a - peroxisome proliferator activated receptor γ coactivator-1α; prkaa <dig> - 5'-amp-activated protein kinase, catalytic α <dig> chain; prkaa <dig> - 5'-amp-activated protein kinase, catalytic α <dig> chain *calculated by factorial normalisation on rpl <dig> expression values; **p-value of pamn' rho; n.r. - not regulated

discussion
we applied whole-genome microarrays to evaluate hepatic gene expression profiles of offspring from sows fed either an isocaloric maternal low protein or adequate protein diet throughout their pregnancy. in order to investigate transcriptional features of developmental nutritional programming we conducted a longitudinal experimental design covering prenatal, perinatal, juvenile and adult ontogenetic stages in a porcine model. the comparisons of the relative mrna abundances depending on dietary group and ontogenetic stages provide an overall view of the developmental plasticity of the liver.

at the prenatal stage mrna expression profiles were extensively altered between the dietary groups. at this time point the fetuses were subjected to a serious nutritional deficiency that requires an acute transcriptomic response. following in utero exposure to a gestational low protein diet at  <dig> dpn we could not find significant regulatory changes of genes of any molecular route in porcine perinatal liver. at this stage the animals experienced a kind of release from metabolic burden after cross-fostering and suckling. obviously, this initiates an immediate recovery of the activity of genes to 'normal level' reflected by similar expression pattern in lp and ap piglets. however, at the whole-body level adverse consequences of restricted intrauterine supply were observed  <cit> . in juvenile lp offspring, mrna expression profiles were moderately altered compared to ap offspring. however, the number of differentially expressed probe-sets increased extensively at adult stage. the observed transcriptional postnatal regulations were delayed long-term effects of the prenatal nutritional supply. due to the normal dietary conditions at juvenile and adult stages the alterations found here can be regarded as fetal nutritional programming.

our model indicates that gestational lp diets affected the hepatic expression profiles in an acute, short-term as well as in a delayed, long-term manner in lp offspring. due to the lp diet a number of molecular routes related to cell cycle and cellular turnover, response to stimuli, as well as energy-, lipid- and amino acid metabolic pathways are shifted on the transcriptional level in the liver at prenatal stages under the direct influence of limited protein and/or amino acid supply, but also postnatal. the effect is characterised by a programming of the genome that leads to different responsiveness and adaptability of the gene expression machinery to chronic and acute environmental stimuli, i.e. nutritional supply. together with the observation that the offspring of both groups did not differ in bodyweight but in body composition and fat content  <cit> , the data indicate that the activity of different genes led to different partitioning of nutrients among peripheral and visceral organs and tissues.

transcriptional excursions regarding cell maintenance and proliferation
mammalian cell division is precisely regulated by variate factors and functional networks. therefore, cell division is synchronous with cell growth  <cit> . eukaryotic cells evolved elaborate mechanisms to verify the fidelity of cell division. therefore, a cell cycle control system can arrest the cycle at certain checkpoints. key components in terms of cell cycle regulation are cyclins. cyclin levels undergo an oscillation of synthesis and degradation in each cell cycle and fall at a proper developmental time point to exit the cell cycle  <cit> . therefore, the transcriptional control of cyclins provides an additional level of growth regulation. mitotic cyclins interact with polo-like kinases , an evolutionary conserved family of essential cell cycle regulators, which are required at several key points within mitosis, including entry into and exit from mitosis  <cit> . it has been shown that fetal growth retardation is accompanied by alterations in cell cycle regulating molecules at both transcriptome  <cit>  and proteome level  <cit> . however, longitudinal studies focussed on diet-dependent alterations of cell cycle regulators are scarce. the porcine expression patterns in this study showed a decreased mrna expression of genes associated with the control of mitosis and cell cycle checkpoint regulation at stage  <dig> dpc in lp fetuses. these regulations may indicate an impaired fetal growth performance due to the gestational low protein diet. therefore, the down-regulation of cell cycle regulating pathways might lead to a lengthened cell cycle in lp fetuses and offspring  <cit>  and cumulate in growth retardation in lp fetuses. in ap fetuses, cell cycle parameters were found to be decreased in expression within developmental period i, which indicates a terminated fetal growth. in contrast, lp fetuses showed an increased expression of transcripts associated with cell division within the corresponding developmental period. obviously, the increased mrna expression of genes related to cell cycle regulators within developmental period i in lp offspring accounts for compensatory regulations regarding the lowered fetal weight due to the gestational diet. within developmental period iii, ap offspring showed a decreased expression of genes associated with polo-like kinases, which is in line with the assumption that lp pigs have not terminated their growth at stage  <dig> dpn; in particular their liver has not attained a steady-state and that there is persistent functional demand towards cell proliferation potentially to respond to an elevated metabolic burden, including a higher turn over of lipids and ketone bodies.

the expression level of ncapg  condensin i complex subunit g) was highlighted as strongly associated with fetal growth retardation  <cit> . according to recent studies ncapg is important during mitotic cell division. due to the gestational low protein diet ncapg was found to be down-regulated in lp fetuses compared to ap fetuses, which reflects the organismal effort to counteract the growth retarding processes in lp fetuses.

beside pathways related to the control of growth and cell deviation, the diet-dependent expression patterns showed regulation in genes associated with biosynthesis, degradation and salvage of nucleotides  as well as cell motility and cytokinesis . these expression patterns suggest a dietary effect on cellular turn-over, which might be increased at early stages but decreased at adult stage in lp offspring. therefore, a diet-dependent tissue remodelling might take place in lp offspring as observed previously  <cit> .

the 'mtor signaling' acts as an important nutrient sensing pathway that controls protein synthesis in mammalian cells at the level of translation  <cit> . upstream signaling events of 'mtor signaling' include alterations in amino acid availability, abundance of hormones, amp and growth factors  <cit> . thus, 'mtor signaling' is involved in regulating individual cell growth, growth performance, and developmental processes  <cit> . an increase of 'mtor signaling' within developmental period ii was observed in ap offspring, but not in the lp group. this may account for improper protein synthesis  <cit>  in lp offspring. however, at adult stage a diet-dependent up-regulation of 'mtor signaling' in lp offspring suggests a transcriptional priority for cellular growth and proliferation. therefore, 'mtor signaling' might be involved in compensatory growth processes at adult stage in lp offspring.

another signaling pathway identified to be regulated in a diet-dependent manner is the 'vegf  signaling' pathway, which is known from gene deletion studies to be essential in developmental processes  <cit> . therefore, the transcriptional up-regulation of 'vegf signaling' reflects the effort on cell maintenance and angiogenic growth in lp offspring at stage  <dig> dpn. obviously, hepatic ontogenetic growth is not finished at adult stage in lp offspring in contrast to ap offspring.

furthermore, the dietary modifications led to regulation of the 'wnt signaling' pathway, which is involved in various aspects of embryogenesis, including cell differentiation and cell proliferation  <cit> . therefore, the observed mrna expression patterns might contribute to an impaired developmental growth in lp offspring.

regarding the lp model used in rodents, it has been suggested that the maternal lp diet had an impact on 'insulin signaling' as well as on 'igf <dig> signaling' and its binding proteins  <cit> . however, in this study no regulation of both 'insulin signaling' and 'igf <dig> signaling' was observed in liver tissue of lp porcine offspring, possibly due to maturation-, species-, tissue-, sex- and time-dependent regulations.

transcriptional excursions regarding lipid-, energy- and n-metabolism
during postnatal development a remarkable number of diet- and stage-dependent transcriptionally regulated pathways were related to lipid metabolism, including 'fatty acid metabolism', 'fatty acid elongation in mitochondria', 'synthesis and degradation of ketone bodies', 'bile acid synthesis' and 'biosynthesis of steroids'. these findings suggest that pathways associated to lipid metabolism are part of postnatal adaptive responses to the prenatal nutritional environment in lp offspring. consistent with these observations, genes associated with lipid metabolism were found to be altered at pre- and postnatal stages in rodents, where the lp model was studied intensively  <cit> . furthermore, the transcriptional adaptations may have consequences for the offspring's phenotype, including alterations of plasma parameters  <cit> , hepatic histology  <cit>  and body composition  <cit> .

according to the longitudinal study design the 'ampk  signaling' was found to be regulated throughout ontogenesis in ap offspring only. 'ampk signaling' is a metabolic pathway which is involved in the regulation of the lipid and energy metabolism in mammalian cells  <cit> . in particular, the cellular energy sensor ampk is essential for a proper mitochondrial activity and metabolic health citetowler <dig>  therefore, the up-regulation of 'ampk signaling' in developmental periods i, ii and iii in ap offspring accounts for metabolic health in ap offspring, but not in lp offspring. on the one hand, this matter may be related to mitochondrial impairments which may happen due to the lp diet, as has been suggested previously  <cit> . on the other hand, it might be associated to the transcriptional excursions within the lipid metabolism in lp offspring. moreover, the expression of the catalytic subunits of ampk, prkaa <dig> and prkaa <dig> was found to be decreased in lp offspring compared to ap offspring at stage  <dig> dpn, which may contribute to an imbalanced cellular metabolism. taken together, the observed regulations were seen as a clue for impairments in energy metabolism in lp offspring during ontogenesis.

furthermore, the diet-dependent transcriptional excursions revealed an impact on n-metabolism. in particular, the degradation of essential, branch-chained amino acids like valine, leucine and isoleucine was found to be regulated, which may illustrate the lp offspring's efforts to mimic prenatal experiences in terms of dietary supply during postnatal development in the face of richer conditions. although essential amino acids are needed for growth, anabolic and developmental processes, transcriptional levels of genes leading to degradation of those dietary valuable compounds is forced during postnatal development in lp offspring.

transcriptional excursions regarding stress and immune response
the biological effect of glucocorticoids is modulated by glucocorticoid receptors. by means of succeeding direct and indirect interactions of downstream target genes, mrna expression regarding metabolic, behavioural, cardiovascular and immune functions is modulated. in rodents, many studies reported an impact of maternal low protein diets on expression and affinity of the glucocorticoid receptor and its signaling molecules  <cit> . consistently, in porcine offspring a diet-dependent regulation of 'glucocorticoid receptor signaling' was also found. therefore, expression profiles at weaning and adult stages point to an alarm alert  in lp offspring. furthermore, genes associated with the complement system were found to be regulated in a diet-dependent manner at stage  <dig> dpn. obviously, at least a part of the innate immune system is impaired when lp offspring is faced with a pre-biotical stress like weaning. consistent with this finding, expression of genes associated with an impaired immunity were found to be altered in offspring of protein malnourished dams  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, the longitudinal survey of the hepatic transcriptomic response in offspring of dams fed either a gestational low protein diet  or an adequate protein diet  at prenatal , perinatal , juvenile, and adult  ontogenetic stages revealed acute short-term and delayed long-term modulations. the changes in gene expression were not persistent in terms of consistent differential expression of genes at all stages. however, genes related to cell cycle and cellular turnover were differentially expressed at all stages except stage  <dig> dpn. this stage appeared as a phase of recovery of the activity of genes. differential expression of genes related to lipid, ketone body, and amino acid metabolism indicate that the offspring of both groups uses different metabolic directions in response to identical nutritional condition during postnatal life.

