BACKGROUND
learning, changed behaviour following experience, is ubiquitous in animals, from protozoans to primates . at large, the huge variety of learning processes can be categorized into non-associative and associative  <cit> . associative learning occurs through the association of two previously unrelated stimuli, and includes reinforcement, whereas non-associative learning occurs in response to a single stimulus, without reinforcement. distinction between these two principal learning categories is not clear-cut and under debate, e.g. . nonetheless, studies rigorously tackling this issue, by, for example, comparing the relative importance of non-associative and associative experiences on the learning success in a given task, such as host or prey recognition, are scarce . associative learning involves pavlovian  and operant  conditioning , while non-associative learning involves sensitization, habituation and imprinting .

here, we addressed the behavioural aspects of non-associative vs. associative learning in foraging predatory mites, neoseiulus californicus. n. californicus is a plant-inhabiting generalist predator feeding on herbivorous mites such as spider mites and rust and gall mites, small insects such as thrips, and plant-derived substances such as pollen . n. californicus has a ranked food preference. among the possible food options, spider mites such as the two-spotted mite tetranychus urticae are the primary prey  <cit> . difficult-to-grasp small insects such as larvae of the western flower thrips frankliniella occidentalis are an alternative, secondary prey, e.g.  <cit> . neoseiulus californicus has five life stages—egg, larva, protonmyph, deutonymph, adult—and is able to improve its foraging performance by imprinting on a given prey in a sensitive phase early in life, i.e. in the larval and early protonymphal stage  <cit> . the larvae are, compared to later life stages, little mobile, because of having only six legs, and usually do not feed; the next developmental stage, the protonymph, has eight legs and is the first obligatory feeding stage  <cit> . the predators are eyeless and use primarily chemo- and mechano-sensory cues to sense their environment, including recognizing suitable prey  <cit> . for prey, such as thrips, which is difficult to grasp and overwhelm by the fragile small juvenile predators, mere prey contact in early life suffices to establish persistent memory, allowing improving foraging on this prey by the larger adult predators  <cit> . while food imprinting early in life, a non-associative form of learning  <cit> , produces prey-specific, long-lasting, life stage-crossing effects in foraging n. californicus  <cit> , it is unclear how these effects compare to the effects of associative experience made by the predators. moreover, which prey cues are learned, probably body odours or chemical traces left on the surface, is unknown. these are important issues, from both fundamental and applied perspectives. studies comparing the operation of different learning processes and their relative contribution to a given learning effect are scarce  <cit>  but inevitable for a thorough mechanistic understanding of learning at the behavioural, perceptual and neuronal levels. detailed understanding of the learning processes and cues has also relevance to the use of natural enemies, such as n. californicus, in biological control, because possibly allowing priming them on a target pest .

we conducted two experiments, no-choice and choice, to determine which features of the alternative prey western flower thrips, f. occidentalis, are learned by n. californicus early in life, and to compare the effects produced by non-associative and associative experience. the prey cues presented to young predatory mites during the learning phase varied in complexity and information content, ranging from  prey traces left on the surface, to  prey traces left on the surface plus chemical, behavioural and morphological traits on the body of live prey, to  prey traces left on the surface plus chemical, behavioural and morphological traits on the body of live prey plus dead prey allowing easy feeding. treatments  and  represent non-associative learning paradigms, while treatment  represents an associative learning paradigm, because of involving tasting, feeding and/or satiation rewards.

RESULTS
no-choice experiment
thrips experience  but not type of experience  and the interaction between thrips and type of experience  affected the number of thrips killed and sucked out over the 4 days experimental period . thrips-experienced predators killed more thrips than thrips-naïve predators. only on the 1st day, associative thrips learners, i.e. those that had experienced thrips by feeding, killed and sucked out more thrips than non-associative thrips learners and thrips-naïve predators . the number of eggs produced did neither vary with thrips experience  nor type of experience  nor their interaction  over time . type of experience affected predator longevity , no matter of thrips experience  and the interaction between thrips and type of experience  . predators that had only experienced prey traces survived longer than predators with feeding experience ; longevity of predators that had contacted prey was intermediate, but not statistically separable  from longevity of predators experienced with prey traces and those with feeding experience .fig.  <dig> predation on first larvae of thrips f. occidentalis by gravid thrips-experienced and -naïve  n. californicus females over time, in dependence of the predators’ type of experience early in life. type of experience was either contact with live prey but no feeding , feeding on prey , or contact with prey traces left on the surface . different superscript letters accompanying prey species and type of experience indicate significant differences 


fig.  <dig> oviposition by gravid thrips-experienced and -naïve  n. californicus females offered first larvae of thrips f. occidentalis as prey over time, in dependence of the predators’ type of experience early in life. type of experience was either contact with live prey but no feeding , feeding on prey , or contact with prey traces left on the surface . the same superscript letter accompanying prey species and type of experience indicates non-significance 


fig.  <dig> survival of gravid thrips-experienced and -naïve  n. californicus females offered first larvae of thrips f. occidentalis as prey, in dependence of the predators’ type of experience early in life. type of experience was either contact with live prey but no feeding , feeding on prey , or contact with prey traces left on the surface . different letters on top of bars indicate significant differences among types of experience 




choice experiment
thrips-experienced predators consumed more prey in total  than thrips-naïve predators , no matter of the type of experience  and the interaction between thrips and type of experience  . this was primarily due to thrips-experienced predators consuming more thrips than thrips-naïve predators , no matter of the type of experience  and the interaction between thrips and type of experience  . in contrast, predation on spider mites did neither vary with thrips experience  nor type of experience  nor their interaction  . egg production was marginally significantly higher in thrips-experienced than -naïve predators , no matter of the type of experience  and the interaction between thrips and type of experience  .fig.  <dig> total number of prey consumed by gravid thrips-experienced and -naïve  n. californicus females simultaneously offered four spider mite nymphs, t. urticae, plus four first larvae of thrips, f. occidentalis, after  <dig> and 24 h, in dependence of the predators’ type of experience early in life. type of experience was either contact with live prey but no feeding , feeding on prey , or contact with prey traces left on the surface . different superscript letters accompanying prey species experience indicate a significant difference 


fig.  <dig> number of first larvae of thrips, f. occidentalis, consumed by gravid thrips-experienced and -naïve  n. californicus females, simultaneously offered four spider mite nymphs, t. urticae, plus four thrips larvae, f. occidentalis, after  <dig> and 24 h, in dependence of the predators’ type of experience early in life. type of experience was either contact with live prey but no feeding , feeding on prey , or contact with prey traces left on the surface . different superscript letters accompanying prey species experience indicate a significant difference 


fig.  <dig> number of t. urticae nymphs consumed by gravid thrips-experienced and -naïve  n. californicus females, simultaneously offered four spider mite nymphs, t. urticae, plus four thrips larvae, f. occidentalis, after  <dig> and 24 h, in dependence of the predators’ type of experience early in life. type of experience was either contact with live prey but no feeding , feeding on prey , or contact with prey traces left on the surface . the same superscript letter accompanying prey species experience indicates non-significance 


fig.  <dig> number of eggs laid by gravid thrips-experienced and -naïve  n. californicus females, simultaneously offered four spider mite nymphs, t. urticae, plus four first larvae of thrips, f. occidentalis, within  <dig> and 24 h, in dependence of the predators’ type of experience early in life. type of experience was either contact with live prey but no feeding , feeding on prey , or contact with prey traces left on the surface . different superscript letters accompanying prey species experience indicate a marginally significant difference 




discussion
our study reveals that both non-associative and associative learning processes operate in foraging predatory mites neoseiulus californicus. mere contact with the prey f. occidentalis or its traces left on the surface was sufficient for learning and establishing long-lasting  memory  <cit> . however, reinforcement of the prey experience made early in life, by pairing external prey cues with a feeding reward , strengthened or intensified the learning effect, as indicated by the initially higher predation rate of predators with thrips feeding experience than those with only thrips contact or traces experience in the no-choice experiment. at the behavioural level, this could mechanistically represent non-associative learning plus the added associative effect, or graded intensities of one and the same learning process , or completely distinct processes. the latter is unlikely because, chronologically, first, orientation on, and recognition of, external prey cues is required, in both non-associative and associative learning, and only then, after recognition and acceptance as suitable prey, in associative learning gustatory cues and satiation come into play, reinforcing learning through the feeding reward. in principle, every associative experience can have, or can build on, components of non-associative learning but this has rarely been assessed .

at the neuronal level, associative learning may either strengthen or intensify the changes in the same neuronal pathways, as compared to non-associative learning, or establish additional interconnected or separate pathways than non-associative learning. the latter is true for the distinction between short- and long-term memory , which, at the molecular level, trigger differing protein syntheses . while in honey bees, non-associative and associative learning could be reflected in different memory retention times  <cit> , this is not applicable to predatory mites, because also non-associative imprinting may produce long-lasting effects  <cit> . at the genetic level, short- and long-term memory, and possibly non-associative and associative learning, may involve genetically distinct, functionally different components . at the epigenetic level, short- and long-term memory may be discernible in methylation of learning-related genes , which may also be true for epigenetic marks produced by non-associative and associative experiences. for predatory mites, any evidence of the involvement of different genes and/or differing epigenetic regulation of non-associative and associative learning remains elusive until identification of learning-associated genes.

apart from feeding experience increasing the initial predation rate on thrips in the no-choice experiment, we did not observe any differences between the types of experience within thrips-experienced predators. however, prey feeding experience early in life, no matter whether thrips or spider mites, had an effect on survival of the experimental animals, that is, it shortened predator longevity. this might represent an operating cost of associative learning, i.e., a trade-off between learning and life history traits  <cit> . energy needed to form new, or strengthen existing, neuronal connections and pathways, was traded off against energy used for basic physiological maintenance and processes, no matter whether the predators then received the prey experienced early in life or a novel prey. predation rate over time was higher in thrips-experienced than -naïve predators but did not differ among types of thrips-experience  in the no choice-experiment. lacking difference among types of experience within prey species was also evident in the choice experiment. similar to the no-choice experiment, thrips-experienced predators consumed more thrips and laid more eggs than thrips-naïve predators, no matter of the type of thrips experience . higher egg production of thrips-experienced than thrips-naïve predators points at the adaptive benefits of thrips learning  <cit> . the choice experiment underlines that the behavioural changes brought about by thrips experience early in life are thrips specific and not the result of unspecific sensitization  <cit> . if thrips experience in early life would have sensitized the predators, thrips-experienced predators should have fed more on any prey, including spider mites, which was not the case.

at the perceptual level, two or three chemosensory modalities were involved in associative learning,  volatile and/or  tactile chemoreception and  gustation by ingestion, whereas it was just one or two,  volatile and/or  tactile chemoreception, in non-associative learning. in associative learning, satiation came as an additional internal stimulus into play. knowledge about the sensory modalities and prey cues playing a role in learning has relevance for the use of n. californicus, and other natural enemies, in biological control. commonly, these predators are mass-reared on other than target prey, possibly compromising their performance against the target pest after release in the crop. adding chemical extracts or dead corpses from target prey to the mass rearing might enhance the efficacy of the predators, at least in the short term after release. pertinent proofs of concept are available for parasitoids  <cit> : parasitoids primed on the target host during rearing performed better against this host in the field than target host-naïve parasitoids.

CONCLUSIONS
learning processes can be broadly categorized into non-associative and associative but how these two processes compare in the same learning task is poorly understood. we tackled this issue by investigating the effects produced by non-associative and associative learning in plant-inhabiting predatory mites neoseiulus californicus in foraging contexts. adult predatory mite females memorized, after three molting events, prey, western flower thrips frankliniella occidentalis, experienced in early life. associative, rewarded experience produced slightly stronger, but physiologically more costly, learning effects than non-associative experience. both learning processes resulted in persistent memory. we argue that non-associative learning is an inevitable component of associative learning rather than a completely distinct process.

