BACKGROUND
regulation of gene expression in response to external and internal stimuli is a crucial mechanism for adaptation of microorganisms to changes of environmental conditions and intracellular states. in bacteria, regulation of gene expression at the transcriptional level is usually mediated by transcription factors  that recognize their cognate tf-binding sites  in the promoter regions of regulated genes. a set of target genes under direct control of a certain tf is defined as a regulon. all regulons in a single organism establish the transcriptional regulatory network , a fine-tuned system for complex regulation of gene expression in response to environmental changes and physiological needs of the cell.

reconstruction of trns in bacterial genomes involves identification of regulatory interactions between target operons and tfs that requires genome-wide definition of all respective tfbss. various approaches for trn reconstruction have been developed including traditional bottom-up genetic methods
 <cit>  and new top-down techniques based on the large-scale expression data
 <cit>  and/or automated inference of tfbs motifs
 <cit> . on the other hand, the growing number of available complete genomic sequences opens opportunities for comparative genomic analysis of transcriptional regulation and subsequent trn inference . this analysis can be efficiently used for both propagation of known regulons to previously uncharacterized organisms and for ab initio discovery of novel regulons. combination of the comparative genomic-based regulon reconstruction with other genome context analysis techniques and multiple available experimental datasets define a knowledge-driven approach for reconstruction of trns in a set of related bacterial genomes. this approach has been successfully used for trn inference in two groups of related genomes including  <dig> shewanella species
 <cit>  and six species from the staphylococcaceae family
 <cit> . the comparative genomics approach not only allowed us to reconstruct trns in multiple genomes but also resulted in prediction of functions for previously uncharacterized genes.

in this study, we applied the knowledge-driven comparative genomic approach for reconstruction of trns in lactic acid bacteria belonging to the lactobacillales order of the firmicutes phylum. in spite of the large number of complete genomes and huge economic impact of this group , most studies of gene regulation in these bacteria are limited to individual regulons in some model species; large-scale trn reconstructions were attempted for lactobacillus plantarum <cit>  and lactococcus lactis <cit> . on the other hand, availability of complete genomic sequences and multiple experimental data on gene regulation provide an opportunity for application of comparative genomic-based techniques for reconstruction of trns in lactic acid bacteria. to reconstruct genome-wide trns in the set of  <dig> lactobacillales genomes we used a modified approach with three innovations. first, we subdivided the analyzed group of genomes into two phylogenetically distinct groups: the streptococcaceae group including species from the streptococcus and lactococcus genera, and the lactobacillaceae group that also includes two closely-related genomes from the leuconostocaceae family. second, to compose the initial training sets of tf-regulated genes we used the available experimental data on transcriptional regulation from  <dig> model species. third, the coordinated reconstruction of a large number of tf regulons was carried out by a community of annotators using the regpredict platform
 <cit>  with subsequent curation and quality control. using this combined approach we reconstructed regulons for  <dig> orthologous tfs, including  <dig> novel regulons predicted for the first time in this study and awaiting further experimental validation.

RESULTS
we selected a set of  <dig> complete genomes in the lactobacillales order for trn reconstruction. based on the phylogenetic species tree  all studied genomes were divided into two groups called the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae. the streptococcaceae family includes  <dig> streptococcus spp. and  <dig> strains of lactococcus lactis. the second group includes  <dig> genomes from the lactobacillaceae family and  <dig> genomes form the leuconostocaceae family that are phylogenetically close to each other
 <cit> .

repertoire of tfs in lactobacillales genomes
to estimate the scale and diversity of the tf mediated regulatory networks in the lactobacillales genomes, we performed a genetic census of their putative dna-binding tfs using similarity search and the existing prokaryotic tf compilations . the total number of putative tfs varies broadly within the lactobacillales genomes, from ~ <dig> in s. thermophilus and l. helveticus to ~ <dig> in l. plantarum and ~ <dig> in s. gallolyticus .

the putative tfs identified in the lactobacillales are distributed between  <dig> protein families and about 90% of these tfs belong to  <dig> major families with at least two representatives per genome. the largest number of tf representatives was observed for the xre family . among other large families with more than  <dig> tfs per genome are the tetr, gntr, marr, ompr, laci, lysr, merr and arac families. comparison of tf repertoires between the two lactobacillales groups reveals  <dig> tf families that have representatives in both groups. among the lineage-specific tf families, three families  are present only in the streptococcaceae, whereas four families  are unique for the lactobacillaceae. interestingly, the lexa and cody regulators are both present in the staphylococcaceae, bacillaceae, and enterococcaceae families of firmicutes, suggesting the family-specific loss of these tfs and their regulons in the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae families, respectively.

the entire set of  <dig> tfs identified in  <dig> studied genomes was broken into  <dig> orthologous groups in the streptococcaceae and  <dig> orthologous groups in the lactobacillaceae . the numbers of universal tfs present in all analyzed streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae genomes are  <dig> and  <dig>  respectively . at that, only  <dig> regulators are shared between these two groups of universal tfs including the global regulator for catabolite repression ccpa
 <cit> , the copper uptake regulator copr
 <cit> , the purine biosynthesis regulator purr
 <cit> , the redox control global regulator rex
 <cit> , and the aminosugar utilization regulator nagr
 <cit> . in each taxonomic group we defined all tfs that are present in more than half of the analyzed genomes as conserved tfs. among the conserved tfs,  <dig> are shared by both studied lineages, whereas the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae groups have respectively  <dig> and  <dig> conserved tfs that are lineage-specific. the regulators of carbohydrate and amino acid metabolism form the most populated functional group of conserved tfs .

the studied two taxonomic groups of lactic acid bacteria demonstrate different distributions of orthologous tfs. the fractions of universal and conserved tfs are significantly higher in the streptococcaceae than in the lactobacillaceae. on the other hand, the lactobacillaceae genomes are equipped by a confidently higher fraction of sporadically distributed tfs that are present in  <dig> to  <dig> genomes. thus, the lactobacillaceae are characterized by higher variability of tfs orthologous groups than the streptococcaceae that is in correspondence with the larger phylogenetic distances between species in the lactobacillaceae family .

reconstruction of regulons in two lineages of lactobacillales
a comparative genomic approach implemented in the regpredict web server
 <cit>  was applied for regulon inference in the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae groups of genomes. totally,  <dig> orthologous tf regulons were reconstructed in the studied genomes . initially we collected the published experimental data on transcriptional regulation in model lactobacillales species . depending on the availability of experimental data, we applied three different workflows for regulon inference:  expansion and projection of tf regulons previously characterized in lactobacillales,  the reconstruction of regulons for tfs that have orthologs previously characterized in b. subtilis or s. aureus, and  ab initio inference of regulons for previously uncharacterized tfs .

a significant number of the studied lactobacillales genomes, including eight streptococcus, two lactococcus and four lactobacillus species, were considered as model species with previously characterized tfs and regulons . by using workflow  <dig>  we propagated the previously established regulatory interactions for  <dig> tfs in the model lactobacillales species, and predicted new regulon members by the comparative genomics approach. using workflow  <dig>  we inferred regulons for twelve tfs that have orthologs previously experimentally investigated in b. subtilis and two tfs that were previously studied in s. aureus. finally, using workflow  <dig>  we predicted and described  <dig> novel tf regulons . thus, all tf regulons studied in this work are either entirely predicted by computational analysis regulons or partially predicted regulons with some regulatory interactions supported by experimental data in model species.

the resulting set of reconstructed regulons varies drastically between the individual genomes . the average number of reconstructed tf regulons per genome is  <dig> , whereas the minimal and maximal numbers are  <dig> and  <dig> that were inferred in l. delbrueckii and l. plantarum, respectively . an average regulatory network of the reconstructed tf regulons includes ~ <dig> genes per genome. the minimal number of genes in a reconstructed trn was observed in l. delbrueckii , whereas the maximal number of regulated genes in a network was in s. suis . in summary, the number of regulated genes in the reconstructed tf regulons is significantly higher in the streptococcaceae genomes. however, l. plantarum from the lactobacillaceae group has numbers of tfs and target genes in the reconstructed trn comparable with streptococcaceae. the observed variability in reconstructed trns of studied microorganisms can be explained by multiple factors including the diversity of their respective ecological niches and nutrient availability, and different metabolic capacities of individual species.

1numbers of orthologous groups of tfs, genes and operons in lineage.

classification of reconstructed regulons by taxonomic distribution
distribution and properties of  <dig> tf regulons in  <dig> genomes of the lactobacillales are summarized in additional file
 <dig>  in each of the two taxonomic groups, the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae, we defined tf regulons that are universal  and the remaining regulons with a mosaic distribution in the analyzed genomes . only five regulons including the global regulons ccpa and rex were found to be universally conserved in both lineages. ten regulons that are universal in the streptococcaceae have orthologs with mosaic distribution in the lactobacillaceae. in contrast, no tf regulons appeared in the group of regulons that are universal in the lactobacillaceae but mosaic in the streptococcaceae. a large set of  <dig> tf regulons that are mosaic in both lineages contains regulons controlling different sugar utilization pathways.

numbers of regulons for orthologous tfs in streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae are shown.  <dig> ‘universal’ regulons are present in all  <dig> studied genomes of the group; ‘mosaic’ regulons are present in group but in less than  <dig> genomes; ‘―’ means the absence of regulons in this group.

the remaining tf regulons reconstructed in this work are present only in a single taxonomic group. among  <dig> tf regulons present solely in the streptococcaceae, the cmbr, cody and pipr regulons are universal, whereas the others have a mosaic distribution in  <dig> analyzed genomes. the sos response regulon lexa is only linage-specific regulon that was identified as universal in the lactobacillaceae, whereas the remaining  <dig> lineage-specific tf regulons have a mosaic distribution in this lineage.

in conclusion,  <dig> tf regulons are specific for the streptococcaceae,  <dig> regulons are present only in the lactobacillaceae and  <dig> regulons have orthologs in both lineages. thus, among the reconstructed regulons, the streptococcaceae group has significantly larger number of universal tf regulons in comparison with the lactobacillaceae group.

classification of reconstructed regulons by tf protein families
the reconstructed regulons are controlled by tfs from  <dig> protein families. the mostly represented tf family in the obtained set of regulons is the laci family . as expected, all laci family regulons reconstructed in this work controls different carbohydrate utilization pathways. another broadly represented tf family is gntr family  that control carbon and amino acid metabolisms and resistance to toxic compounds. tfs from the tetr and marr families  regulate genes involved in environmental adaptation, multidrug and heavy metal resistance and fatty acids metabolism. the reconstructed regulons from the rpir family control various carbohydrate utilization pathways , whereas the predicted agur regulon controls the agmatine utilization pathway. the bglr and deor families of tfs include respectively  <dig> and  <dig> regulators that control carbohydrate catabolism. three regulons operated by tfs from the lysr family regulate the cysteine/methionine metabolism, whereas one regulon  controls the malonate utilization pathway.

classification of reconstructed regulons by function
the functional gene content was assessed for each reconstructed tf regulon to tentatively predict its possible biological function and molecular effector. metabolic reconstruction of the respective biochemical pathways and prediction of functions of co-regulated genes were performed using the subsystem-based approach implemented in the seed genomic platform
 <cit> . the inferred functional annotations of genes constituting regulons were captured in the regprecise database
 <cit>  within the taxonomic collections of regulons for the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae groups .

overall, the reconstructed regulons were classified into  <dig> functional groups . the largest group counts  <dig> regulons for carbohydrate and central carbon metabolism. three other functional groups of regulons are involved of stress response , metal homeostasis  and amino acid metabolism . small numbers of regulons were reconstructed for cofactor metabolism , nucleotide metabolism  and fatty acid metabolism . additionally,  <dig> reconstructed tf regulons contain genes with unknown or hypothetical functions, and thus their specific functional roles and effectors remain unknown. functional content for the selected subset of reconstructed regulons is briefly described below.

carbohydrate metabolism
carbohydrates comprise a key source of carbon and energy for a variety of microorganisms. genomes from the lactobacillales order encode a large number of sugar catabolic pathways and most of these pathways have a mosaic distribution in individual species
 <cit> . this diversity of sugar catabolic pathways is matched by a large number of regulatory systems that allow sugar-specific induction of expression of these pathways.

here we reconstructed  <dig> tf regulons that control the sugar and central carbon metabolism in the lactobacillales. in addition to  <dig> sugar metabolism regulons that were previously characterized experimentally in model lactobacillales species,  <dig> regulons were reconstructed by projection from b. subtilis or s. aureus and  <dig> novel regulons were predicted for the first time in this work . analysis of available experimental data revealed  <dig> previously known regulatory interactions involving the sugar metabolism regulators in model lactobacillales organisms. using comparative genomics, we were able to significantly expand the sugar metabolism regulatory subnetwork. as an example, the previously known regulator of hyaluronidase regr in s. pneumoniae <cit>  was predicted to have an expanded regulon of  <dig> additional genes involved in the hyaluronate utilization that is conserved in six streptococcaceae genomes .

about  <dig> new regulatory interactions per genome were predicted for carbohydrate metabolism genes using the projection of known regulons from b. subtilis and s. aureus. for example, ccpn in b. subtilis was previously described as a regulator of the gluconeogenesis genes gapb and pcka <cit> . the comparative genomics reconstruction of the ccpn regulon revealed the pyruvate phosphate dikinase ppdk, the ccpn gene and the fructose biphosphatase fbp as novel members of the ccpn regulon in the lactobacillales . thus, the novel ccpn regulon in the lactobacillales have a set of target genes that is completely different from the known ccpn regulon in b. subtilis, although in both lineages it controls the gluconeogenesis pathway.

the reconstructed regulatory network includes  <dig> tfs that control  <dig> peripheral sugar utilization pathways, and  <dig> of these pathways are controlled by more than one tf. for instance, we reconstructed  <dig> different tf regulons for maltose and maltodextrin utilization pathway and  <dig> tf regulons for the sucrose catabolism. two different tf regulons per one sugar metabolic pathway were described for pathways involved in utilization of ascorbate, cellobiose, gluconate, lactose, n-acetylgalactosamine, ribose and trehalose. the observed redundancy in sugar-specific tfs is explained by  non-orthologous replacements of tfs for the same pathway in different genomes, and  existence of alternative pathway variants and multiple paralogs regulated by different tfs in the same genome. for example, two maltose/maltodextrin abc transporters are controlled by two non-orthologous tfs from the laci family in the streptococcaceae . the malefg operon is always regulated by malr protein. the malxcda operon is regulated by malr in four streptococcus spp. and under control of malr <dig> in three other streptococcus spp.

three other sugar utilization pathways in the streptococcus spp. are equipped by a redundant set of catabolic genes controlled by multiple non-orthologous regulators. sgar and sgar <dig> from the bglg family control the ascorbate utilization. the gntr family regulators agar and agar <dig> were predicted to control the n-acetylgalactosamine utilization gene loci. the cellobilose utilization genes are regulated by celr from the bglg family
 <cit>  and celq from the rok family
 <cit> . these functionally redundant sets of tf regulons indicate a complex evolutionary history of the sugar utilization subsystems in firmicutes.

stress response
we reconstructed totally  <dig> tf regulons involved in various stress responses and drug resistance. these include the ctsr, hrca, nmlr, padr and perr regulons that were previously experimentally described in at least one model lactobacillales genome. the sos response regulon lexa and multidrug resistance regulon ytra were projected using the previous knowledge of orthologous regulons in b. subtilis <cit> . overall, we predicted  <dig> target operons in the lactobacillaceae lexa regulon including some novel functions .

the fur family regulator perr was previously studied in s. pyogenes and s. suis, where it co-regulates genes involved in peroxide stress response and manganese transport
 <cit> . here we predicted some new members of the perr regulon involved in iron transport  and iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis . the latter iron-sulfur cluster biosynthesis operon was previously identified by us as a novel member of the perr regulon in the staphylococcaceae family
 <cit> . interestingly, we also predicted that in some streptococcus spp., perr controls expression of another tf for manganese homeostasis, mntr, and these two regulators form a potential cascade.

metal homeostasis
the group of reconstructed regulons for metal homeostasis includes  <dig> tf regulons. starting from  <dig> regulatory interactions previously described in  <dig> known regulons for model lactobacillales organisms, we expanded and projected the adcr, copr, flpa, mntr and scza regulons resulting in prediction of several new regulatory interactions in the genomes. for instance, we predicted regulation of genes encoding manganese  and nickel  transporters, heavy metal-transporting atpase , and mntr gene by the manganese homeostasis regulon mntr in the streptococcaceae.

in contrast to the adcr regulon for control of zinc homeostasis in the streptococcaceae, the lactobacillaceae species utilize the typical zinc-responsive regulator zur from the fur family. the zur regulon in the lactobacillaceae, which was reconstructed by projection from the b. subtilis zur regulon, includes the zinc transporter znuabc, and the zur and rpsn <dig> genes, the latter encoding a paralog of the ribosomal protein s <dig> 

two novel tfs from the arsr family analyzed in the lactobacillaceae are distantly related to the czcr regulator of cobalt-zinc-cadmium resistance from pseudomonas aeruginosa <cit> . the reconstructed czcr <dig> and czcr <dig> regulons were predicted to control different sets of genes involved in heavy metal resistance. another novel regulon, termed nihr , was predicted by its conserved co-localization with the nikmqo genes encoding a nickel transport system. the predicted nihr regulon also includes the nihr and nixa genes, the latter encoding a high-affinity nickel permease .

amino acids metabolism
among  <dig> reconstructed tf regulons for control of amino acid metabolism, seven regulons have been previously described in at least one model lactobacillales species. for these tf regulons, we projected  <dig> regulatory interactions to additional genomes and predicted ~ <dig> novel regulatory interactions per genome. first, we predicted the mtar- and cmbr-dependent regulation of the mmump operon involved in s-methylmethionine utilization in the streptococcaceae. second, we identified multiple new members of the nitrogen metabolism regulon glnr in both lineages including the glutamine transporter gluqhmp, the arginine catabolism genes arcabc and the aspartate-ammonia ligase asna. a novel amino acid metabolism regulon that was inferred for the first time in this work is operated by a rpir-like regulator, termed agur , which was found to be co-localized with agmatine utilization genes in the lactobacillaceae genomes.

crispr-cas genes under the control of global regulators
crispr-cas is a recently discovered prokaryotic rna-based system for adaptive immunity for defense against phages, plasmids and other mobile genetic elements
 <cit> . previously, the expression of crispr-cas genes has been shown to be regulated by different global tfs, such as h-ns, lrp, leuo
 <cit>  and crp
 <cit>  in e. coli, and rex in thermotoga maritima <cit> . in this work we predicted some new cases of regulation of crispr-cas genes in the lactobacillales genomes. the predicted operon cas9-cas1-cas2-csn <dig> is preceded by a candidate ccpa-binding site in s. agalactiae and s. mutans, whereas in s. agalactiae and s. equi this operon has a candidate cody-binding site in its promoter region. another putative crispr-cas operon, cas5-cas8c-cas7-cas1-cas <dig>  is predicted to be regulated by ccpa in s. equi and s. pyogenes. these predicted regulatory interactions for crispr-cas genes extend our understanding of regulatory mechanisms for bacterial immune systems.

evolution of regulons in lactobacillales
evolution of orthologous tf regulons
among  <dig> tf regulons reconstructed in this work,  <dig> regulons have orthologous tfs in both studied lineages of the lactobacillales . we compared the deduced tfbs motifs for the orthologous tf regulons in the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae lineages and classified them into three categories . category i includes  <dig> tf regulons with binding motifs that are well conserved or slightly variable in two lineages. category ii contains  <dig> tf regulons with moderately different motifs . category iii has  <dig> remaining tf regulons with binding motifs that are substantially different between the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae. remarkably, the category i is enriched by universal and highly conserved regulators. thus, it includes all  <dig> regulons that are universal in both studied lineages and  <dig> regulons for tfs that are universal in the streptococcaceae and have a mosaic distribution in the lactobacillaceae. the category i contains the highest number of global regulons  and mid-size regulons that control  <dig> or more target operons per genome . the remaining  <dig> regulons in this category are local, i.e. containing less than  <dig> target operons per genome. in contrast, the categories ii and iii contain respectively 94% and 100% of local regulons. these observations suggest that the conservation of tfbs motifs have a positive correlation with the regulon size. similar correlation was previously reported for the staphylococcaceae spp.
 <cit> .

analysis of conservation of gene contents for orthologous tf regulons between the two studied lineages classified all regulons into three different categories. the first group contains  <dig> strictly conserved regulons that do not demonstrate any difference in their gene content or have only slight changes between the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae . the second group includes  <dig> regulons that have a common core of conserved genes supplemented by unique sets of peripheral genes that are substantially different between the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae . this group of partially conserved regulons includes the global regulons ccpa and rex and several mid-size regulons . the third group contains  <dig> orthologous regulons, mdxr, niar and nrtr, having completely different sets of target genes between the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae groups, although their corresponding biological roles are conserved between the studied groups. high diversity of the latter three regulons can be explained by redundancy of the respective metabolic systems and regulatory mechanisms. thus, mdxr controls the maltose and maltodextrin utilization and the similar biological role was assigned to several other tf regulons in the lactobacillales . the phylogenetic distributions of two nad metabolism regulons niar and nrtr have an overlapping pattern in many studied genomes . in conclusion, we did not observe any correlation between the conservation of orthologous tf regulon structure and their cognate binding motifs in the analyzed taxonomic groups.

the  <dig> tf regulons with a common core and flexible set of peripheral genes between the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae groups can be classified into three subgroups:  regulons expanded in the streptococcaceae ;  regulons expanded in the lactobacillaceae , and  regulons with different peripheral sets of genes in the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae . we prepose that different sets of peripheral genes in the above  <dig> regulons have appeared due to independent expansion of regulons in each lineage. a common core of the argr regulon is formed by genes for the arginine transport and biosynthesis. the periphery of this regulon in the streptococcaceae consists of the argr gene and arcabc operon for arginine catabolism, whereas the extended part of the argr regulon in the lactobacillaceae includes only carbamoyl-phosphate synthase . the purr regulon in the streptococcaceae is expanded by genes for metabolism of folate-associated one-carbon compounds, whereas in the lactobacillaceae this regulon has additional genes for the adenine and guanine metabolism  and ribose-phosphate pyrophosphokinase . expansion of the perr regulon in the streptococcaceae affects genes for the iron and manganese homeostasis, whereas in the lactobacillaceae perr regulates several additional genes such as a nadh peroxidase. the ccpa regulon demonstrated the largest peripheral sets of genes in the studied lineages,  <dig> operons in the streptococcaceae and  <dig> operons in the lactobacillaceae. noteworthy, the ccpa regulon in the streptococcaceae is expanded by the crispr-cas cassette genes  and some virulence genes , suggesting that this global regulon supplies the link between the carbohydrate utilization, virulence and anti-phage immunity.

non-orthologous displacements of tf regulons
functional analysis of reconstructed tf regulons in the lactobacillales revealed that many biological processes are regulated by two or more non-orthologous tfs. these metabolic subsystems with redundant tf regulation include  <dig> distinct sugar utilization pathways  and the zinc homeostasis that are controlled by  <dig> non-orthologous tfs . in most cases, patterns of phylogenetic distribution of non-orthologous tfs controlling the same biological subsystem complement each other in the analyzed  <dig> genomes. interestingly, there are only four cases in which the non-orthologous tfs belong to different protein families , whereas in all remaining cases the identified pairs of non-orthologous tfs belong to the same tf family and thus can be classified as cases of xenologous gene replacement
 <cit> . the largest number of xenologous replacements of tfs was identified within the laci family .

interconnectivity in reconstructed trns
the cross talk between tf regulons can be identified by prediction of tfbss for two or more tfs within the regulatory region of the same operon. numerous target operons in the reconstructed trns are subject to regulation by multiple tfs. for instance, s. preumoniae has  <dig> target operons that share tfbss for two or more tfs. regulation of several target operons by multiple tfs is evolutionary conserved across a number of related genomes .

three global regulons, ccpa, cody and rex, often interconnect with each other and also with multiple local tf regulons. for example, the ccpa regulon overlaps with  <dig> tf regulons that control the carbohydrate utilization such as malr, scrr, trer, galr, frur, and regr. the cody regulon overlaps with the glnr and cmbr regulons that control the nitrogen metabolism and sulfur amino acid biosynthesis, respectively. a similar situation was previously observed in s. aureus, where the ccpa regulon overlaps with numerous local regulons for sugar utilization and the cody regulon overlaps with amino acid metabolism regulons
 <cit> . similarly, co-regulation of two heat shock response regulons, hrca and ctsr, was found both in the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae groups, and was also previously observed in s. aureus <cit> .

autoregulation of tfs is a regular feature of the reconstructed regulons. an average portion of the lactobacillales tfs with predicted control of their own expression is 72%. this index slightly varies between the analyzed genomes and is very close to the percentage of autoregulated tfs that was previously reported for s. aureus <cit> .

multiple regulatory cascades between various tfs were detected in the studied genomes. for instance, ccpa regulates the cody gene and multiple genes encoding sugar utilization regulators, such as frur, scrr, trer, and celr. among other identified cascades, cody controls glnr, cmbr controls homr and perr controls mntr in the streptococcaceae, whereas ctsr controls hrca in the lactobacillaceae. some cascades, such as the regulation of frur, galr, gutr, mtlr, scrr and trer genes by ccpa, are conserved between the streptococcaceae and lactobacillaceae lineages, whereas the remaining cases of regulatory tf cascades are lineage specific. comparison with the previously reconstructed regulatory network of s. aureus <cit>  showed that some of the identified lactobacillales regulatory cascades are also conserved in the staphylococcaceae. for instance, the ccpa-dependent regulation of frur, rbsr <dig>  scrr and trer, as well as the regulation of glnr by cody and hrca by ctsr, are conserved between the two groups. the conservation of cascades between distantly related genomes points to the importance of these regulatory interactions in the lactobacillales regulatory networks.

CONCLUSIONS
the knowledge-based bottom-up approach and comparative genomics techniques have been previously successively applied for reconstruction of bacterial trns in different groups of genomes
 <cit> . here we tentatively defined the reference collection of tf regulons in  <dig> lactobacillales genomes comprised of  <dig> orthologous groups of tfs and ~ <dig> regulatory interactions . the resulting regulatory network contains ~ <dig> regulated genes  that are involved in sugar utilization, stress response, metal homeostasis and metabolisms of amino acids, fatty acids, nucleotides, and cofactors. we used a modified workflow for trn reconstruction that is characterized by three main innovations:  analysis of two taxonomically related groups of genomes ,  involvement of numerous experimental data from the literature about tf regulation in lactic acid bacteria, and  coordinated reconstruction of multiple tf regulons by a community of annotators using multi-user web interface of the regpredict tool for regulon analysis
 <cit> . by utilizing the semi-automatic workflow for regulon inference combined with manual curation and regulon annotation we described the largest reference collection of tf regulons in lactic acid bacteria do date. the collection also includes the previously uncharacterized regulons for  <dig> tfs that comprise ~ <dig> target genes . thus, a significant number of predicted regulatory interactions and novel tf regulons await future experimental validation. during preparation of this manuscript, bitoun et al. experimentally analyzed rex regulon in the s. mutans ua159
 <cit>  and confirmed rex dependent regulation of  <dig> targets predicted in this work .

comparison of the inferred trns in the lactobacillales genomes reveals interesting trends in the evolution of trns and individual tf regulons. first, we found a positive correlation between the tfbs motif conservation between the two lactic acid bacteria lineages and the distribution and conservation of the respective tf regulons. second, we report that in the analyzed collection of lactobacillales regulons non-orthologous displacements of tfs occur more often between structurally related tfs in comparison with regulators that belong to different protein families.

