BACKGROUND
avocado  is a crop plant with oleaginous fruits belonging to the magnoliidae clade, a basal lineage of flowering plants. it is a member of lauraceae, a large family of about  <dig> genera and approximately 2500– <dig> species, mostly trees  <cit> . despite its recent introduction to international commerce, the avocado is no longer just an exotic fruit; it has been rapidly incorporated as a key component in the diet of many countries  <cit> . although mexico is the world’s largest producer and consumer of avocados , there are at least ten other countries with annual production of over  <dig>  t of avocado fruit .

p. americana comprises no fewer than three well-recognized varieties, geographical ecotypes, or botanical races, also known as horticultural races. the mexican race, p. americana var. drymifolia , is adapted to the tropical highlands and constitutes the most commonly used rootstock in mexican orchards; p. americana var. guatemalensis , the guatemalan race, which grows preferentially at medium elevations in the tropics, and the west-indian race, p. americana var. americana, which is typically cultivated in the lowland humid tropics  <cit> . commercial avocado production is based on grafting cultivars onto rootstocks of mexican and guatemalan races; the cultivars grown in subtropical climates are selections from these races or hybrids of them, with the guatemalan genotypes being the dominant horticultural race among subtropical avocado cultivars  <cit> . however, the mexican genetic background contributes to avocado diversity with a plethora of desirable, selected characteristics in commercial varieties, such as cold tolerance, smaller tree size, high oil content, early maturity, and smooth fruit skin. it is imperative to identify key genes and the signaling pathways associated with these traits, as well as to study the allelic diversity present among botanical races for these desirable traits.

the avocado fruit accumulates oil instead of sugar unlike most fruits, probably as a consequence of co-evolutionary processes developed with ancient neotropical megafauna that became extinct about  <dig> – <dig>  years ago  <cit> . avocado has been described as the most nutritious of all fruits  <cit> , as the mature fruit flesh of avocado contains about 20 % beneficial fatty acids, 6 % carbohydrates, 2 % protein, and vitamin precursors and antioxidants such as carotenoids and vitamins e, c, b <dig>  b <dig>  b <dig>  k and d  <cit> . the mesocarp of the mexican race avocado possesses up to 25–30 % oil content, of which nearly 90 % is mono-unsaturated oleic, palmitic and linoleic fatty acids. although avocado is a strongly climacteric fruit, its ripening or softening process does not take place during maturation on the tree, but instead it starts several days after the fruit has been picked. in the avocado fruit oil content increases in the mesocarp a few weeks after the fruit sets, and healthy fruits on trees continue to grow and accumulate oil for several months after maturation  <cit> . once an avocado fruit has been detached from the tree, an ethylene-dependent ripening process is triggered, orchestrating flesh softening, skin color change and lipid biosynthesis. upon ripening completion, concentrations of unsaturated fatty acids increase and those of saturated fatty acids decrease  <cit> .

the production of essential oils in avocado vegetative organs is influenced by environmental and developmental conditions. however, the distinctive characteristics of the avocado fruit, including secondary metabolite production, are genotype-dependent. for example, the chemical composition of the leaves of the mexican race is distinctive in its anise scent, which is absent from the two other horticultural races. estraole, which represents 60 % of the total essential oils in leaves of the mexican race, is responsible for this trait  <cit> . essential oils contain a variety of volatile molecules such as terpenes and terpenoids, phenol-derived aromatic components, and aliphatic compounds; these are widely used for various pharmaceutical, sanitary, cosmetic, agricultural and food purposes, and in nature, they function as herbivore repellants and pollinator attractants  <cit> . understanding the biosynthetic pathways of such bioactive compounds by associating functional genomics information with the enzymes involved in the metabolic pathways is fundamental for their commercial production.

because to date there are only limited avocado genomic resources, carrying out comprehensive gene expression profiling is a challenge requiring large-scale analysis of transcriptomic data. breakthroughs in next generation sequencing technology and data analysis during the last 10 years have made it possible to generate reference transcriptomes in the absence of a reference genome at a relatively low cost  <cit> . reference transcriptomes can be used to perform comparative expression profiling by methods such as digital gene expression profiling  <cit> . here, we present the de novo assembly of the mexican avocado  transcriptome, based on hybrid sequencing datasets derived from gs-flx+ roche and miseq illumina platforms. additionally, using a high-throughput sequencing platform, we develop a gene expression atlas of the avocado transcriptome in which a total of six different avocado organs and three fruit ripening stages  were included. to confirm the utility of the avocado transcriptome atlas, we specifically analyzed the expression of genes involved in acyl-lipid metabolism, ripening processes, and organ-specificity. our approach generated over  <dig>  unigenes with high quality annotations, providing an unprecedented coverage of the avocado transcriptome. the availability of the avocado gene expression atlas should facilitate additional studies on the basic biology of avocado, while also supporting applied research to improve this increasingly important crop.

RESULTS
sequencing and assembly of the mexican race avocado transcriptome
in order to obtain sequences for as many avocado  genes as possible, a cdna library from an rna pool isolated from seeds, roots, stems, leaves, aerial buds, flowers and pre-climacteric, climacteric and post-climacteric fruits was generated and sequenced using the gs-flx+  and miseq  sequencers. miseq produced paired-end reads of length  <dig> bases while gs-flx+ sequencer generated less reads  but the average length was ~3× longer. it is well known that a mixed platform approach  can improve the number of full length genes through the inclusion of longer reads, while a higher paired-read coverage increases the detection of low abundance transcripts  <cit> . pre-climacteric, climacteric and post-climacteric fruit stages were determined according to their ethylene production . it should be noted that unlike other commercial varieties such as ‘fuerte’, which show the maximum ethylene production seven days after harvest  <cit> , the climacteric physiological stage  is detected 3 day after harvest in mexican avocado .fig.  <dig> ethylene production rises during avocado ripening. ethylene was measured by gas chromatography during the subsequent 4 days after harvest. maximum ethylene production was adjusted to be 100 %. three independent biological replicates were analyzed



reads generated by gs-flx+ were masked using the seqclean software pipeline to eliminate sequence regions that would cause incorrect assembly while the miseq read pairs  were trimmed and/or merged together using the seqprep pipeline . to carry out the assembly process,  <dig> , <dig> high quality reads  were considered .

many assemblers have been developed to assemble reads generated by next generation sequencing platforms . the overlap layout algorithm is able to handle the longer reads of gs-flx+, and programs such as mira  <cit>  incorporate it. trinity  <cit>  in contrast is a de-bruijn graph-based assembler developed for short reads. we compared the performance of the mira v <dig> . <dig> and trinity assemblers, both previously used in several analyses of plant transcriptomes  <cit> . for each assembler, we used the default parameters recommended for transcriptome assembly. standard metrics describing the assembly process, such as number of contigs ≥1 kb, average contig lengths and maximum contig size were used to compare the assembly programs . considering that many contigs representative of unique genes are often produced in de novo assemblies due to the presence of variant alleles, sequencing errors, and alternative splicing of transcripts, the resulting contigs  were filtered to eliminate redundant sequences and then passed through a second assembly step using the cap <dig> assembler  <cit>  . a unigene set  from p. americana was generated including resulting contigs  and “singlets”  derived from the cap <dig> run with a minimum size of 200 bp . it should be noted that “singlets” are the contigs generated from the first steps of mira or trinity assemblies that were not reassembled by cap <dig>  the average length of unigenes was  <dig>  bp  . considering the mean size of coding sequences  in amborella trichopoda, a basal angiosperm species  <cit> , it was expected that a large percentage of these avocado unigene transcripts may represent full-length cdnas. a comparison of p. americana unigenes against the unpublished ca.  <dig> mbp draft genome of p. americana var. drymifolia  using blastn  shows that  <dig>  % of the transcripts had a significant hit against the genome .

to annotate the avocado transcriptome, we performed blastx alignments  between the unigene set and several protein databases, including arabidopsis thaliana, amborella trichopoda and plant proteins available in the reference sequences  collection of ncbi. we found that  <dig>   unigenes of p. americana show high identity to at least one plant protein; the remaining  had no function assigned . in a total of  <dig>  avocado unigenes, an individual high-scoring segment pair  produced by blastx covered at least 80 % of the target protein. results indicated that  <dig>  distinct plant proteins could be identified among the  <dig>  unigenes that showed significant similarities against refseq database . we further compared p. americana unigenes against the pfam  domain database   <cit> .

functional annotation
the results of blastx searches against the arabidopsis thaliana protein database were used for gene ontology  mapping and annotation. based on the arabidopsis top hits, we obtained the go annotations for the avocado unigenes, and wego software  <cit>  was used to perform go functional classification into the three major classes . among the unigenes with arabidopsis hits,  <dig>   were assigned to gene ontology classes with  <dig>  functional terms. biological processes comprised the majority of the functional terms , followed by cellular component  and molecular functions . within the biological processes category, cellular  and metabolic  processes were prominently represented. to further predict the metabolic pathway in p. americana, the assembled unigenes were annotated with corresponding enzyme commission  numbers in the kegg automatic annotation server  using arabidopsis thaliana and oryza sativa as references . a total of  <dig> unigenes were mapped to  <dig> pathways corresponding to five kegg modules: energy metabolism, carbohydrate and lipid metabolism, nucleotide and amino acid metabolism, genetic information processing, and environmental information processing. additionally, the modules energy metabolism  and metabolism  were also identified . ribosome had the largest number of unigenes , followed by glycolysis , reductive pentose phosphate cycle , gluconeogenesis , and spliceosome  .fig.  <dig> gene ontology classification of p. americana transcriptome. unigenes with blastx matches against the arabidopsis proteins were classified into three main go categories . the left-hand scale on the y-axis shows the percentage of unigenes belonged to each category. the right-hand scale on the y-axis indicates the number of unigenes in the same category

fig.  <dig> profiling expression of p. americana transcriptome. a hierarchical clustering shows expression levels of unigenes across different avocado organs. b principal component analysis 



expression map of the p. americana unigenes 
in the past, gene expression atlases from different plant species have been established by using massive parallel-signature sequencing and array-hybridization technologies . plant transcriptomes strongly vary from one tissue to another  <cit> , and it has been suggested that these variations are responsible, at least in part, for the identities of different plant organs  <cit> . we used the solid v <dig> -sequencing platform to quantify the expression of p. americana unigenes in seven different organs: seeds, roots, stem, leaves, aerial buds, flowers and fruits. fruit was considered as the total of reads generated from pre-climacteric, climacteric and post-climacteric libraries. the resulting reads from these three libraries were also independently mapped. between  <dig>  and  <dig>  million solid reads were generated for each of the seven organ libraries; among them,  <dig>  % were mapped to the avocado transcriptome . an expression profile matrix containing the unigenes  and the number of mapped reads in each normalized organ-specific transcriptome , was created. to allow for data comparison among samples, a normalization of the reads per kb per million  was performed. a threshold of rpkm ≥ <dig> was used to distinguish expressed genes in at least one of the organs sampled from background  <cit>  . we further investigated how the organs can be classified according to transcript levels using a principal component analysis  and hierarchical clustering , by employing the pearson metric on average expression levels for each organ .

for many of the organ types, the hierarchical plot and the pca reflect the known similarity of biological functions among organs. for example, transcripts from leaves and stems clustered as a neighboring group, reflecting their physiological similarity . likewise, the storage organ transcriptomes  were grouped together, whereas gene products from roots clustered separately from the rest . to assess the relative abundance of gene transcripts among the organ-specific transcriptomes, we used the log-likelihood ratio statistic, r  <cit> , which scores reads by departures from the null hypothesis of equal counts in each library given the total number of reads sampled from each library. higher r-values indicate a greater probability of differential expression, whereas r-values near zero represent constitutive expression . by considering as preferentially expressed genes the unigenes with r-values ≥ <dig> , a total of  <dig> p. americana unigenes were selected as preferentially expressed in at least one of the organ analyzed . of these,  <dig> unigenes  could be considered as organ-specific genes because the reads were derived from a single library . although  <dig>  % of organ-specific unigenes corresponded to sequences that could not be annotated, in the remaining unigenes, these organ-specific expression data are consistent with previously documented expression patterns of known genes. for example, the avocado unigene un <dig>  a homolog of the arabidopsis high-affinity phosphate transporter pht1- <dig> gene , is expressed in roots  <cit> . four well-characterized floral pattern determination genes, agl <dig> , agl <dig> , ap <dig>  and pi , exhibited specific expression patterns among floral organs . likewise, in leaves, several avocado unigenes homologous to arabidopsis light-harvesting chlorophyll a/b  proteins were expressed in an organ-specific manner. this was expected, since in higher plants and algae, lhcb proteins are major components of the light-harvesting complex of photosystem ii  in chloroplasts, which is responsible for light harvesting and energy transfer to reaction centers  <cit> . moreover, the fruit-specific avocado unigene un <dig> is homologous to agl <dig> , a transcription factor that has been recently characterized for its main role in apple fruit development and ripening  <cit> . interestingly, an oleosin-encoding gene  homologous to at3g <dig> showed a higher expression level in fruits than in seeds . oleosins have been described as key structural and signaling components of seed oil bodies that form during the desiccation process and prevent coalescence of the oil  <cit> . this suggests that oleosins could be involved in avocado fruit development, beyond their known functions in seeds. in addition to its high lipid content, the avocado fruit contain several bioactive phytochemicals, including carotenoids  <cit> . the homolog of carotenoid biosynthesis-associated epoxycarotenoid dioxygenase nced <dig> , unigene un <dig>  was highly expressed in the fruit transcriptome . seven different avocado unigenes , among the highest expression levels from seed-specific genes, are homologs of pap <dig> , a member of the large superfamily of cupins, which are expressed during seed development and act as a nutrient reservoir  <cit> . the homolog to fasciclin-like arabinogalactan protein fla <dig>  exhibited one of the highest expression levels of stem-specific genes, which is consistent with previous reports showing that expression of some members of the fla gene family is correlated with the onset of secondary-wall cellulose synthesis in arabidopsis stems and with wood formation in the stems and branches of trees, suggesting a biological role in avocado stem development  <cit> . together, these results indicate that the transcriptome atlas of p. americana presented here provides an accurate estimation of organ-specific gene expression patterns that may assist functional interpretations.

transcriptome changes during avocado fruit development and ripening
we identified unigenes that are differentially expressed during fruit development and ripening using a similar approach to that described above . first, the rpkm values between flower and fruit were compared in order to identify some genes that may play important roles during fruit development. a total of  <dig> unigenes were selected due to the significant increase of their transcripts in the fruit/flower comparison. we surveyed some of these genes in order to determine their potential roles during fruit development . a total of  <dig> avocado unigenes , homologs of arabidopsis metallothionein mt2a , were identified. metallothioneins are small cysteine-rich proteins required for heavy metal tolerance in animals and fungi. in plants, metallothionein genes are up-regulated in response to heavy metal stress  <cit>  but also participate in natural and induced leaf senescence  <cit> , ethylene-induced abscission  <cit>  and biotic and abiotic stress responses . however, metallothioneins have been also identified as up-regulated genes during climacteric fruit development in banana  <cit> , apple  <cit> , and kiwifruit  <cit>  and in non-climacteric fruit such as grape  <cit> , citrus unshiu  <cit> , strawberry  <cit>  and pineapple  <cit> . despite their abundance, the function of metallothioneins during fruit development still remains largely unknown. chitinases were also found to be a well-represented group of fruit specific unigenes , most of them homologs of the basic chitinase chib/pr- <dig> . consistently, besides the role of chitinases in plant defense  <cit> , these proteins have also been associated with fruit development in both climacteric  <cit>  and non-climacteric fruits  <cit> . pectate lyases constitute an additional protein family that has been suggested to play an important role in fruit ripening and softening  <cit> . this is consistent with the fact that eight avocado unigenes, homologous to four different members of the arabidopsis pectin lyase-like superfamily , showed significant increase in the frequency of transcriptional units in the flower/fruit comparison.

one-thousand-two-hundred-thirty unigenes out of  <dig>   were identified as differentially expressed during the ripening process of the avocado fruit . in order to find over-representation of a given function, go categories were assigned to the unigenes differentially expressed in each ripening stage . only go sub-categories that showed significant differences in the ‘molecular function’ and ‘biological process’ categories were analyzed. figure 4a shows the differentially expressed unigenes within the ‘molecular function’ category. sub-categories ‘hydrolase activity, acting on glycosyl bonds’, ‘polysaccharide binding’ and ‘peptidase inhibitor activity’ showed a significant increase in the number of genes while ‘oxidoreductase activity, acting on the aldehyde or oxo group of donors’, ‘passive transmembrane transporter activity’, ‘water transporter activity’ and ‘chlorophyll binding’ showed a decrease. regarding ‘biological process’ go terms, the majority of differentially expressed unigenes appeared to be related to some major biological changes, including ‘monosaccharide metabolic process’, ‘carbohydrate catabolic process’, ‘cell wall macromolecule catabolic process’, ‘gene expression’, ‘cellular aldehyde metabolic process’, ‘organic acid metabolic process’, ‘vitamin metabolic process’, ‘photosynthesis’, ‘cellular lipid metabolic process’, ‘reproductive process in a multicellular organism’, ‘aging’, ‘defense response’, ‘cellular response to hormone stimulus’, ‘fluid transport’, and ‘secondary metabolic process’ . the complete list of go categories is provided in additional file 4: table s <dig>  these results are consistent with the notion that the principal changes associated with ripening include color , firmness , taste , and flavor   <cit> .fig.  <dig> functional categorization of differentially expressed genes during avocado fruit ripening. genes were categorized based on go annotation, and the number for each category is displayed based on molecular function , or biological process . data presented represent go terms at level 4



differentially expressed unigenes during fruit ripening were also examined by cluster analysis of gene expression patterns, which arranged the gene products into  <dig> major groups named as classes i-v . the most represented classes comprised the unigenes whose expression increased  or decreased  during fruit ripening. both classes were subdivided into two sub-classes . classes iii-a and iv-a comprised the unigenes whose expression increased or decreased continuously during fruit ripening, while classes iii-b and iv-b showed increase or decrease at the climacteric stage, with similar expression levels maintained at post-climacteric stages. classes i and ii represent the unigenes in which the highest or lowest expression levels were detected at the climacteric stage. finally, class v represents the remaining unigenes that were not grouped into none of the classes mentioned above. differential gene expression patterns observed in the rna-seq experiments were validated by real-time pcr for eight avocado unigenes differentially expressed during fruit ripening . these genes showed the same expression pattern in both rna-seq  and in the real-time pcr analyses.fig.  <dig> rna-seq based transcriptome dynamics of avocado during fruit ripening. a the log <dig> of rpkm values for each gene was used for the hierarchical clustering analysis at each of the three selected ripening stages . b the  <dig> differentially expressed unigenes were classified into  <dig> regulation patterns . classes iii and iv were subdivided into two sub-classes each. the graph shows the expression profile of unigenes for each class. gray lines, expression profiles for individual unigenes. brown lines represent the average intensities of unigene members of the clusters. for additional information, see additional file 4: table s10



genes relevant to avocado fruit ripening
in ripening of climacteric fruits, the expression of some members of the gene families encoding acc synthase and acc oxidase is induced, regulating the biosynthesis of ethylene  <cit> . two differentially expressed unigenes  were found to be homologs of arabidopsis acc synthase , and one, un <dig>  a homolog of acc oxidase . in relation to their expression profiles, the unigenes homologous to the acc synthase were classified into class iii-a, while the homolog of acc oxidase was classified into class ii . therefore, during avocado fruit ripening, the ethylene burst seems to be regulated mainly by acc oxidase. this is consistent with the notion that in climacteric fruits the rate of ethylene production is well correlated with the pattern of accumulation of acc synthase and acc oxidase gene transcripts  <cit> . avocado unigenes homologous to ethylene response factor erf <dig>  and ethylene receptor ein <dig> , which play key roles in the signaling of ethylene responses  <cit> , were also identified as members of class iii-a .

the genetic and physiological characterization of tomato ripening mutants, ripening-inhibitor , non-ripening  and colorless non-ripening , together with the molecular characterization of the mutated genes, have demonstrated that several important regulatory factors must be properly coordinated with the ethylene signal to properly activate and orchestrate the ripening program. rin  <cit> , nor  <cit>  and cnr  <cit>  genes encode transcription factors belonging to the mads-box, nac-domain, and sbp-box families, respectively, that act upstream of ethylene biosynthesis and perform key functions in the control of fruit ripening  <cit> . rin  <cit>  and two regulatory proteins more recently identify as involved in fruit ripening, the tagl <dig> mads-box factor  <cit>  and the hb- <dig> homeobox protein  <cit> , are able to bind to the promoter region of acs <dig>  <cit>  and aco <dig>  <cit>  genes, respectively, demonstrating that transcription factors directly regulate the activity of ethylene biosynthesis genes in tomato. a bi-directional best blast hit approach was used to identify the avocado orthologs of tomato genes involved in ripening . using the seaview program  <cit>  the protein-coding nucleotide sequences were then aligned based on their corresponding amino acid translations to calculate the percent identity at nucleotide and amino acid levels . the identities of avocado/tomato genes ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  %  and with only one exception , their expression levels were considerably higher in flowers than in the remaining organs sampled. meanwhile, nor and hb- <dig> avocado transcripts increased during fruit ripening while cnr decreased. rin and tagl <dig> showed very low transcript levels  only at the preclimacteric stage . avocado is considered a basal angiosperms with origin near the split between monocot and eudicot plant species. the finding that some but not all transcription factors involved in tomato fruit ripening are up-regulated or even expressed during avocado fruit ripening suggests that part but not all of the transcription factor wiring was ancestrally present and that substantial rewiring occurred during the evolution of modern eudicots.

it has been reported that a thaumatin-like protein and a class i chitinase are some of the most abundant ripening-associated proteins in banana fruit  <cit> . genes encoding these proteins were also found to have differential expression during ripening in avocado. avocado unigene un <dig>  a homolog of a pathogenesis-related thaumatin , clustered into class iii-a , the same as several unigenes  homologous to pr- <dig> , a well-known class i chitinase strongly induced when plants respond to wounding or infection by fungal, bacterial, or viral pathogens  <cit> . additional unigenes  with different expression profiles  were identified as homologs of at4g <dig> and at2g <dig>  class ii and iv chitinases, respectively. therefore, comparisons with data reported for other climacteric fruits  facilitated identification of putative conserved orthologous ripening-related genes, which serve as an initial set of candidates for assessing the conservation of gene activity during the evolution of fleshy-fruited plant species.

acyl lipid metabolism of persea americana fruits
previously, an acyl lipid metabolism gene database was developed for arabidopsis  <cit> , and this was recently expanded by deep transcriptional profiling of developing seeds from four different oilseed species  <cit> . this significant effort resulted in detailed sequence information for over  <dig> genes encoding proteins involved in lipid metabolism, providing a useful resource for construction of additional databases of genes related to lipid biosynthesis from other oilseed or plant species with lipid-rich fruits . after comparing our assembled transcriptome against the aforementioned database, we found that  <dig> avocado unigenes had been annotated as homologous to lipid metabolism genes with transcriptional evidence for their expression  in at least one of the organ sampled  . a similar number of unigenes related to the ‘fatty acid synthesis’ category were detected in fruit, seed, flower and aerial bud organs, whereas stem, leaves, and root organs had a lower number of expressed unigenes annotated in the same category. the category ‘fatty acid elongation, desaturation & export from plastid’ shares a similar pattern . interestingly, the number of genes detected in both categories decreases during fruit ripening . this was expected since after flowering and during avocado fruit development, the moisture content decreases while the lipid content steadily increases  <cit> , and after the picking, and during the post-harvest ripening period, the avocado fruit does not show significant changes in the fatty acid composition  <cit> . our data suggests that the initiation of fruit ripening marks the end of oil accumulation and fatty acid composition.fig.  <dig> totals of p. americana unigenes suspected to be involved in acyl-lipid metabolism. unigenes were annotated with a translated blast  against arabidopsis proteins and further annotated based on information at the arabidopsis lipid gene database . for additional information, see additional file 4: table s <dig>  a percent of the genes detected in each of the organs sampled and  during fruit ripening



the average rpkm values of unigenes annotated as homologous to fatty acid biosynthesis genes were calculated in order to estimate expression profiles of their corresponding avocado genes . the transcription levels of the majority of genes involved in fatty acid biosynthesis are significantly higher in fruit than in all the other organs analyzed ; nonetheless, they decrease during fruit ripening . in addition, according to their expression profiles, three homologs  of fab2/ssi <dig>  were identified as class iv-a differentially expressed unigenes. fab2/ssi <dig>  a soluble stearoyl-acyl carrier protein desaturase, is a major enzyme responsible for converting saturated stearic acid  to monounsaturated oleic acid  in chloroplasts  <cit> . our data are also in agreement with the transcriptome of developing mesocarp of ‘hass’ avocado that was generated in parallel to these studies where genes involved in acyl lipid metabolism were exclusively investigated  <cit> . together, these results suggest that lipid accumulation and changes in fatty acid composition  occur during avocado fruit development, and probably both processes stop a few days after the fruit has been harvested . the noticeable decrease of the fab2/ssi <dig> transcripts, as well as genes involved in fatty acid biosynthesis during fruit ripening, could explain the fact that no significant changes have been detected in avocado fatty acid composition during the post-harvest ripening period  <cit> . considering that ethylene production starts at the pre-climacteric stage and quickly increases towards the climacteric state, it is tempting to hypothesize that in avocado fruit, ethylene is perhaps a signaling molecule that once perceived, halts lipid biosynthesis and programs future changes in fatty acid composition.fig.  <dig> expression profile of p. americana unigenes involved in the fatty acid biosynthetic pathway. the bar graphs show the frequency of transcriptional units as the average of rpkm values of all unigenes annotated as homologous to each arabidopsis gene . each avocado organ analyzed is represented by different color: fruit , seed , flower , aerial buds , leaves , stem  and roots . this figure was modified from the arabidopsis lipid gene database 

fig.  <dig> expression profile of genes coding for fatty acid biosynthesis during avocado fruit-ripening. the bar graphs show the frequency of transcriptional units as the average of rpkm values of all unigenes annotated as homologous to each arabidopsis gene . each avocado fruit ripening stage is represented by different color: pre-climacteric , climacteric  and post-climacteric . this figure was modified from the arabidopsis lipid gene database 



although in most avocado varieties over half of the total fat present is in the form of oleic acid , recent studies have shown that at least  <dig> different fatty acids can be detected in pulp and seed avocado oils  <cit> . palmitic  and linoleic  fatty acids are the second major constituents of fruit oils while some others like stearic acid  are present in trace amounts  <cit> . the benefits to nutrition and health of avocado fatty acids have been recently reviewed  <cit> ). in addition, avocado acetogenins, such as persin , a deoxy-derivative of glyceride with close structural homology to the monoglyceride of linoleic acid, has been proposed as an alternative therapy against breast cancer due its necrotic effect in the mammary gland  <cit> . considering the importance of avocado to nutrition and health, transcripts encoding enzymes of the biosynthetic pathway from palmitic to linoleic acid, passing through stearic and oleic acids, were reconstructed similarly to described above . it is worth noting that genes involved in the biosynthesis of linoleic acid  showed lower expression levels in fruit than in seed. this is consistent with previous reports in which linoleic acid seems to accumulate in greater amounts  in seeds than in fruits.

CONCLUSIONS
the avocado transcriptome reported in this study provides a foundation for the molecular genetics and functional genomics required to study the basis of the genetic diversity that determines the different levels and quality of oil accumulation in the fruit of different avocado cultivars, as well as other important agronomic traits for this increasingly important crop. transcriptomic data will also facilitate the identification of the pathways involved in production of a wide variety of essential nutrients and phytochemicals beneficial for human health that are produced by the avocado. this data will also facilitate the study of early plant evolution since avocado is phylogenetically placed near the separation between monocot and eudicot plants.

