BACKGROUND
cide family proteins including cidea, cideb and cidec/fsp <dig>  <cit>  were originally identified by their sequence homology to the n-terminal cad domain   <cit>  of dna fragmentation factors dffa and dffb  <cit> . whereas ncd specifically refers to the n-terminal domain of dff factors, cide-n denotes the n-terminal sequence shared by cide proteins in this article. in addition to the cide-n domain, cide proteins also contain a unique conserved c-terminal domain . despite some variation between ncd and cide-n, they all contain a potential yin and yang surface that could mediate weak protein-protein interaction. recently, they were also found to be structurally homologous to the ubiquitin  α/β roll superfold  <cit> , but bear no high similarity to other existing proteins  <cit> .

while cidea is expressed at high levels in bat  <cit> , cideb is more abundantly expressed in the liver, with moderate levels in kidney, small intestine and colon  <cit> . when over-expressed in heterologous cells such as 293t and cos- <dig> cells, cideb can form homo- or hetero-dimers with other cide family members and induce caspase-independent cell death  <cit> . furthermore, cide-c domain of cideb, is responsible for cideb-induced cell death and dimerization  <cit> . cidea protein has also been found to regulate apoptosis induced by tgf-β  <cit> . however, how cide proteins induce apoptosis remains unclear. no caspase cleavage site or nuclease specific domain present in dff factors was identified in cide proteins. to study the physiological role of cide proteins, we previously generated cidea null mice, and found that cidea-null mice are lean and resistant to diet-induced obesity and diabetes  <cit> . cidea controls energy homeostasis in bat by regulating lipolysis and thermogenesis. a recent study showed that cidea was implicated in human obesity by regulating human adipocyte lipolysis  <cit>  and a v115f polymorphism in human was found to be associated with obesity in certain populations  <cit> . cidea was the most highly up-regulated gene in the liver of high calorie diet -fed mice and second most down-regulated gene in the liver of hc plus resveratrol  aging-improved mice  <cit> . similar to cidea, cideb also plays important roles in metabolism. we recently reported that cideb regulates diet-induced obesity, liver steatosis, and insulin sensitivity by controlling lipogenesis and fatty acid oxidation in the liver  <cit> . in addition, fsp 27/cidec was found to be associated with lipid droplets and promote triglyceride storage in differentiated 3t3-l <dig> cells  <cit> . all these studies suggest that cide family proteins play important roles in modulating energy homeostasis, aging and the development of metabolic diseases such as obesity and diabetes  <cit> .

while it is evident that cide proteins regulate energy homeostasis in mammals, it is unclear about the origin and evolution of cide family proteins. to provide further insights into the structure and function of cide proteins, we have employed various databases and bioinformatic tools to study how cide family proteins have been evolved. a recent analysis of the evolutionary process of dff family proteins has identified orthologs of dffa/b in lower organisms such as sea anemone, suggesting that the dna fragmentation pathway in apoptosis is conserved throughout evolution  <cit> . here we defined signature sequences for the n-terminal region of dffa, dffb and cide proteins and cide-c domain of cide proteins and analyzed the evolutionary history of cide-n and cide-c domains of cide family proteins. no ortholog of cide proteins was identified in invertebrates or other lower organisms. however, a homologous sequence of cide-n domain of cide proteins was identified in hydra, in addition to sea anemone as previously reported  <cit> . we found that the signature sequences for cide-n domain of cide proteins are similar to those of ncd of dffa in hydra and sea anemone. more importantly, we found that cide-c domain exists only in vertebrates with occasional possible omission from certain ancient fish species. by analyzing the genic structures and intron phases of cide and dff family, we found that although the evolution of the ancestral cide-n domain includes different intron insertions, the genomic structure of cide family in vertebrates is stable, including  <dig> conserved exons separated by  <dig> introns with the sequential phases 2-0-0- <dig>  based on our observation, we postulate that the origin of cide proteins may be the result of recombination of sequences encoding cide-n and cide-c domains in early vertebrates, and subsequent duplication and evolution have led to the formation of different cide family proteins.

RESULTS
sequence comparison and species/tissue distribution of cide-n and cide-c domains
through sequence alignment of the n-terminal region of cide and dff family proteins in human and mouse , we observed highly conserved  <dig> amino acid residues around the edgt protein signature site in the cide-n domain and ncd. nmr structural analysis in human cideb suggests that the edgt signature is located on an important loop of the cide-n domain interaction interface zone  <dig>  within this conserved domain, we observed penta amino acid residues rpxrv unique for cide-n domain of cide family proteins, a vddxxyf signature for dffa and a lpxxgsr signature for dffb . these specific sequences will be used to distinguish cide proteins from dff in our following study. in addition, through the sequence alignment of cide-c domain of cide family proteins in human and mouse , we identified a highly conserved xarxtfdxyxxnpxdxxgxlnkvatxyxxysxsxd signature in cide-c domain.

an hmmer search of nr.db downloaded from ncbi showed that proteins that share similarity to cide-n domain or ncd are found in  <dig> organisms , representing either cide or dff proteins. these dff proteins are widely found in vertebrates and invertebrates, whereas cide proteins only exist in  <dig> vertebrates among the  <dig> organisms.

total cide protein found 41

total dff related protein found 48

* drep <dig> is dffa in fruit fly, and drep <dig> is dffb in fruit fly.

to check the expression of cide proteins, we searched currently available est data base using the mouse cide-n sequence and found  <dig>  est clones that share homology to cide-n domain or ncd in  <dig> organisms  spanning from lower organism such as cnidarians  to human. these data suggest that cide-n domain is evolutionarily conserved, consistent with an observation previously reported  <cit> . some  <dig> est clones that share sequence homology to the cide-c domain were found in  <dig> organisms , all of which are vertebrates including sharks, bone fish, amphibians, birds, and mammals. thus far, we have not identified any protein or open reading frame that contains only the cide-c domain and does not contain the cide-n domain. the nr.db and est search also suggests that cide-c domain has appeared in a later stage of evolution and it may have a specific function relating to vertebrates.

# the order of tissues is based on the copy number of cdnas encoding corresponding protein. the cdnas from mixed tissues are ignored in counting.

+ the high expresion of cide proteins in these tissues is verified by expriments, but not observed in the current est database.

to further investigate the origin and function of different cide proteins, we checked the tissue distribution of ests encoding cide proteins in vertebrates . in the mouse, cidea is predominantly expressed in bat, with small amounts of mrna detected in heart, brain, skeletal muscle, lymph node, thymus, appendix and bone marrow  <cit> . the expression of cidec/fsp <dig> is more widespread, with high levels in wat and moderate levels in bat and skeletal muscle <cit> . cideb is more abundantly expressed in the liver, with moderate levels in kidney, small intestine and colon  <cit> . results from the analysis of the distribution of cide ests are in good agreement with the above observations, revealing that a large number of est for cideb found in the liver, and of cidec in wat. we also found cide proteins are expressed at varying levels in many different tissues in the lower vertebrates. cidea is expressed in the eye of zebrafish , testis of atlantic salmon , ovary and brain of x. tropicalis and chicken , caecal tonsil, intestinal lymphocyte and liver of chicken; cideb is expressed in the liver of zebrafish, medaka  and x. tropicalis, gut/intestine of zebrafish, atlantic salmon and x. tropicalis, in the thymus, head kidney, and pyloric caecum of atlantic salmon, in fat body and oviduct of x. tropicalis; while cidec/fsp <dig> is expressed in the liver of little skate , zebrafish and chicken, in the small intestine of x. tropicalis and chicken, in the ovary of medaka, in thyroid, thymus, spleen and pyloric caecum of atlantic salmon, in the brain and lung of x. tropicalis, as well as in the fat body, intestinal lymphocyte and hearts of chicken.

identification of the ancestral cide-n domain in hydra
hydra and sea anemone belong to the phylum cnidaria which is one of the earliest animal phyla  <cit> . we found  <dig> cdna  in hydra and  <dig> cdnas  in sea anemone which encode proteins homologous to the most conserved  <dig> amino acids of cide-n domain from mouse cideb. further analysis revealed that the cdna in hydra encode dffa, while the other  <dig> cdnas in sea anemone all encode dffa, as observed by eckhart et al  <cit> .

sequence alignment of n-terminal region for cide and dff family proteins in hydra, sea anemone and human  showed a remarkable similarity between cide proteins and hydra dffa. using pair-wise comparison, we found the ncd of hydra dffa shares approximately  <dig>  percent sequence similarity to the ncd of human dffa, and  <dig>  percent sequence similarity to the cide-n domain of human cideb. dffa in hydra and sea anemone has signatures of both cide family proteins and dffa , but dffb in sea anemone only contain signature sequences for dffb . these data, together with the above sequence comparison and species distribution data, suggest that cide-n domain of cide proteins is derived from the ncd of dffa, but not dffb, in lower organism like hydra and sea anemone. thus we define herein the ncds of dffa in hydra and sea anemone as the ancestral cide-n domain.

comparative genomic analysis of genic structures and intron phases of cide and dff gene family
by searching the genomic data base of various species, we observed that the gene structure of all cide family proteins in vertebrates consists of  <dig> exons and  <dig> introns with the sequential phases 2-0-0- <dig>  while vertebrate dffa gene consists of  <dig> exons and  <dig> introns with the sequential phases 1-1-0-1- <dig>  vertebrate dffb consists of  <dig> exons and  <dig> introns with the sequential phases 0-1-1-0-0- <dig>  the length of exons of cide gene family is also conserved in vertebrates. by matching their exons to the corresponding protein sequences of cide and dff family proteins, we found that cide-n domain is encoded by exon  <dig> and exon  <dig> of cide genes whereas the conserved cide-c domain is encoded by exon  <dig> and exon  <dig> of cide genes. ncds of dffa and dffb are encoded mainly by its exon  <dig> and exon  <dig>  respectively .

unlike the conserved genic structures and intron phases of dff gene family in  <dig> vertebrates, the dff gene family in  <dig> representative invertebrates has different genic structures and intron phases. the ancestral cide-n domain of dffa in sea anemone was split by one phase  <dig> intron in fruit fly , but by phase  <dig> intron in a different position in amphioxus  . based on the genomic structure and analysis from non-redundant proteins databases and est database, we conclude that the cide gene family exists only in vertebrates, while the dff gene family exists in both vertebrates and invertebrates.

the absence of some cide family proteins in several vertebrate species
from the result of tblastn search in available est data bases, we found the most ancient cide-n domain exists in hydra and sea anemone, and the most ancient cide-c domain exists in spiny dogfish  and little skate . no sequence homologous to cide-n domain was identified before phylum cnidaria such as yeast . in addition, no sequence homologous to cide-c was found before the phylum vertebrata.

interestingly, although the whole genome of nematodes  was sequenced and analyzed extensively, no genomic sequence encoding proteins that share sequence similarity to dffa/b or cide proteins were identified. we only found  <dig> protein  in c. elegans with limited homology to the conserved  <dig> amino acids including the signature edgt motif of cide-n domain from human cideb , with no homology to any other region. furthermore, the exon boundaries between this protein and human cideb are not conserved. therefore, this protein is unlikely to be the ortholog of dff or cide in c. elegans.

in the petromyzon_marinus- <dig>  contigs database  genome data base last modified on apr  <dig>  2007) we found an ortholog of dffb, but not dffa or cide proteins. as sea lamprey is regarded as the most primitive vertebrate, it would be interesting to determine whether any ortholog of cide proteins exists in this organism. in the large est database for little skate and spiny dogfish, we failed to identify any cidea-like protein. thus it is highly possible that ortholog of cidea may not exist in little skate and spiny dogfish. furthermore, after searching the whole genome sequences of fugu  and tetraodon   <cit> , no ortholog for cidea protein was identified in these species. no cidea-like protein was identified in stickleback  either. in addition, no ortholog of cideb was identified in the currently available chicken  genome data base  <cit>  or est databases.

the phylogenetic tree of cide-n and cide-c domains
in this study, three methods including neighbor-joining , maximum likelihood , and unweighted pair group method with arithmetic mean  were used to construct the phylogenetic trees. these three methods often gave the same trees, except for some minor details. from the phylogeny of  <dig> selected cide and dff family proteins from various model organisms using the cide-n domain and ncd, respectively , we found that cide family proteins form an independent sub-clade from the dffa proteins and the vertebrate cide-n domains have close relationship with the ncd of amphioxus dffa. these results confirm that cide-n domain is derived from ncd of dffa in early vertebrates. through the two phylogenetic trees of  <dig> selected cide family proteins in vertebrates using the cide-n and cide-c domains, respectively , we found that all the cide family proteins can be divided into  <dig> subfamilies, cidea, cideb and fsp27/cidec. the cide-n domain nj phylogeny is rooted by the ncd of amphioxus dffa . in addition, the cide-n domain ml phylogeny and the cide-c domain phylogeny generated by nj and upgma analysis are rooted at midpoint . these data suggest that cideb is the most ancient member in cide family, and its duplication resulted in the formation of cidec and cidea. however, the cide-n domain upgma phylogeny rooted by the ncd of amphioxus dffa indicates cidec as the most ancestral cide protein. the cide-c domain ml phylogeny rooted at midpoint indicates cidea as the most ancestral cide protein. to sum up, these results point to a likelihood that cideb is the most ancestral cide protein.

discussion
here we have defined signature sequences for the n-terminal region of dffa, dffb and cide proteins, cide-c domain of cide proteins, and analyzed the evolutionary history of cide-n and cide-c domains of cide proteins using various databases and bioinformatic tools. we identified the ancestral cide-n domain in hydra and found cide-c domain exists only in vertebrates. furthermore, genomic structures and intron phases of cide family proteins are conserved in vertebrates.

the formation of ancestral cide-n in early metazoan
based on currently available data, we have found the ancestral cide-n domain in h. vulgaris, in addition to n. vectensis as previously reported  <cit> . in tropical demosponge reniera, more primitive to the above two cnidarians, we did not find any sequence homologous to cide-n domain, with the caution that its genome sequencing is still ongoing  <cit> . similarly, we did not find any cide-n homology in the current database of est from sponges  <cit> . however, other important apoptosis genes, such as the proapoptotic molecule dd <dig>  <cit> , the cell survival proteins, bcl-2-related molecules  <cit> , and caspases  <cit>  have been found in the sponge. more importantly, the caspase- <dig> dependent dna fragmentation was observed in sponge  <cit> . these data indicate that the dna fragmentation pathway in apoptosis is conserved in sponge. thus an ancestral cide-n domain, the ncd of dffa, should also exist in sponge. the exact conclusion awaits further sequencing information from sponges.

the formation of cide-n and cide-c in early vertebrates
the mechanisms for the origin of new genes, such as exon shuffling, gene duplication and retroposition, have been thoroughly explored and extensively discussed  <cit> . it is well established that recombination of sequences encoding protein domains play a major part in protein evolution. however, there is less evidence to suggest how the novel protein domain, themselves, arise  <cit> . here, we found homology sequences of cide-c exist only in vertebrates and all of them are linked to cide-n to form cide. based on protein sequence alignments  and the phylogenetic tree , cide-n domain of cide family proteins must have been derived from the ncd of dffa. in addition, from the exon boundaries derived from the protein sequence alignments results , we could tell that exon  <dig> of cide gene is derived from the exon  <dig> of dffa gene. by comparison of the genic structures and intron phases between dffa and cide gene family, we found that the formation of cide-n domain had undergone three steps of intron changes from ncd of dffa . first, the phase- <dig> intron <dig> of dffa was changed to the phase- <dig> intron  <dig> of cide. second, the phase- <dig> intron  <dig> of dffa was changed to the phase- <dig> intron  <dig> of cide. third, the phase- <dig> intron <dig> of cide was formed. these three intron changes underlie the evolution of the ncd of dffa into cide-n, and provide insight into the molecular mechanisms regarding the origin of cide family. completion of the whole genome sequencing of sea lamprey, regarded as the most primitive vertebrate thus far, will help ultimately resolve the formation of cide-n and cide-c domain.

the divergence of cide family proteins in advanced vertebrates
the 2r hypothesis  suggests that one round whole genome duplication happened at the root of the vertebrate lineage, followed by another round in agnatha and gnathostomata  <cit> . we found the evolution path of cide proteins is in good agreement with the hypothesis. we propose that the appearance of ancient cide family protein occurred at the root of the vertebrate lineage along with the first round of whole genome duplication. we suspect that the most ancient cide family protein was most similar to cideb, which then gave rise to the ancient cidea/c around the agnatha and gnathostomata period which was probably accompanied with another round of whole genome duplicatoin. cidec and cidea were derived from ancient cidea/c at the emerging of the actinopterygian fishes. in support of the above conclusions are the following observations: no cide protein was found in amphioxus; only cideb and cidec are found in little skate and spiny dogfish; all of cidea, cideb and cidec are found in zebrafish and x. tropicalis. according to the phylogenies of cide-n and cide-c domains  and the evolution of other gene families such as the hox gene family in early vertebrates  <cit> , we speculate that there should be one cide protein in sea lamprey with strong resemblance to cideb. the lack of evidence for the presence of any cide protein in sea lamprey must be due to the incomplete genome database available.

we have also compared the tissue distributions of est clones and experimental data , and found that there are some differences in the expression patterns of cide proteins between mammals and lower vertebrates, which surprisingly revealed an expression overlap between cideb and cidec in lower vertebrates but not in mammals. the coexpression of cideb and cidec in the liver, guts and wat of lower vertebrates is in accordance with our above-mentioned evolutionary model for the early divergence of cideb and cidec. cidea seems to be highly expressed in tissues unique to mammals, including bat and mammary gland.

although cide family proteins were originally identified to induce cell death  <cit> , many studies have also found they could play an important part in modulating energy homeostasis, aging and the development of metabolic diseases such as obesity and diabetes  <cit> . considering the urgent need in evolution for vertebrates to modulate energy homeostasis and the emerging of warm blood animals, cide family proteins may originally to function as "thrifty" genes and gradually evolve to be important regulator of metabolic pathways in mammals  <cit> . combining the vertebrate origin and the control of metabolic pathways, cide family proteins could be ideal targets for therapeutic intervention of metabolic diseases such as obesity and diabetes.

model for the evolutionary history of cide family proteins
based on our results, we mapped the presence or absence of the cide and dff family proteins to the phylogenetic tree of the animals, and summarized the evolutionary history of cide-n and cide-c domains into six stages . around the transition of unicellular protozoan to multicellular metazoan, or the evolution of bilateria from diploblasts , one ancient or ancestral ncd for dffa and dffb was formed, encoded by an ancient exon bordering a phase  <dig> intron. subsequent duplication led to the separation of dffa and dffb in cnidarians, and only the ncd of dffa, but not dffb, comprised the ancestral cide-n domain . in arthropods the ancient exon that encoded the ancestral cide-n domain was spliced by one phase  <dig> intron, while in nematodes the whole dff family proteins, including the ancestral cide-n domain, were lost for some unknown reason . around the same time in cephalochordates another phase  <dig> intron was inserted into a different position of the ancestral cide-n. this new intron insertion of the ancestral cide-n was later passed on to vertebrates. also dff family proteins might have disappeared from urochordates at this time . in early vertebrates like agnathan fishes, ncd of dffa/the ancestral cide-n domain underwent duplication. one duplicated ncd of dffa became the cide-n domain and merged with the newly formed cide-c domain to generate one ancient cideb-like protein . subsequent duplication led to the ancient cidea/c protein which bears strong resemblance to cidec in chondrichthyan fishes . when actinopterygian fishes occurred, cidea was formed from the duplication of ancient cidea/c. some cide family proteins might have disappeared in several vertebrate species .

CONCLUSIONS
in this article, we searched various databases and performed comparative genomic analysis to study the sequence conservation, genomic structure, and phylogenetic tree of the cide-n and cide-c domains of cide proteins. we were able to define signature sequences of cide-n domain and cide-c domain for cide proteins, and ncd for dff proteins, respectively. our study identified the ancestral cide-n domain in cnidarians, and found the cide-c domain exists only in vertebrates. further analysis of genomic structure such as exon length and intron phase patterns showed although evolution of the ancestral cide-n domain had undergone different intron insertions to various positions in the domain among invertebrates, the genomic structure of cide family in vertebrates is stable with conserved intron phase. we propose that ncd of dffa was duplicated in early vertebrates, and one of the duplicated copies became cide-n domain that merged with the newly formed cide-c domain, generating an ancient cide family protein. subsequent duplication and evolution led to the formation of different cide family proteins that exert their specific roles in the control of metabolic pathways in different tissues.

