BACKGROUND
flubendazole  is a broad-spectrum benzimidazole  methylcarbamate anthelmintic available for use in human and some domestic animals. it is widely used for parasite control in pigs, chicken, turkeys and game birds. flbz is commercially available for oral administration as a paste, tablets, pellet or premix formulations 
 <cit> . bzd anthelmintics are extensively biotransformed in all mammalian species studied 
 <cit> . flbz is metabolized by microsomal and cytosolic fractions obtained from sheep liver and duodenal mucosa into a reduced flbz metabolite  
 <cit> . r-flbz was the main analyte recovered from the bloodstream of flbz treated sheep 
 <cit> , in which only trace amounts of the hydrolysed metabolite  were detected.

the antiparasitic activity of bzd anthelmintics largely depends on their affinity for parasite ß-tubulin, the putative mode of action 
 <cit> , but also on their ability to reach high and sustained concentrations at the site of parasite location; which, in turn, depends on pharmacokinetic, metabolic and tissue distribution processes in the host 
 <cit> . despite the type of helminth involved, the higher the concentrations achieved at the parasite location, the higher the amount of drug reaching the target parasite 
 <cit> , which is strongly supported by the findings from different in vivo studies 
 <cit>  where systemic drug availability and efficacy were simultaneously estimated. because the low aqueous solubility of the methylcarbamate bzd compounds, poor/erratic gastrointestinal absorption is a common inconvenient for the systemic availability of orally administered bzd in most species 
 <cit> . consequently, enhanced systemic availability of the parent drug/active metabolite obtained by increased drug absorption will correlate with an improved antiparasitic effect.

the cyclodextrins  are cyclic oligosaccharides which are well known as molecular host capable of including water-insoluble guest molecules via non-covalent interaction within their hydrophobic cavity 
 <cit> . the cds-drug complex formations results on changes in the physicochemical properties of the guest drug. consequently, enhanced aqueous solubility and bioavailability of guest molecules are common effects observed after the formulation of poorly water soluble drugs with cds 
 <cit> . the ability of cds to enhance oral absorption of poorly water-soluble drugs has been well documented 
 <cit> . furthermore, cds enhance oral bioavailability of fda’s class ii compounds  such as the bzd methylcarbamates 
 <cit> . in fact, it has been reported that hydroxypropyl-ß-cd  increase the relative bioavailability of albendazole  metabolites in sheep 
 <cit> . furthermore, abz-cds complexes enhance the bioavailability of abz metabolites in mice, improving its activity against trichinella spiralis <cit> .

previous work carried out in our laboratory demonstrated that cds enhanced the absorption and systemic availability of flbz in mice 
 <cit> . this modified pharmacokinetic behaviour permitted an enhanced drug exposure of the hydatid cysts which increased flbz clinical efficacy against cystic echinococcosis developed in mice 
 <cit> . while mice infected intraperitoneally with protoescoleces of e. granulosus develop cyst in the whole abdominal cavity, sheep naturally infected with e.granulosus oncospheres develop hydatid cyst in similar locations  to those observed in humans. complementary work to evaluate the efficacy of flbz against cystic echinococcosis developed in sheep is planned. however, before any clinical efficacy trial is performed, the effect of cds in the pharmacokinetic behavior of flbz in sheep needs to be assessed. the comparative in vitro aqueous solubility of flbz and other closely related bzd anthelmintics in the presence of hpβcd was evaluated in the current work. based on those solubility results, the comparative plasma and abomasal fluid pharmacokinetic behaviour of flbz  intraruminally  administered to sheep as either an aqueous cds-based solution or a conventional carboxymethylcellulose  suspension was assessed. complementary, the flbz/metabolites disposition kinetic was characterized after the experimental intraabomasal  of the flbz cds-based solution.

RESULTS
the comparative aqueous solubility of different bzd compounds assayed with or without hpßcd at ph  <dig>  and  <dig>  is shown in table 
 <dig>  bzd solubility greatly increased at a ph value of  <dig> , in which the highest aqueous solubility  was observed for the most polar abzso metabolite. furthermore, the presence of hpßcd significantly enhanced the solubility of the different bzd compounds at both ph values assayed . at ph  <dig>  , the aqueous solubility resulted abzso > flbz > ofz > abz > mbz. however, the greater hpßcd-induced “solubility increasing effect”  was observed for flbz , which resulted higher than that observed for ofz , mbz  abz  or abzso  .

*at each ph value , significantly different from the solubility obtained in the presence of hpßcd at p <  <dig> .

the comparative mean plasma concentration profiles of flbz  and r-flbz  observed after the i.r. administration of flbz formulated both as a cds-solution and cmc-suspension are shown in figure 
 <dig>  in experimental groups , the parent drug and its r-flbz metabolite were the main analytes recovered in plasma. low concentrations of the h-flbz metabolite were detected in plasma between  <dig> and 48 h after the administration of flbz in all experimental animals, which preclude any pharmacokinetic analysis. the mean pharmacokinetic parameters for flbz and r-flbz after the administration of flbz as a cds-solution  or cmc-suspension , are shown in table 
 <dig>  flbz auc values were similar between formulations after its i.r. administration. low peak plasma concentrations for the parent compound were observed after the administration of flbz in both cds-solution  and cmc-suspension . however, the observed plasma cmax value for r-flbz resulted significantly higher in flbz-cds treated compared to that observed in the flbz-cmc treated animals.

the pharmacokinetic parameters obtained after the intra-abomasal  administration of flbz  formulated as a cyclodextrin-based solution , is also shown . t½abs/for: flbz absorption or metabolite formation half life; cmax: peak plasma concentration; tmax: time to the cmax; auc0-t: area under the plasma concentration vs. time curve from  <dig> to the detection time; t½el: elimination half-life; mrt: mean residence time . *significantly different from the flbz-cds i.r. treated group at p <  <dig> .

1experiment 1: crossover design  sheep were treated with the hpβcd-flbz solution  or the cmc-flbz suspension  by the i.r. route at the same dose rate .

2experiment 2: intraabomasal  administration of the flbz-cds solution .

figure 
 <dig> shows the mean concentration profiles for flbz  and r-flbz  in abomasal fluid, obtained after the i.r. administration of flbz as both formulations to sheep. the results of the kinetic analysis for these molecules in both experimental groups are summarized in table 
 <dig>  flbz and r-flbz were recovered in abomasal fluid after flbz administration as both formulations. whereas the parent compound was found between  <dig> and 72 h, the detection of r-flbz in abomasal fluid lasted up to 96 h post-treatment. the overall abomasal pharmacokinetic pattern for flbz and r-flbz was similar in both experimental groups, however a statistically difference in cmax value  was observed for r-flbz.

t½abs/for: flbz absorption or metabolite formation half life; cmax: peak plasma concentration; tmax: time to the cmax; auc0-t: area under the plasma concentration vs. time curve from  <dig> to the detection time; t½el: elimination half-life; mrt: mean residence time . *significantly different from the flbz-cds i.r. treated group at p <  <dig> .

the comparative plasma disposition kinetics of flbz  and r-flbz  observed after the i.r. and i.a. administration of the cds-solution are shown in figure 
 <dig>  r-flbz reached a peak concentration significantly earlier after the i.a. administration  compared to the i.r. treatment . on the other hand, the peak plasma concentration of the reduced metabolite resulted higher  after the i.a. administration , compared to that observed after the i.r. treatment . however, a faster plasma depletion either for flbz or r-flbz metabolite was observed in sheep treated by the i.a. route, this represented in both cases a lower auc value  compared to that observed after the i.r. flbz-cds administration .

discussion
bzd methylcarbamate compounds are insoluble or slightly soluble in water. solubility studies involving abz 
 <cit>  or abzso 
 <cit>  indicate that bzd methylcarbamate compounds possesses both acidic and basic groups in their chemical structure, with pka values ranging between  <dig> - <dig>  and  <dig> - <dig> , respectively. thus, the aqueous solubility of these compounds increases greatly when ph values are above  <dig> or below  <dig>  the impact of low ph values in improving the aqueous solubility of different bzd compounds has been previously demonstrated 
 <cit> . in the same direction, higher aqueous solubility of different bzd molecules was observed under our in vitro experimental conditions . a markedly higher aqueous solubility at both, ph  <dig>  or  <dig> , was obtained for abz, abzso, mbz, ofz and flbz. however, the highest solubility improvement was observed for flbz at ph  <dig> , where the presence of hpßcd enhanced  <dig> fold its water solubility .

flbz, r-flbz and h-flbz were recovered in plasma samples after i.r. administration of flbz formulated as either the cds-solution or cmc-suspension. the active anthelmintic molecule after flbz treatment is the parent drug, which exhibits a high affinity binding for ß-tubulin 
 <cit>  and high potency in parasite motility test 
 <cit> . additionally, the ovicidal activity against fasciola hepatica eggs of the r-flbz metabolite has recently been described 
 <cit>  as well as the in vitro activity against echinococcus granulosus protoscoleces 
 <cit> . additionally, this metabolite has demonstrated ability to accumulate  into target parasites equivalent to that observed for the parent flbz compound 
 <cit> . consequently, a complementary effect of the parent drug and the reduced metabolite may account for the final anthelmintic activity after flbz administration.

the limited aqueous solubility of the most potent bzd compounds allows their formulation only as suspensions for oral administration to sheep. water solubility and the rate of dissolution in the gastrointestinal  tract lumen have been shown to be relevant to the absorption and resultant systemic availability of bzd compounds in ruminants 
 <cit> . to increase the bioavailability of poorly soluble compounds, pharmaceutical scientists may rely on particle micronization, use of surfactant agents, or use of complexing agents such as cds 
 <cit> . increased abz aqueous solubility induced by hpßcd has previously been reported 
 <cit> . moreover, the administration of an abz-hpßcd formulation to sheep increased gi absorption of abz with an increment  in the auc value of the active abzso metabolite 
 <cit> . however, this formulation-based advantage in water solubility did not reach, under our experimental conditions, a beneficial pharmacokinetic result compared to the treatment with the flbz suspension. contrarily to what was expected, the absorption-related pharmacokinetic parameters did not show any marked formulation-dependant effect. only the cmax value for the r-flbz metabolite was higher  after administration of the novel cd-based preparation  compared to that observed after the treatment with the cmc-suspension  . the auc values obtained after the administration of a cds-based formulation resulted 73%  and 39%  higher than those obtained for the cmc-based formulation. however, these differences did not reach statistical differences due to the large variation among experimental animals.

in mice treated with the flbz-hpßcd solution, the enhanced flbz absorption resulted in a significantly higher  plasma cmax compared to that obtained after the flbz-suspension treatment  
 <cit> . this modified pharmacokinetic behaviour permitted a higher drug exposure of the hydatid cysts developed in mice, which enhanced the clinical efficacy of flbz in echinococcosis 
 <cit> . the drastic changes induced by cds in the systemic availability of flbz in mice, do not correlate with the results observed in sheep. chemical stability of numerous foreign compounds is affected by the microflora in the rumen . cds are extensively metabolized in the human colon 
 <cit> . it is then likely that after the i.r. administration of the cd-flbz complex, a ruminal microflora-mediated metabolic process may have hydrolized/destroyed the cds structure. this may facilitate flbz release into the ruminal fluid, which could then be associated to the particulate ruminal material as it occurs after the treatment with the suspension formulation. such a phenomenon may account to explain the equivalent flbz systemic availability obtained following administration of two pharmaceutically well distinguish formulations. the absence of significant kinetic changes observed for flbz/metabolites in abomasal fluid after its administration as a cds or cmc-formulation supports this argument.

to confirm the hypothesis of a cds ruminal degradation, a pharmacokinetic study involving the i.a. administration of flbz as a cds-based solution was performed. the plasma disposition kinetics of flbz/metabolites after its i.a. administration agrees with those reported after the i.a. administration of fbz 
 <cit> , ofz 
 <cit>  and abz 
 <cit>  in sheep. basically, the auc and the tmax of the parent compound were significantly  reduced by ruminal bypass. furthermore, a significantly  shorter t½abs for flbz compared to the i.r. administration was observed . similar pharmacokinetic differences were observed for the r-flbz metabolite. when an orally administered bzd suspension reaches the rumen, an extensive adsorption of bzd molecules to the rumen particulate digesta has been shown to occur shortly after treatment 
 <cit> . this extensive association between drug molecules and the particulate material of the digesta does not inhibit absorption but delays the rate of passage of the drug down the gi tract. the rumen acts as a “drug reservoir” and prolongs the duration of drug absorption 
 <cit> . after the direct i.a. administration of a conventional bzd suspension, the drug formulation may bypass the rumen and the advantage of the “ruminal reservoir effect” is lost, resulting in poor dissolution of the bzd suspension in the abomasum due to a shorter residence time at the acidic abomasal ph, which results in reduced intestinal absorption and lower systemic availability. after the i.a. administration of flbz as a hpßcd-based solution, we expected to observe an enhanced absorption and subsequent bioavailability of the parent compound. however, the cds formulation behaved similar to the conventional suspension. the association  of flbz with digestion particulate material could explain the lack of a clear effect on drug absorption induced by the novel formulation .

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion the enhanced systemic availability flbz induced by cds, did not reach a significant pharmacokinetic improvement, as it has been shown for monogastric species and does not seem to achieve a great practical relevance for use in parasite control in sheep. the work described here contributes with relevant information on the search of new and/or alternative pharmaceutical strategies to improve the systemic availability of well know anthelmintic drugs for use in ruminant species.

