BACKGROUND
in zambia, bovine tuberculosis , caused by mycobacterium bovis, a member of the mycobacterium tuberculosis complex , has previously been reported in the wildlife-livestock interface areas of the kafue basin  <cit> . the kafue basin has a long history as an area with a high prevalence of btb in zambian cattle with the wildlife-livestock interface being suggested as the high risk area and the kafue lechwe antelopes , being the wildlife reservoir hosts  <cit> . the basin is one of the few lucurstrine wetlands supporting close to  <dig>  cattle  <cit>  at a carrying density of  <dig> animals per square kilometre on a  <dig>  square kilometre flood plain with a variety of wildlife species whilst the kafue lechwe antelope form the mega fauna with an estimated population of  <dig>   <cit> .

in wildlife-livestock interface areas, one important control measure to prevent the spread of diseases from known wildlife reservoirs is to restrict wildlife-livestock contacts  <cit> . however, control measures largely depend on the knowledge base of cattle owners for success or failure. cattle owners play a critical role in the implementation and success of disease control programmes  <cit> . to our knowledge, no studies on cattle owners' awareness of btb and other zoonotic diseases have been conducted in zambia despite livestock production and agriculture in general being the mainstay of the economy after mining and tourism. the basin has been identified as an important area with a high potential for beef production, but this status is seriously threatened by the sustained reports of serious diseases such as btb  <cit> .

the impact of tuberculosis  on human health has been devastating worldwide with more than  <dig>  million people dying annually from tb with btb being responsible for 3% of these cases  <cit> . however, in zambia, the extent of m. bovis involvement in the national tuberculosis burden is unknown. the situation is further compounded by poor or non existent institutional support systems and lack of control and research facilities. the responsibility of controlling infections that are not considered as "diseases of national economic importance" , despite their serious public health effects, lies entirely with cattle owners. it becomes important for cattle owners to acquire a degree of awareness of circulating livestock diseases in their areas notwithstanding the risks they pose, and possible transmission routes to humans, if they are to make informed decisions on diseases suspected to have zoonotic potential.

risk factors associated with btb in the kafue basin have been identified using epidemiological models  <cit> . however, the level of awareness of btb by local communities is unknown. studies in industrialized countries have shown that mitigation of btb in cattle populations can drastically reduce or eradicate the disease in human communities  <cit> . there are indications that mitigation of wildlife-livestock interaction reduces the levels of infection when cattle owners play a central role in planning control measures  <cit> .

the overall objective of this study was to assess and determine cattle owners' awareness of btb in high and low prevalence areas of the wildlife-livestock interface areas in zambia.

RESULTS
household characteristics of cattle owners
one hundred and six randomly selected villages that formed the primary sampling units of  <dig> households and corresponding cattle herds from  <dig> main study regions of kazungula , lochinvar  and blue lagoon  were selected. a total of  <dig>  family members constituted the  <dig> households from which the minimum number of individuals per household was  <dig> and the maximum were  <dig> with an average household having  <dig> individuals. cattle owners who entirely depended on their animals as the principal source of their livelihood were  <dig> % , while  <dig> % , were cattle owners who also had extra sources of livelihood. of the  <dig> %, none were in lochinvar with  <dig> from blue lagoon being cotton farmers, while the other  <dig> from kazungula were fishermen from lower ngwezi, apart from being cattle owners. ninety eight percent of the households were male headed across the three study areas with only  <dig> percent being female headed households.

awareness and knowledge of tuberculosis by cattle owners
a general overview of results is provided in table  <dig>  among the cattle owners that were interviewed, ,  <dig> % had not heard of bovine tuberculosis, or tuberculosis in animals. of the cattle owners who had heard of tuberculosis in animals, only 7%  had an idea on how the disease is spread with  <dig> %  having no basic knowledge of its spread. among the  <dig> cattle owners that were aware of the disease, all came from lochinvar and none from blue lagoon and kazungula. further,  <dig> % of the cattle owners were not aware of tuberculosis in wildlife. among those who were aware of tuberculosis in wildlife ,  <dig> %, lochinvar had a greater majority at 75%  with the remaining 25%  in blue lagoon and none from kazungula. cattle owners are particular about who takes care of their animals with preference of taking care and herding cattle being left within close family members by the majority of cattle owners ,  <dig> % . awareness of tuberculosis was associated with the experience of having an animal condemned at the abattoir . a significant association was seen when cross tabulating tuberculosis awareness and having a positive herd , indicating that higher awareness is associated with positive herds.

epidemiological parameters
across the three study areas, transhumance grazing system was the common system practised . herd size was related to the type of grazing system . herd level btb prevalence in transhumant herd  was comparably higher than the village resident herds  . only  <dig> herd owners practised interface herd grazing system . there was a significant difference in herd level prevalence of btb in relation to contact with wildlife based on the area of study . in kazungula region, only one cattle owner confirmed having seen his animals come in contact with wild animal species . the response by cattle owners and their proportions of affirmatives corresponded with the level of btb in livestock . the effect of proximity to wild animals was further assessed by the sharing of watering points of cattle and wild animals  and further by contact . sharing of water between wildlife and cattle was identified as a significant factor for btb positivity . in lochinvar, close to 88% of the animals were reported to have had shared water with wildlife. in kazungula the animals that were reported to have had shared water with wildlife accounted only for 8% of the studied population.

overall
*the type of wildlife contact reported in kazungula was with duikers, rabbits and not lechwe antelopes.

discussion
our results indicate that  <dig> % of cattle owners were cognisant of bovine tuberculosis across the study areas. however, only 7% had basic knowledge of the disease in terms of its mode of spread. further, all those who knew how the disease was spread were cattle owners based in lochinvar which is a high prevalence setting  <cit>  and none from kazungula   <cit> . blue lagoon despite being in a high prevalence setting reported no cattle owner with basic knowledge on how tuberculosis is spread. considering that both lochinvar and blue lagoon are in the high prevalence setting  <cit> , these findings intimate area variations as a platform evincing different factors of btb awareness, albeit the similarity in prevalence setting. this variation in the levels of awareness between two regions sharing high prevalence and similar ecological settings may suggest the presence of different underlying factors unique to the two areas. notable about lochinvar is the presence of a defunct abattoir  <cit>  which was operational between  <dig> to  <dig> for specifically screening wild animals for tuberculosis and other infections  <cit> . this was a point of reference by lochinvar cattle owners who had better knowledge of the disease than those in other areas. these results suggest that to a larger extent, area deterministic factors may have additional effects on disease awareness levels by cattle owners. further, history of wildlife culling in the 1970s, to detect btb in lechwe antelopes  <cit>  in lochinvar may have created an extra source of information to the local cattle owners in this area.

based on earlier epidemiological studies, high prevalence of btb appear to have had an effect on the awareness of the disease  <cit> . other studies have indicated that the level of disease awareness among famers is related to the prevalence of the disease  <cit> . however, these observations are related to area dependant factors that influence the existence of high prevalence, i.e., the presence of wildlife reservoirs of the disease  <cit> . such underlying factors may be sufficient determinants in closely related ecological areas like in lochinvar and blue lagoon, with both areas sustaining high prevalence settings, hence having a much higher level of cattle owners' awareness of btb than kazungula with a different ecological setting.

despite the lack of awareness on btb by most cattle owners, they were worried about introducing diseases into their cattle herds, as over one third of the owners had experienced the pain of taking an animal to the abattoir and to have its plucks condemned , and sometimes whole carcasses condemnations. this was of particular concern to cattle owners as it resulted in direct loss of income, and these formed the core majority of the cattle owners who were aware of tuberculosis in both the high and low prevalence settings. further, the study found a strong association between having a btb positive herd on skin test and level of awareness by the cattle owners .

as herd size increased, cattle owners tend to take their animals into the plains joining into the practice of transhumance grazing which brings their animals in contact with wildlife  <cit> .

during such periods, livestock and wild animals share drinking points. sharing of water between wildlife and cattle was identified as a significant factor for btb positivity. however, this may have been a bit subjective considering that not every cattle owner may have had seen their cattle sharing water points with wild animals simultaneously. however, during the questionnaire interview, the family members sat as a group to give as much accurate information as possible and the herd boys were available in most cases and further the family members accounted for more than 80% of the people who herded the animals consolidating the accuracy of the information.

studies elsewhere have shown that closeness to disease increased concern among cattle owners  <cit> . however, this was not in agreement with what is obtaining in the high btb prevalence area of blue lagoon, where despite high prevalence; the interest shown was low, but similar findings are congruent with what is obtaining in lochinvar area  <cit> .

our results are important in managing not only btb in complex pastoral communities where perceptions to disease occurrence vary and where standard disease control measures may fail to achieve desired results. however, our results intimate that disease control in livestock should incorporate socio aspects. our findings, where cattle owners with good knowledge of the disease were those with prior exposure to btb control activities merits further exploitation of farmer supported programs and actions in areas where such knowledge is deficient. further from this study, the major factors that were identified to be influencing knowledge gaps between different btb prevalence settings were not only plausible biologically, but also socially. this underscores the importance of disease awareness campaigns. this should take form in farmer education, farmer supported actions and participation in disease extension services. such active participation in disease control activities will develop the farmers' interests further assisting disease control experts when adopting workable methodologies aimed at controlling livestock diseases such as btb in diverse farming communities with varying levels of disease perceptions among cattle owners. in summation, these are key lessons that may be relevant for other settings where a similar situation may exist before standard disease control measures through a multifaceted approach involving veterinarians and sociologists are envisaged.

the validity of the data may be affected by interviewer bias, but this was avoided by limiting only to two persons as interviewers during the whole period of the study. in order to improve the accuracy of the data collected during these interviews, the data relevant for the tb survey were collected simultaneously with data collected for other tb and brucella questionnaires <cit>  further, the questionnaires were pretested to avoid confounding questions and to test for clarity of the questions among other aspects. our study was designed and conducted as cross sectional in nature. however, this design has limitations of considering events at a particular point in time. perceptions differ with time and the lack of information before the abattoir was built in lochinvar denied the study comparative reference. however, the findings represent prevailing levels of awareness by cattle owners in high and low prevalence settings in relation to epidemiological characteristics of btb at the time of the study. additionally, we tried to reduce recall bias by basing questions to the preceding  <dig> months before the study period. in case this study was to be conducted again, the questionnaire design would include both dichotomous variables from closed questions and open questions especially were the range of responses is not known.

all in all, our results indicate a relatively good level of disease awareness to those cattle owners in areas of high prevalence settings, peculiarly in areas augmented by existing secondary factors, activities and epidemiological characteristics related to the disease under consideration. these findings further highlight the need to sensitize cattle owners on prevailing diseases, drawing on their support, both as counterpart contact personnel for extension services as well as supporters of the disease control programs.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our study has revealed low levels of awareness among cattle owners on btb. these results could be useful for policy makers involved in planning mitigation measures to consider awareness levels by cattle owners for effective implementation. such information is useful for determining sensitisation programs for cattle owners before mitigation. these results further provide useful insights that disease control is a multi-factorial process with cattle owners as an integral part that can support policy implementation. based on these results we recommend that all future livestock disease control strategies should be farmer based, or should provide an element of determining the level of knowledge of the disease by cattle owners since most of the diseases are associated with cattle husbandry systems.

