BACKGROUND
the phylum cnidaria encompasses five classes: anthozoa, cubozoa, hydrozoa, scyphozoa, and staurozoa. anthozoa is the most speciose of these classes and is further subdivided into two diverse subclasses hexacorallia  and octocorallia   <cit> . the remaining four classes – cubozoa , hydrozoa , scyphozoa , and staurozoa  – are united in the subphylum medusozoa. cubozoa  and staurozoa  were originally included in the class scyphozoa , but each has been promoted to the status of class, leaving three orders coronatae, rhizostomeae and semaeostomea in scyphozoa  <cit> . recent progress in understanding cnidarian phylogeny, particularly efforts from the cnidarian tree of life  project , based on analyses of rrna data, have yielded a relatively widely accepted view of cnidarian relationships . nevertheless, these relationships are hypothetical and subject to tests with alternative datasets, and questions about the relationships among and within the major cnidarian taxa remain.

for instance, monophyly of anthozoa is supported by numerous analyses of rrna data  <cit> , although only one of them  <cit>  included a dense sampling of both anthozoan and medusozoan taxa. however, studies based on mitochondrial dna data suggest that anthozoa is paraphyletic, with octocorals forming a sister group relationship with medusozoans  <cit>  . the monophyly of medusozoa has not been challenged, but relationships within it remain somewhat contentious. as an example, although traditionally box jellies  were considered to be closely related to true jellyfish , some studies have suggested the groupings of  and   <cit> . furthermore, the early branching position of staurozoa, as sister group to the remaining medusozoans only received moderate support in rrna studies  <cit> .

even within the major cnidarian taxa, phylogenetic hypotheses remain to be assessed with independent datasets. some studies have nested the monophyletic rhizostome jellyfish within a paraphyletic semaeostomeae  <cit> , a view supported by the most recent phylogenetic study using rrna sequences  <cit> . other relevant findings include the sister group relationships between trachylina and hydroidolina within hydrozoa  <cit> , paraphyletic “filifera”  within hydroidolina  <cit> ; monophyletic stony corals  within hexacorallia  <cit>  in opposition to earlier studies  <cit> ; and, two robust clades carybdeida and chirodropida composing box jellyfish   <cit> . in addition, rdna-based studies have also exposed some disparities between classical taxonomy and molecular phylogenies for some groups  <cit>  and were unable to resolve phylogenetic relationships within others, e.g. hydroidolina  <cit>  and alcyonacean octocorals  <cit> . thus, additional markers are necessary to achieve a better understanding of cnidarian relationships.

resolving phylogenetic relationships for the phylum cnidaria is a prerequisite for the reconstruction of the evolutionary history of key morphological novelties in this group, e.g. life history and morphological characters  <cit> , medusan morphospace and swimming ability  <cit> , the evolution of toxicity in cubozoans  <cit> , the origin and evolution of reef-building corals  <cit> , and mitochondrial genome structures  <cit> . one critical character in cnidarian evolution is the ancestral state of the adult life stage, polyp or medusa, which has been a matter of controversy for over a century  <cit> . all anthozoans  lack a free-living medusa stage, while cubozoans and most scyphozoans contain both polyp and medusa stages. hydrozoans display the widest range of diversity in their life cycle, with the absence of a sessile polyp in trachymedusae  and many species of narcomedusae, and a highly reduced or absent medusa in other lineages )  <cit> . while some earlier studies have proposed the medusa form has been lost in anthozoa, the current view holds the medusa is an apomorphy  for medusozoa  <cit> ). consequently, it is generally considered that  a sessile polyp-like form was the ancestral adult form in the phylum cnidaria and,  an adult pelagic medusa phase evolved  in medusozoa  <cit> . however, the latter view has only slight phylogenetic support in the currently accepted cnidarian phylogeny, where the most parsimonious scenario involves the gain of the polyp form in the ancestral cnidaria and of the medusa form in medusozoa. alternatively, both the polyp and the medusa forms could have been acquired in the ancestral cnidarian, and the medusa form subsequently lost in the branch leading to anthozoa. the multiple losses of the medusa stage in different medusozoan lineages suggest that this character is indeed evolutionary labile.

medusozoa  is supported by a combination of characters both morphological , and microbasic eurytele nematocysts) and molecular   <cit> . similarly, several morphological characters have been suggested as synapomorphies for anthozoa, including the presence of an actinopharynx , mesenteries and possibly siphonoglyphs , although the latter are absent in some anthozoan lineages  <cit> . as noted above, conflicting evidence exists about the monophyly of anthozoa, being supported by rrna data  <cit>   and contradicted by mitochondrial genome dna data  <cit>  . this alternative phylogenetic hypothesis, if true, would necessitate reinterpretation of morphological characters shared by anthozoans as symplesiomorphies  rather than synapomorphies.

mitochondrial dna  is a popular molecular marker for understanding the phylogenetic relationships in animals. recent technological advances in sequencing complete mtdna sequences have provided easier access to mitogenomic data for phylogenomic studies  <cit> . some suggested advantages of mtdna over nuclear dna  in phylogenetics are the asserted orthology of all genes  <cit>  and the small genome structure being relatively conserved, which provides additional characters such as gene order   <cit> . despite some limitations, mtdna-based phylogenetic trees are considered valid proxies of the evolutionary history within and between most metazoan groups. in non-bilaterian animals, recent increase in the number of completely sequenced mtdnas has helped to resolve deep phylogenetic nodes within sponges  <cit>  and hexacorallia within cnidaria  <cit> . yet, the very poor sample size of medusozoan taxa in previous studies raises some question about the validity of phylogenetic results based on them. indeed, it is known that inadequate taxon sampling and systematic errors can override genuine phylogenetic signal, resulting in flawed phylogenetic reconstructions  <cit> .

we assembled a more taxonomically balanced mitogenomic dataset to investigate the evolutionary history of cnidarians. our dataset contains newly published mitochondrial sequences from  <dig> representative species of all medusozoan classes, including three orders of scyphozoa, both orders of cubozoa, and six out of the nine orders of hydrozoa  <cit> . we also included sequences from two octocoral orders penatulacea and helioporacea, and two hexacoral orders antipatharia and ceriantharia. our analyses suggest that the paraphyly of anthozoa does not result from poor taxon sampling. we also found the groupings  and ], contradicting the current rdna-based phylogenetic hypothesis within medusozoa.

RESULTS
additional mitogenomes for hexacorallia and octocorallia
for this study, we amplified and sequenced the complete mtdna of the black coral cirripathes lutkeni , the sea pens renilla muelleri  and stylatula elongata , and the alcyonarian sinularia peculiaris  as described earlier  <cit>  and partial mt sequences for the cerianthid ceriantheopsis americanus and the octocoral heliopora coerulea. all three complete octocoral mt-genomes have the same genome organization as that of sarcophyton glaucum. the mtdna of c. lutkeni is similar to that of chrysopathes formosa, but possesses an intron within cox <dig> that harbors a heg-like orf, responsible for the larger genome size. partial data from the mtdna of c. americanus does not allow us to discuss the mitochondrial genome organization in ceriantharia.

models of sequence evolution in our phylogenetic analyses
we evaluated how the site-heterogeneous cat and catgtr models perform on mitochondrial protein amino acid dataset  compared to the reference site-homogeneous model gtr under bi by using cross-validation. according to pair-wise difference of log-likelihood scores, we found that the catgtr model more accurately explained our data ; the cat model was the worst of the three models for our alignment . for all the codon alignments, we found gtr to be the best-fit model according to the bayesian information criterion , the corrected akaike information criterion , and the decision theory performance-based selection . we therefore used the gtr models as well as the q-matrix mixture model  implemented in pb for all codon analyses.

phylogenetic relationships among cnidarian classes
we analyzed the phylogenetic relationships among cnidarian classes for both the amino acids and codon data under the bayesian  and the maximum likelihood  frameworks. we also used two different models of sequence evolution  for bayesian inferences on the amino acids alignment. for all our analyses, we decided to exclude sequences from bilaterian animals because they form long branches in mitochondrial phylogenomic trees that attract other long branches, resulting in long branch attraction artifacts  <cit> . in the future, the inclusion of bilaterians in mtdna-based phylogenies can be tested given better models of sequence evolution are available. we found maximum support for the monophyly of medusozoa, cubozoa, staurozoa, hydrozoa, and discomedusae in all amino acid analyses . in the analyses based on amino acid sequences, a few differences emerged when using two different models of sequence evolution, most of them limited to poorly supported branches. for instance, we found monophyletic cnidaria  and hexacorallia , and the placement of the coronate linuche unguiculata as the sister taxa to the clade   under the catgtr model . on the other hand, we found paraphyletic cnidaria and hexacorallia in all gtr trees, where the position of ceriantheoptsis americanus was unstable . we also observed that l. unguiculata was the first diverging medusozoan clade in gtr  analyses but the sister taxa to  in gtr  without support . removing the coronate l. unguiculata and those species with missing data  did not impact cnidarian paraphyly under gtr  model .

bootstraps values  and posterior probabilities  obtained for the alimg alignment for several clades traditionally recognized in cnidaria.

all analyses supported the clade  , although posterior probabilities  were lower when gtr model was used . within medusozoa, we recovered the monophyly of cubozoa, staurozoa, and hydrozoa with maximum support, but scyphozoa  was not recovered as a monophyletic group in any analyses . the class hydrozoa always grouped with discomedusae , and cubozoa was the sister taxon to staurozoa . when we removed the single species of coronate, l. unguiculata, the support values for the clade  slightly increased , while support values for the clade  decreased .

we also analyzed codon alignments from a subset of  <dig> species using the gtr and the qmm models under bi and the gtr model under the ml frameworks. it has been shown that codon usage bias can result in phylogenetic artifact  <cit> . in order to minimize the impact of codon usage bias on phylogenetic trees, we reanalyzed the codon dataset after removing the third codon position, as well as codons for arginine , leucine , and serine . only the codalim75tx-argleuser <dig> dataset under gtr and the codalim75tx-argleuser <dig> and the codalim75tx-ser <dig> datasets under qmm model produced informative trees , the other analyses resulting in the near absence of phylogenetic resolution. when some resolution was achieved, the codon analyses yielded similar results to those from the amino acid dataset. we found paraphyletic anthozoa, with medusozoa the sister taxon to octocorallia  in all codon analyses, but monophyletic cnidaria only in the qmm analysis of the codalim75tx-ser <dig> dataset .

intra-class relationships
within discomedusae, our data reject the monophyly of semaeostomeae and rhizostomeae  with the rhizostome rhizostoma pulmo as the sister taxon to the ulmariid semaeostome aurelia aurita, while uniting the semaeostome families cyaneidae and pelagiidae, as well as all the remaining rhizostomes. cubozoa is divided into the two monophyletic clades carybdeida and chirodropida as found earlier  <cit> , but our data do not resolve the relationships between the three carybdeids. in hydrozoa, our analyses supported the dichotomy trachylina  – hydroidolina  with high support values . the aplanulatan hydra spp and ectopleura larynx and the capitates millepora platyphylla and pennaria disticha formed a monophyletic clade . the species clava multicornis  and nemopsis bachei  also formed a monophyletic clade as the sister group to the rest of hydroidolina with maximum support values. the position of the leptothecate laomedea flexuosa was different between gtr and catgtr analyses. the gtr trees placed leptothecata as the sister taxon to the clade   similar to ml analyses using nuclear and mitochondrial rrna genes with the gtrmix model of sequence evolution  <cit> . by contrast, bayesian analysis using the catgtr model strongly supported the leptothecate hydrozoan as the sister taxon to the clade  .

our data do not resolve the position of ceriantharia . given that our sequence for the tube anemone is incomplete and our sampling only includes one species from ceriantharia, additional data from the group might provide some clues on the position of cerianthids. we recovered the currently accepted order-level relationships  <cit>  for the remaining hexacorals in all our analyses . zoanthidea  was the earliest diverging lineage, followed by actiniaria , antipatharia , and the clade . the order scleractinia  was monophyletic in catgtr analyses with low support values , but paraphyletic under gtr framework, where one clade of scleractinians was the sister taxa to corallimorphs . finally, despite the addition of two new sequences from pennatulacea  and partial data from heliopora coerulea, our analyses did not resolve the phylogenetic relationships within octocorallia.

testing evolutionary hypotheses
we used several phylogenetic tests to evaluate the support for traditional taxonomic hypotheses of our datasets under the ml framework. we used the approximately unbiased  test, the kishino-hasegawa  test, and the shimodaira-hasegawa  test with the gtr + Γ model . we found that the order semaeostomeae is significantly rejected , but not the inclusion of staurozoan species as part of an extensive “scyphozoa” clade . we also found that despite the absence of support for the monophyly of both hexacorallia and scleractinia in gtr trees, hypothesis tests do not reject these clades . in addition, gtr-based analyses do not significantly reject the validity of anthozoa , scyphozoa , or the clade acraspeda  , even after removal of the long-branch coronate l. unguiculata . by comparison, under bi we found no support for the validity of anthozoa , acraspeda , scyphozoa , and semaeostomeae  in any of our trees under both gtr and catgtr models.

probability values for the au, kh and sh tests and bi values for several clades traditionally recognized in cnidaria.

* similar results have been obtained for a smaller dataset that does not contain the sequences from the coronate linuche unguiculata, the tube anemone ceriantheopsis americanus and the blue octocoral heliopora coerulea.

discussion
we reevaluated cnidarian phylogenetic relationships using a dataset of mitochondrial protein genes from a systematically more balanced sample of species, including cubozoans and staurozoans  <cit> , which were absent in previous works  <cit> . our cnidarian-rich dataset reduced one major source of potential error that could derive from biased and insufficient taxon sampling for the groups of interest. in our analyses, the site-heterogeneous model catgtr recovered the monophyly of cnidaria and hexacorallia, both supported by molecular and morphological characters  <cit> . by contrast, these clades were paraphyletic in both maximum likelihood and bayesian analyses based on the gtr model of sequence evolution. this is not surprising given that a main assumption underlying the gtr model, i.e. homogeneity of the substitution pattern across sites, is violated by most molecular data, rendering the correct capture of the phylogenetic signal present in our alignments more difficult  <cit> . the resulting topologies from catgtr analyses differed significantly from the current consensus view of cnidarian phylogeny  <cit> . using the best estimate as a working hypothesis for cnidarian relationships, we can propose a putative reconstruction of character evolution for the group.

the mitogenomic point of view of cnidarian systematics
the current view on cnidarian phylogeny based on nuclear rrna genes subdivides the phylum cnidaria into anthozoa and medusozoa  <cit> , but mitochondrial protein genes have consistently supported anthozoan paraphyly with octocorallia being the sister taxon to medusozoa  <cit> . it has been argued that the paraphyly of anthozoa reported in earlier mitogenomic studies resulted from poor taxon sampling  <cit> . here we show that paraphyletic anthozoa does not result from unbalanced taxon sampling. in addition, a principal component analysis of the amino acid composition  suggests that compositional bias is also an unlikely explanation. the amino acid composition of hexacorallia is rather divergent, but not similar to those of the two outgroups ; in fact, the composition similarity between octocorallia and the outgroups would favor the alternative possibility of anthozoa paraphyly , which is not observed in our analyses. to further test the possible impact of compositional bias, we analyzed our alignments using the catgtr model with a dayhoff recoding strategy, despite the fact that it implies a loss of signal resulting in increasing the stochastic error. interestingly, octocorallia remained sister-group of medusozoa, even if the statistical support was reduced .

we also analyzed codon alignments using the gtr and qmm models under bayesian and gtr under maximum likelihood frameworks. even after removing the third position as well as codons for arginine , leucine , and serine , which can cause phylogenetic artifacts  <cit> , we found the paraphyly of anthozoa, with medusozoa the sister taxon to octocorallia . consequently, according to our analyses, mitochondrial protein genes support the clade  . in contrast, the amino acid composition of hydrozoa and discomedusae is similar  and the dayhoff recoding recovered discomedusae as sister-group of cubozoa , although with low support, suggesting that the monophyly of the clade  might be due to an amino acid composition artifact. in fact, preliminary analyses including the very fast evolving and compositionally biased bilateria using the site-heterogeneous catgtr model supported the unlikely grouping of bilateria and cubozoa . this suggests that the use of a complex model of sequence evolution and of a rich taxon sampling is not sufficient to overcome all the systematic errors in the mitochondrial protein dataset. with the current increase in genome sequencing efforts, it will soon be possible to evaluate our phylogenetic tree  with large nuclear dna datasets.

within medusozoa, staurozoa is considered the first diverging clade, and the sister taxon to  . while the position of linuche unguiculata is still ambiguous in our trees, we found no support for either the inclusion of coronates in scyphozoa , or for acraspeda  . instead, we found high support for the clades   and  . this suggests that scyphozoa is polyphyletic, although both scyphozoa and hydrozoa display similar amino acid composition. additional sequences from coronates are needed to test the phylogenetic relationships presented here.

recent molecular studies have refined our understanding of hydrozoan relationships, particularly the sister group relationship between hydroidolina and trachylina  <cit> . however, relationships within hydroidolina have been very difficult to resolve based on either nuclear or mitochondrial rdna genes. here we have been able to sample five important hydroidolinan clades: aplanulata, capitata, filifera iii and iv, leptothecata, and limnomedusae. mitochondrial protein genes provide good resolution for order-level relationships within hydrozoa, although our sampling was limited in scope . we recovered monophyletic hydroidolina as the sister group to our single representative from trachylina. we also found monophyletic aplanulata and capitata, and paraphyletic anthoathecata as suggested earlier  <cit> . on the other hand, we found a consistent grouping of capitate and aplanulate hydrozoans in all our trees , which is in contradiction with earlier rdna-based studies  <cit> . the high support values here suggest that higher resolution of the clade hydroidolina may be achieved with an increase in the number of complete mtdnas for representative taxa within this difficult clade.

based on mitochondrial genome data, the monophyly of stony corals  has recently been put into question  <cit> , but more thorough studies employing alternative datasets have rejected this hypothesis  <cit> . our analyses support the monophyly of scleractinia under the preferred catgtr model . our phylogenetic analyses did not resolve relationships within octocorals. this was predictable given the low-level of variation of mitochondrial genes in octocorals , a pattern attributed to the activity of the mtmuts gene they encode. it is noteworthy mentioning that our alignments did not encompass sequences from the mtmuts gene, absent in all other cnidarian and animal taxa, and which displays a comparatively higher rate of sequence evolution than other genes  <cit> . while future molecular studies of the evolutionary history of octocorals may focus their investigation to only a portion of the mtdna  <cit> , complete mitogenomes provide additional genomic features such as gene order and the composition of intergenic regions  that could be valuable to systematic studies  <cit> . furthermore, the combination of mitogenomic sequences with nuclear data will likely provide even better phylogenetic resolution for this group.

morphological evolution in cnidarians
unlike the dichotomous anthozoa-medusozoa, our strongly supported finding that anthozoa is paraphyletic further supports the idea that bilateral symmetry, a step of foremost importance in metazoan evolution as it is exhibited as part of most animal body plans , was anciently acquired prior to the divergence between cnidaria and bilateria. in fact in cnidaria, increasing evidence supports the presence of bilateral symmetry in corals and sea anemones, where it is represented by the siphonoglyph  <cit> , while most medusozoans do not exhibit any bilateral symmetry  <cit> , with siphonophores being an exception  <cit> . the tree topologies provided here strengthen the view that the ancestral cnidarian displayed a bilateral symmetry from which the radial tetrameral symmetry  of most medusae and many polyps of medusozoans derived . previous studies have already suggested occurrences of deviation from a bilateral bauplan in several animal groups, such as siphonophores  <cit> , myxozoans  <cit>  and some bilaterians  <cit> . bilaterality has evolved very early in animal evolution near the root of the metazoan tree  <cit> , and our data support the view that such a step was taken before the divergence of cnidaria. future studies that resolve the position of cnidarians within the metazoan tree of life will shed light on the origin of bilateral symmetry in animals.

based upon the basal position of staurozoa in previous phylogenies, collins and collaborators  <cit>  proposed that the medusa of hydrozoa, cubozoa and scyphozoa derived from a stauromedusa-like ancestor. however, if the mitogenomic hypothesis of cnidaria is true , then the free-living medusa form likely evolved in the branch leading to monophyletic medusozoa, with subsequent independent losses of this life stage occurring in the lineages leading to staurozoa and several hydrozoan clades . this scenario is consistent with earlier studies that originated the name "stalked jellyfish" for staurozoans, and concluded that these species represented "degenerated" jellyfish descended from ancestors with a pelagic medusa  <cit> . simplification or losses of the medusa form has also been documented in several hydrozoa clades  <cit> . the acquisition of a pelagic form is significant given that a free-swimming medusa allows a higher degree of offspring dispersion than by gametes and larvae alone  <cit> .

earlier studies have suggested several synapomorphies for the extended acraspeda clade , namely radial tetrameral symmetry, medusa formation located at the apical end of the polyp, polyps with canal system and gastrodermal musculature organized in bunches of ectodermal origin , the presence of rhopalia or rhopalioid-like structures, medusae with gastric filaments and septa in the gastrovascular cavity  <cit> . paraphyletic acraspeda as suggested by our analyses implies that either these characters were acquired several times independently in cubozoa, coronatae and discomedusae, or that they have been inherited from the ancestral medusozoan and lost in hydrozoa. given the complexity of these characters, it is unlikely that they were re-derived independently in various lineages. rather, the most parsimonious scenario is their presence in the last common ancestor of medusozoans, with subsequent loss in hydrozoans. similarly, scyphozoa are defined by the presence of ephyrae and simple rhopalia, and production of medusae through strobilation of the polyp  <cit> . if scyphozoa are paraphyletic as suggested by our trees, these characters can be either convergent or plesiomorphic. for instance, rhopalia-like structures are present in all medusozoan clades but hydrozoa. according to the mitogenomic view of cnidarian phylogeny, the most parsimonious scenario suggests that the ancestral medusozoan possessed some sort of rhopalium, maybe similar to those present in discomedusans and coronates. according to this scenario, simplification of rhopalia must have accompanied the degeneration of the medusae in staurozoa, while they were completely lost in hydrozoa. by contrast, the rhopalia in cubozoa have evolved into complex structures with multiple, complex eyes. marques and collins  have suggested a clade formed by  based on cladistic analysis of a set of morphological and life-history characters  <cit> . they suggested the presence of y-shaped septa and a quadrate or square symmetry of horizontal cross-section as synapomorphies for this clade. mitogenomic data also support such a grouping, providing additional evidence for the validity of these characters as synapomorphies for the clade .

CONCLUSIONS
we used an extended dataset of mitochondrial protein genes to reevaluate the phylogeny of cnidaria, paying attention to common biases in phylogenetic reconstructions resulting from insufficient taxon sampling and using more simplistic models of sequence evolution. our phylogenetic analyses suggest the grouping of octocorallia and medusozoa to the exclusion of hexacorallia, resulting in paraphyletic anthozoa. we also recovered the  and ] relationships within medusozoa. it should be noted, however, that although our data provide little or no support for the clades anthozoa, acraspeda and scyphozoa, they are not rejected with statistically significant support in the maximum-likelihood framework. using the new mito-phylogenomic view, we reconstructed the evolution of several morphological characters in medusozoans. in particular, our phylogenetic hypothesis provided additional evidence for the “polyp first” theory, where the ancestral cnidarian was a bilateral polyp-like organism, and that a radially symmetrical and vagile medusa evolved in the branch leading to medusozoa. our analyses support the view that the ancestor of cnidarians and bilaterians  possessed bilateral symmetry  <cit> . according to our working hypothesis, synapomorphies traditionally associated with acraspeda such as the presence of gastric filaments in the medusae and gastrodermal musculature organized in bunches of ectodermal origin were most likely acquired early in the evolution of medusozoa, and later lost in the branch leading to hydrozoa. finally, our study highlights some of the limitations of mt-based phylogenies and call for the concomitant use of several markers for resolving such deep nodes in the metazoan tree of life.

