BACKGROUND
brain-computer interface  technology has already been successfully used to control a computer mouse cursor and a robotic arm by thought, and thus has been expected to become a tool to compensate for lost motor functions in patients with spinal cord injury
 <cit>  or amyotrophic lateral sclerosis
 <cit> . recently, some research groups succeeded in showing another possible use of bci, that is, as a tool to promote neural plasticity causing functional recovery from stroke
. the number of clinical applications of such bci-based neurorehabilitation is expected to increase in the near future.

focal dystonia is a disorder of movement characterized by involuntary, sustained muscle contractions, frequently causing twisting and repetitive movements or abnormal postures of a body part
 <cit> . writer's cramp  is an example of task-specific focal hand dystonia. wc was once believed to be a purely psychological problem, but more recently is understood to be due to more specific neural dysfunction, including that of the basal ganglia
 <cit> . disinhibition and overexcitation of the cortico-basal ganglia-thalamic loop may lead to co-contractions and dystonic postures
 <cit> .

a recent transcranial magnetic stimulation study has also revealed that there is shift in the balance between excitation and inhibition in local circuits of the primary motor cortex in focal dystonia
 <cit> . sensory evoked potential recordings in focal dystonia  also indicate that in dystonia there is impaired inhibition at spinal and cortical levels of the somatosensory system, which can lead to an abnormal sensory assistance to ongoing motor programs, resulting in motor abnormalities
 <cit> .

toro et al. investigated abnormal activity at the cortical level with a scalp electroencephalogram
 <cit> . in their results, a significantly lower amount of event-related desynchronization  in the 20–30 hz band was found in dystonic patients over the contralateral and midline centroparietal regions, from −100 ms to +200 ms with respect to electromyogram  onset. if we could provide explicit online representation of such dystonic-specific eeg features, it could help wc patients to voluntarily return the cortical state to normal using bci neurofeedback.

to prove its concept, the present study employed a bci paradigm to provide visual feedback of ongoing eeg features that represents the exaggerated excitability of the sensorimotor cortex during hand movement , and assessed neurological and behavioral changes through 5-month use in a wc patient as a clinical pilot studya.figure  <dig> 
schematic diagram of the brain-computer interface that feeds back information about cortical excitability in the sensorimotor cortex.




RESULTS
after  <dig> bci training sessions, the wc participant clearly showed a reduction of dystonic movement during writing, and their handwriting of japanese characters showed a reduction in distortion . the patient also showed some reduction in hand rigidity during writing.

for further analysis, eeg over the bilateral sensorimotor cortex and emg from the dystonic right extensor carpi radialis  were recorded during tonic wrist extension, and the power spectra and coherency of the eeg signals and the rectified emg signal were calculated . in the pre-training condition , the coherence peak achieved  <dig>  between the left eeg and the rectified emg. a coherence peak was also found between the right eeg and the rectified emg. the frequency band of significant coherence expanded from 26 hz to 34 hz both in the left eeg-emg coherence  and in the right eeg-emg coherence . in contrast, the post-training condition data showed no significant coherence between the left eeg-emg, and a low peak  in right eeg-emg coherence.

in the erd/ event-related synchronization  analysis for eeg data during a repetitive motor task, significant extension-related eeg power increase  in the beta band was observed bilaterally in the pre-training condition . the frequency bands of this ers expanded from 26 hz to 30 hz in the left eeg and from 27 hz to 32 hz in the right eeg. both frequency bands were within the frequency band of dystonia-specific eeg features determined by the coherence analysis. after bci training, the averaged ers decreased bilaterally from 67% to 28% in the left eeg  and from 62% to 32% in the right eeg .figure  <dig> 
an example of japanese and chinese characters and the handwriting of the patient .

cortico-muscular coherence and power spectra of eeg and rectified emg in pre-training condition. top row shows eeg power spectra from the left eeg  and the right eeg . middle row shows the power spectrum of rectified emg recorded from the right ecr muscle . bottom row shows coherence between eeg and rectified emg of the right ecr. the horizontal lines denote the 99% confidence limit. panels d and e show the laplacian eeg from the left and right hemispheres, respectively.
cortico-muscular coherence and power spectra of eeg and rectified emg in post-training condition. top row shows the power spectra from the left eeg  and the right eeg . middle row shows the power spectrum of rectified emg recorded from the right ecr muscle . bottom row shows coherence between eeg and rectified emg. the horizontal lines denote the 99% confidence limit. panels d and e show eeg from c <dig> and c <dig>  respectively.
erd/ers produced by repetitive motor task. panels a and b are computed from data recorded prior to training and panels c and d are from after training. the lower panels show averaged erd/ers values in the 26–30 hz band  and in the 27–32 hz band  for comparison between pre- and post-training conditions. the left column  and the right column  represent the data recorded from around c <dig>  and c <dig> , respectively. statistically non-significant areas are shown as blank in panels a–d. the significance level is set to p <  <dig> .



certainly, there is some evidence for the involvement of the bilateral motor cortices in the abnormal muscle activity in focal dystonia. tecchio et al. reported patients’ exaggerated and bilaterally coupled cortico-muscular coherence in the beta band  during isometric contraction
 <cit> , which is not seen in healthy participants . these studies suggest the existence of different mechanisms of cortico-muscular coupling from healthy individuals in dystonia patients. we found a large beta ers from the hand motor areas in both hemispheres in the pre-training condition . since such eeg characteristics were consistent with previous coherence studies
 <cit> , it is natural to assume that large ers is observed in the frequency in which large cortico-muscular coherence exists. therefore, we consider that selecting the 26–34 hz eeg amplitude to represent dystonia-specific eeg features was reasonable.

cortico-muscular coherence provides a quantitative measure of the linear components of the coupling between eeg and rectified emg. it should be noted that the coherence is not expected to be a direct estimate of the anatomical neural connections. tecchio et al. argue that high cortico-muscular coherence found in dystonic patients should be understood in a physiological sense as signs of a different  sensorimotor integration
 <cit> . they also suggest that healthy subjects transiently mediate movement control by tuning their neuronal firing rates more than by cortico-muscular synchronization, and that the repertoire of voluntary motor control strategies is reduced in dystonic patients. we agree with this suggestion and the improvement of writing after bci training  can be explained by a change in the motor control strategy for writing. the cortico-muscular coherence might quantitatively indicate this change from synchronization leading control to other modes, for example, firing rate tuning.

our result clearly shows a decrease of ers in the beta frequency band associated with a significant improvement of handwriting after biweekly bci training. since the ers in this beta frequency band must be a dystonia-related feature, providing visual feedback of the ongoing ers level through our bci system might promote plastic and functional reorganization in the neural network of this patient. considering that it has been over 5 years since the appearance of symptoms, and that conventional treatments were not effective for this patient, bci training might have different applications for functional cortical modulation than previously thought.

in addition, in the current study, clinical scales were not measured before or after the intervention. instead, the handwriting on a paper was employed, and the authors set the main focus of the study on eeg pattern changes induced by our bci system in a wc patient. therefore, degree of the functional improvement of the patient's handwriting is still unclear in this study. as a next step, it is necessary to quantify the functional improvement using, for example, the writer's cramp rating scale
 <cit>  or other dystonia rating scales. to inquire more details regarding functional improvement of hand-writing by trainings, it will need long-term follow-up study. there are still open questions whether more training can change eeg pattern or improve hand writing, or whether the improvement of the handwriting can be sustained after finishing the bci training.

CONCLUSIONS
to date, mainstream bci rehabilitation has aimed to induce functional reorganization for stroke patients or incomplete spinal cord injury patients
 <cit> . the current study, however, demonstrates another application of therapeutic bci for patients with exaggerated cortical activity associated with involuntary muscle contractions, such as a dystonia patient, using visual feedback of abnormal eeg activity. though this study is a single-case study without control participants and is also in the pilot stage, the encouraging results may facilitate further larger scale studies or randomized controlled trials.

