BACKGROUND
plants can be affected by a broad range of plant-pathogenic oomycetes, such as downy mildews and phytophthora species. comprehensive knowledge of host-pathogen interactions is a prerequisite for designing novel control strategies. elucidation of these complex interactions will especially benefit from easy and user-friendly model pathosystems. one of the potential model systems is the interaction between phytophthora brassicae and arabidopsis  <cit> .

p. brassicae was initially classified as p. porri, a major pathogen causing white tip disease on allium species  <cit> , but based on detailed characterization, including isozyme pattern, its sequence, morphology and host-pathogenicity, it is now categorized as a new and distinct species  <cit> . p. brassicae has a narrow host range restricted to brassicaceous plants and was shown to be pathogenic on different brassica species, e.g. chinese cabbage , brussels sprouts  and rutabaga    <cit> . p. brassicae is mostly associated with post-harvest damage that limits the marketability of cabbage heads and can reach up to 90% losses  <cit> . although less frequently, disease symptoms have been observed on cabbage plants in the field. colonization often starts in root or stem tissue, and subsequently progresses upwards through the vascular system, eventually colonizing the leaves. infection and disease spread is more severe under wet weather conditions with moderate temperatures; the optimum lies between  <dig> and 20°c, although pathogen growth has been observed at lower temperatures down to -3°c  <cit> .

in the last decade, arabidopsis has become the most attractive model plant for genetic and molecular studies and consequently it is favorable as host plant for studying plant-pathogen interactions. several oomycete pathogens have been reported to infect arabidopsis, either naturally or under laboratory conditions. these include hyaloperonospora arabidopsidis, albugo candida and two phytophthora species, p. cinnamoni and p. brassicae  <cit> . the best studied phytophthora species, i.e. p. infestans and p. sojae, are incapable to infect arabidopsis; they trigger defense responses leading to non-host resistance  <cit> . roetschi et al. , who first described the p. brassicae-arabidopsis pathosystem, inoculated a variety of p. brassicae isolates on multiple arabidopsis accessions and defence mutants, and showed that certain combinations result in compatible and others in incompatible interactions  <cit> . this pathosystem has the potential to become a model for studying oomycete-plant interactions, allowing concurrent molecular analysis of the host as well as the pathogen.

a disadvantage of p. brassicae is the fact that generating zoospores is troublesome. in nature, phytophthora species produce vegetative spores, the so-called sporangia, that infect the host tissue upon germination. at lower temperatures sporangia often develop into zoosporangia that release zoospores and these then act as the infectious propagules. in the laboratory one can also use mycelium plugs or mycelial suspensions as inoculum but to mimic disease cycle in nature it is more appropriate to use sporangia or zoospores. various laboratory protocols describe the isolation of zoospores from in vitro grown mycelium  <cit>  and for several phytophthora species it is relatively easy to obtain sufficient amounts of zoospores for en masse inoculation. for p. brassicae, however, efficient production of zoospores is not so straightforward  <cit> . to induce sporulation p. brassicae has to be cultured on soil medium  or transferred to schmitthenner solution  <cit> . the preparation of these media is complicated and laborious and the amount of zoospores generated on these media is low. moreover, zoospore production is dependent on ph, mycelial age and season . this study aimed at establishing a fast, simple and convenient system for production and isolation of p. brassicae zoospores. we first compared the pathogenicity of five p. brassicae isolates on brussels sprouts  and monitored infection and colonization using bright field and fluorescence light microscopy. subsequently, we optimized the zoospore production system. leaf discs cut from infected brussels sprout leaves were shown to be an excellent source for large scale production of p. brassicae zoospores.

RESULTS
phytophthora brassicae lesion development on brussels sprouts
mycelial plugs of p. brassicae were inoculated on detached leaves of brussels sprouts cultivar cyrus. we tested five p. brassicae isolates that were originally isolated from different brassica crop species. although all five were able to infect brussels sprout leaves , there were differences in disease progression between isolates. for example, foliar lesions caused by p. brassicae isolates cbs <dig>  and ii were predominantly larger than lesions caused by the other isolates. it is noteworthy that these two isolates were originally isolated from brussels sprouts, possibly explaining their advantage. foliar lesions on brussels sprouts had a brownish-grey color and were usually surrounded by a water-soaked halo . in later stages of disease development the lesion edges and especially the leaf midribs became darker in color, varying from dark-grey up to black. another typical symptom often seen at this stage was leaf chlorosis.

a the average size in cm <dig> of at least  <dig> lesions at  <dig> dpi

the isolates were also tested for their ability to infect stems and roots . all isolates were infectious on both tissues, but – as on the leaves – there was variation in disease progression between isolates . to better visualize the colonization process we used a green fluorescent protein  tagged p. brassicae transformant. microscopical examination of the infected tissues showed hyphal growth in leaves, stems and roots . in leaves extensive intercellular hyphal growth was found in the intercellular space between mesophyll cells. the few haustoria that were observed were small and – like haustoria of p. infestans – digit-like in shape. in late stages of infection, hyphae emerged through the stomata and occasionally protruded the epidermal cell layer but there was no sporulation. instead, in leaf, stem and root lesions typical protrusions were observed . supposedly, these protrusions are the sporangiophore initials. only after being exposed to cold water sporangia were formed, which subsequently developed into zoosporangia.

development of a zoospore production method
the susceptibility of brussels sprout leaves towards p. brassicae raised the idea that the lesions could be an excellent source for mass production of zoospores. figure  <dig> depicts an overview of the zoospore production procedure. inoculum was prepared by cutting mycelial plugs from p. brassicae colonies grown on v <dig> agar medium . the plugs were placed on the brussels sprout leaves  with gentle pressure and with the mycelium in direct contact with the leaf surface. lesions on the brussels sprout leaves developed quickly and usually  <dig> days post inoculation  the lesions were large enough to obtain infected leaf discs with a diameter of  <dig> mm . the leaf discs were cut with a cork borer , placed with the abaxial side upwards in 6-well plates with 1– <dig> ml cold water per well and gently pushed under water . when – after leaf disc cutting – further expansion of the foliar lesions was allowed, the infected leaf could be used to obtain new leaf discs. the first  <dig> hours the plates were incubated at 4°c and thereafter at 18°c. water was refreshed with a two day interval. infection was checked daily under a stereomicroscope. newly formed mycelium and sporangia formation were observed after one day. after two days there was a strong increase in the number of sporangia . subsequently, the sporangia matured and developed into zoosporangia . the process from appearance to maturation lasted approximately  <dig> days. to initiate zoospore release from mature zoosporangia fresh cold water was added and the plates were incubated at 4°c. after one hour the first zoospores were released , mostly eight from each zoosporangium. the zoospores were able to swim for several hours . a time-lapse movie showing discharged zoospores is appended .

all five isolates were tested in this system. in all cases numerous zoospores were produced and we did not observe seasonal influences. the amount of zoospores per leaf disc was semiquantitatively determined with a hemacytometer. comparable mean numbers of zoospores per leaf disc were found for isolates cbs <dig>  and ii, whereas isolates hh and cbs <dig>  were shown to produce more zoospores, reaching concentrations of 1* <dig> zoospores per ml .

a Ø  <dig> mm, b zsp./ml = zoospores per ml, c not determined

an additional advantage of this system is that the infected leaf discs can be reused after the first harvest. for additional zoospore harvests fresh water was added to the microwell plates every two days. subsequently, the microwell plates were placed at 18°c to allow development and maturation of fresh zoosporangia. as in the first round, cold water was added and incubation at 4°c was used to trigger zoospore release. zoospore yields from successive harvests were lower when compared to initial harvests , but the concentrations were still sufficient for infection assays on plants. the leaf discs remained viable and continuously produced zoospores for a period up to one month, albeit that the concentrations became lower as the culture period proceeded.

furthermore, in accordance with the homothallic nature of p. brassicae, formation of oospores was observed in the infected leaf discs, although at low frequencies and only in older leaf discs .

zoospores produced on leaf discs can infect brussels sprouts and arabidopsis
infectiousness of zoospores produced on leaf discs in the microwell plates was tested on brussels sprout leaves and stems, and on arabidopsis rosette leaves . the inoculations were performed as described in materials and methods. on brussels sprout leaves, lesion development became clearly evident  <dig> dpi. at  <dig> dpi – when the lesions were remarkably larger – a typical discoloration of the tissue was observed . the zoospores were also shown to infect brussels sprout stems. water-soaked, dark brown lesions with dense mycelial growth were observed  <dig> dpi . occasionally, callus formation on stem tissue was observed.

on arabidopsis, sporulating lesions were observed at  <dig> dpi. initially the lesions appeared water-soaked, thereafter the infected tissue wilted and subsequently collapsed . dried out lesions turned bleached white in color and papery in appearance. dense tissue colonization by p. brassicae was observed microscopically after trypan blue staining in infected brussels sprout and arabidopsis tissue .

CONCLUSIONS
in this report we demonstrate that p. brassicae easily infects brussels sprout leaves, stems and roots. an in vitro leaf disc method for the isolation of p. brassicae zoospores was successfully established and zoospores isolated via this procedure were shown to be infectious. this method opens the opportunity to execute – on small to large scale – zoospore infections on brassicaceous plants, including arabidopsis. the major advantages are its easy handling, the possibility of inoculating large numbers of plants and the continuous production of zoospores over a period of at least one month, at any season.

