BACKGROUND
the tyrosine recombinase -encoding elements constitute one of the major groups of retrotransposons  <cit> . these elements encode a yr that is required for the mechanism of integration into the genome  <cit> , distinguishing them from other retrotransposons   <cit> . dirs1-like retrotransposons belong to the yr-encoding element superfamilies  <cit> , whose constituents exhibit a unique structure made up of three orfs and uncommon repeats . the first orf encodes a putative gag protein, the second the yr, and the third a pol region composed of three distinct domains: a reverse transcriptase , a rnase h , and a methyltransferase . the function of this latter still remains unknown. depending on the element considered, there may be considerable overlap between the pol and the yr regions . the catalytic tyrosine recombinase domain is encoded by the non-overlapping 3'-end of the yr orf. many phylogenetic relationship analyses have shown that the rt/rh domains of dirs1-like retrotransposons are closely related to those of ty3/gypsy ltr retrotransposons, suggesting that all these elements diverged from an ancient gag-pol form of retrotransposon  <cit> . dirs1-like elements are bounded by inverted terminal repeats  and harbor two internal complementary regions . the two icrs located at the 3'-end of the element appear to overlap on a 3-bp motif called the circular junction. as the left icr is inverse-complementary to the beginning of the left itr so is the right icr to the end of the right itr, but the latter also appears complementary to an extension of the right itr that is called the right extension   <cit> . given these unusual features, an integration model has been proposed  <cit>  in which the itrs' extremities match with their respective icr. the junction of the two itrs results in the formation of a rolling-circle intermediate of the element. the element integration then occurs by recombination between the 3-bp itr junction sequence  and an identical sequence in the genome, which does not produce any target site duplications. their unique structure distinguishes dirs1-like retrotransposons from other yr-encoding elements, also known as the dirs order  <cit>  that includes also the ngaro, viper and pat elements. the ngaro and viper retrotransposons are devoid of the mt domain and do not usually harbor orf overlaps  <cit> . elements from the pat superfamily, the sister group of dirs1-like retrotransposons, differ most prominently in their repeats. the pat retrotransposons  are bounded by some "split" direct repeats  and can contain tyrosine recombinase-encoding regions in an inverted orientation  <cit> .

transposable elements have been found in all eukaryotic species investigated thus far  <cit> . however, depending on the superfamily or family of elements studied, they show different distributions among eukaryotes. for example, the ty1/copia, ty3/gypsy, lines, sines retrotransposons and the tc1/mariner transposons, have been detected almost ubiquitously  <cit> . the penelope retrotransposons are also abundant in many animal species, but seem to be rare among plants, protists and fungi  <cit> . in contrast to this, the maverick transposons  have been characterized by a highly patchy distribution in diverse eukaryote species, but not in plants  <cit> . until recently, bibliographic data and automatic annotations have revealed the presence of dirs1-like retrotransposons only in  <dig> diverse eukaryote organisms , mostly with a low diversity per species  with the notable exception of xenopus tropicalis . they were not described in several well-studied groups , and are absent from model organisms such as saccharomyces cerevisiae and drosophila melanogaster. the dirs1-like retrotransposons appear widely distributed among decapod crustaceans  <cit> . these elements were previously detected using pcr approaches in  <dig> decapod species, including some shrimps, lobsters, crabs and galatheid crabs. the wide distribution among decapods and the continuous identification of elements in new species with the emergence of large-scale genome sequencing call into question their supposedly patchy distribution among eukaryote species.

all the detected dirs1-like elements, even in partial sequences, are reported here.

notes: 1repbase: version  <dig>  .

we aim to determine the distribution of dirs1-like retrotransposons among eukaryotes using an in silico approach. in the post-genome era, several automatic annotation tools have been developed to detect the presence of particular types of transposable elements in genomes. the conventional approaches are based on similarity searching using the repeatmasker program  <cit> . however, transposable elements often correspond to ancient genome components. many copies even within the same family appear fragmented and divergent in nucleotide sequences due to several punctual mutations, rearrangements, and insertions or deletions . similarity searching-based programs are efficient in identifying copies closely related to those previously reported in the library, but they often appear inefficient in detecting very divergent copies or unknown elements  <cit> . other in silico approaches have been developed to detect particular types of elements. these programs, such as ltrharvest  <cit> , are not based upon similarity searching but on specific signature searches . while some programs have been developed to detect ltr retrotransposons or transposons, none have been developed for dirs1-like retrotransposons. such a program might appear inefficient in identifying divergent dirs1-like retrotransposons because the training dataset that is currently available for these elements remains too limited . some de novo approaches that detect more divergent transposable elements, such as recon  <cit> , have been developed to exhaustively report the content of repeated sequences within genomes. to identify a specific type of element, many investigations of this report must be performed, such as similarity searching. for the same reasons as those given for similarity searching-based methods, such approaches could appear inappropriate for studying the distribution of the dirs1-like retrotransposons.

we hereby present a new computational approach specifically dedicated to the identification of dirs1-like retrotransposons among genomes that we called redost. our method is based on both the detection of the structure of these elements and on sequence similarity searches performed using alignment profiles designed on coding domains. it has the advantages of not considering the element copy number and of avoiding any preconception of the itrs . with our method we analyzed  <dig> completely sequenced genomes, which allowed for a high coverage of eukaryotic diversity, especially plants and unikonts.

we have identified more than  <dig> element copies that can be clustered into approximately  <dig> new families. we report the first dirs1-like element copy number estimate among many genomes and we evaluate the diversity within the dirs1-like superfamily. their distribution appears wider than it was previously thought, especially in unikont species. sequence analyses confirmed the presence of well-conserved dirs1-like retrotransposons in  <dig> species, including at least  <dig> species that were not previously known to host such elements, and allowed us to define a more precise structure of the dirs1-like retrotransposons, especially in their terminal repeats.

RESULTS
identification of putative dirs1-like retrotransposons in eukaryote genomes
to study the distribution of dirs1-like retrotransposons among genomes, we developed a new computational tool that we call redost . the element detection is mainly based on independent similarity searches against co-oriented and well-ordered rt-, mt- and yr-encoding domains within a single 10-kb genomic fragment . so, the dirs1-like copies detected with redost may be considered as well-conserved , which suggests that they may still be active, or have moved only recently. thus, relics and highly degenerate elements are not considered here.

using redost, we identified  <dig> copies of putative dirs1-like elements distributed among  <dig> diverse species out of the  <dig> well-sequenced genomes tested . a wide spectrum of eukaryote species is represented in which some taxa are characterized for the first time as harboring dirs1-like retrotransposons. for example, we observed the first dirs1-like elements in mollusca . interestingly, dirs1-like retrotransposons can be detected in all the species in two higher taxa, actinopterygii and mucoromycotina. redost was able to detect dirs1-like elements in all species already described in the literature except those harbor in the honey bee apis melifera genome. this discrepancy is due to the fact that this genome contains only remnant fragments of dirs1-like elements that redost is unable to detect  <cit> .

for each species, the number of sequences detected using redost and the number of families obtained with the mcl program are given. when they are informative, the minimum  and the maximum  numbers of sequences included in a family are provided. species in which the presence of dirs1-like elements was previously reported  are indicated with an asterisk. in the family number column, numbers in brackets indicate the number of families that we characterized as pat-like elements. the two nematoda species that comprise only pat-like elements are indicated with a dollar. the clustering was performed on all sequences detected in the  <dig> species. the families shared by several species are represented several times in the table.

notes: a: the zebrafish genome sequencing project at the sanger institute  funded by the wellcome trust. b: the broad institute of harvard and mit . c: the national institute of genetics and the university of tokyo . d: the institute of molecular and cell biology . e: the baylor college of medicine human genome sequencing center . f: the u.s. department of energy joint genome institute . g: the genome institute at washington university school of medicine in st. louis . h: the genoscope .

as expected, the identified elements seem to be well-conserved. the length of the three detected domains appears highly constrained within the elements of a given genome. for example, in the sauropsida anolis carolinensis genome, almost all rt-, mt- and yr-encoding fragments have a length ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> bp,  <dig> to  <dig> bp, and  <dig> to  <dig> bp, respectively . this pattern is present in most genomes, with the notable exception of saccoglossus kowalevskii, which varies considerably in its domain length , possibly because of multiple large fragment deletions.

considering the repartition of the  <dig> copies detected in  <dig> eukaryotes, the copy number per genome appears highly variable , even within some of the higher taxa examined. in actinopterygii, the low copy numbers detected in oryzias latipes, takifugu rubripes, tetraodon nigroviridis and gasterosteus aculeatus  contrast with the  <dig> copies identified in d. rerio. conversely, in mucoromycotina, mucor circinelloides has ten times fewer copies than other related species. the copy number per genome is usually relatively low, illustrated by the fact that half of the species harbor fewer than  <dig> copies. twelve species show between  <dig> and  <dig> copies and only  <dig> species harbor more than  <dig> copies . this suggests that the more or less recent element activity is relatively low, resulting either from the inactivation of most genomic copies or from a strong regulation of the copy number. the loss of elements in some higher taxa or species could be facilitated by this low copy number. however, the relatively low copy number observed in genomes has to be conservative since only well-conserved copies are considered based on the three coding domains studied. for example, similarity searches on acantheamoeba sp. allowed us to reveal  <dig> more degenerate sequences related to the unique element detected using redost .

to our knowledge, the copy number has only been previously estimated in two genomes: the slime mold dictyostelium discoideum and the crustacean daphnia pulex. in d. discoideum, the previous copy number estimation of dirs1-like retrotransposons suggested  <dig> full-size elements and around  <dig> incomplete copies  <cit> . our detection tool results in the identification of  <dig> well-conserved copies. this result seems consistent with the previous estimation considering the difference in the methods used. the previous analysis estimated the copy number with quantitative southern-blot experiments using the complete dirs1-like sequence as a probe. for this reason it may detect more altered elements than our tool does. this is especially the case with the nested elements  <cit>  that amplify the signal in southern blots but are by default considered to be a unique copy by in silico redost analysis . in d. pulex, the dirs1-like copy number has been previously estimated at  <dig>  <cit> , including only  <dig> intact copies   <cit> . this estimation also seems consistent with our results , as redost identifies well-conserved elements but is not limited to intact copies.

the diversity of dirs1-like retrotransposons
to study the diversity of the dirs1-like elements, we use the mcl program to cluster into families all the sequences that were detected with redost as well as reference elements. the parameter values used to cluster in the mcl program were empirically estimated to discriminate each of the dirs1-like families previously described . based on the sequence identity, the clusters obtained on the reverse transcriptase-encoding sequences using the mcl program are considered to correspond to different dirs1-like families. for example, the sequence identities among the largest cluster in a. carolinensis  range from 57% to 100%, with an average sequence identity of 81%. such a relatively high nucleotide sequence divergence is similar to those observed in reverse transcriptases encoded by non-ltr retrotransposons and in some dna transposases. the cluster number obtained in each genome reflects the diversity of dirs1-like elements.

a total of  <dig> families were found distributed unevenly among the genomes of the  <dig> species examined . most of the families seem restricted to only one species with the notable exception of mucoromycotina species for which several interspecific families are obtained. some species show very low element diversity in comparison to their copy number. for example, all  <dig> copies detected in d. discoideum grouped into a single family. on the other hand, few species show very high element diversity. for example, s. purpuratus harbors  <dig> copies distributed among  <dig> families. likewise, the  <dig> copies of b. floridae are split into  <dig> families. the distribution of copy number per family shows two major profiles according to species . comparing the two vertebrate species x. tropicalis and a. carolinensis, both of which harbor high copy and family numbers, the western clawed frog contains families almost equal in size whereas the lizard contains two families that together include 64% of the copies. the two fungi rhizopus oryzae and allomyces macrogynus have only about  <dig> copies, which are well distributed in r. oryzae while half of the copies of a. macrogynus belong to one family. finally, in d. rerio, which harbors the highest copy number, 96% of the  <dig> copies belong to just three families . such a distribution with a high copy number restricted to few families could be related to bursts of transposition. bursts of dirs1-like element activity are also suspected in s. kowalevskii  and in a. carolinensis .

phylogenetic analysis of dirs1-like retrotransposons
to infer the relationships among the various members of dirs1-like superfamily, we constructed a phylogenetic tree  based on an alignment of amino acid pol region sequences . this phylogenetic tree contains  <dig> sequences, including a representative sequence of each family that has at least one uncorrupted copy,  <dig> dirs1-like or pat-like reference elements and  <dig> ty3/gypsy elements used as outgroups. preliminary analysis of the three genomes that present high family numbers  has shown that all of the elements from a given species cluster together into a monophyletic group . for these species, only representative elements from the  <dig> or  <dig> largest families were included in the phylogenetic analysis. in contrast to previous analyses on much smaller datasets, the monophyly of dirs1-like elements is not supported in the present study . such a pattern could be an artifact of a dataset that is too large and includes divergent elements. alternatively, it might suggest that the pat elements belong to the dirs1-like superfamily, representing a peculiar group because of their structure. many well-supported groups can be identified within the dirs1-like elements. in many cases, the elements from a given species form a monophyletic group . however, some species harbor elements from two or three different groups . in the same way, each group usually integrates elements from the same species or from a few closely related ones. for example, all the elements identified in fishes belong to one group called drdirs <dig>  <cit> . likewise, the fungi group  <dig> comprises most of the elements identified in fungi, a result that confirms the close relationships between most fungi dirs1-like elements revealed by the mcl analysis. despite the difficulty in resolving the relationships among the different dirs1-like groups, the monophyletic groups comprising only elements from a species or related species, the tree topology appears absent of clear evidence of horizontal transfer.

discriminating the pat-like sequences included in the final dataset
the pat-like retrotransposons are the sister group of dirs1-like elements and show a similar structure with the exception of their termini  <cit> . to discriminate the putative pat-like elements retained by redost,  <dig> pat-like reference sequences were included during the clustering process and the phylogenetic analysis . this allowed us to determine that  <dig> families correspond to pat-like retrotransposons . this includes  <dig> families from the chlorophytes ,  <dig> families from the nematodes , one family from l. gigantea, and one shared by nematostella vectensis and s. kowalevskii.

the presence of dirs1-like retrotransposons is confirmed in  <dig> species, but still remains uncertain in emiliana huxleyi, petromyzon marinus, naegleria gruberi, p. pacificus, v. carteri and c. reinhardtii. elements from these species do not cluster with any reference elements and their sequences harbor too many frameshifts or indels to be included in our phylogenetic analysis. for these elements, we checked the presence of dirs1-like elements using similarity searches using the tblastx program  <cit>  and the repbase database that we previously re-annotated for the dirs1-like and pat elements . a family was assigned to the dirs1-like element superfamily under the two conditions:  an e-value lower than 1e- <dig> with at least one dirs1-like reference element; and  a minimum difference between the best e-values obtained with dirs1-like and pat reference elements of 1e- <dig>  under these criteria, the presence of dirs1-like retrotransposons could be confirmed in v. carteri, p. marinus and n. gruberi, but remains uncertain in c. reinhardtii and e. huxleyi, whereas the element detected in p. pacificus appears to be a pat-like retrotransposon. so,  <dig> of the  <dig> species revealed by redost are now considered as harboring dirs1-like retrotransposons and the two remaining posses in fact only pat elements.

distribution of dirs1-like elements among eukaryotes
dirs1-like retrotransposons are now described in  <dig> diverse eukaryote species , including  <dig> species in  <dig> higher taxa newly characterized using redost: annelids, blastocladiomycetes, cephalochordates, chlorophytes, heteroloboseans, molluscs, petromyzontids and sauropsids. the dirs1-like element distribution does not seem to be as patchy as it was previously described. sixteen of the  <dig> unikont groups tested revealed the presence of these elements, indicating a wide distribution. this distribution could be shown to be wider in the near future since seven of the unikont groups apparently devoid of dirs1-like elements are currently represented by only one or two completely sequenced genomes. conversely, four other unikont groups seem to be clearly devoid of dirs1-like elements. despite a high number of completely sequenced genomes and diverse taxa tested, no well-conserved copies could be identified in any ascomycetes , basidiomycetes , nematodes  or mammals . a specific loss of dirs1-like elements in mammalia during evolution is the most probable cause of their absence when one takes into consideration their wide distribution in unikonta, especially deuterostomia. outside of unikonts, dirs1-like retrotransposons appear infrequently, observed in only three groups, even though most groups are represented by relatively few species.

various distributional patterns can currently be observed among eukaryotes. on a large phylogenetic scale, we make two observations:  a wide distribution of dirs1-like elements among groups such as deuterostomes, with the detection of copies in a wide range of higher taxa from echinodermata to sauropsida; and  a large repartition of the dirs1-like elements observed in certain taxa despite a lack of detection in closely related taxa. in fungi, all three mucoromycotina genomes were found to harbor dirs1-like elements, whereas none could be detected in ascomycota and basidiomycota. on a smaller phylogenetic scale , the distribution again appears to be taxon-dependent with three distinguishable patterns. as described above, some groups seem to possess no dirs1-like retrotransposons . second, a large repartition of dirs1-like elements was observed in some groups such as in actinopterygii and mucoromycotina . finally, a sparser distribution of dirs1-like elements was observed in yet other groups. only  <dig> of the  <dig> hexapod species tested harbor well-conserved elements. however, this heterogeneous distribution could result in part from a sampling bias. we observed a lack of elements in some overrepresented taxa, such as diptera , and an abundance in others, such as hymenoptera . indeed, we used redost to analyze the recently released ant genomes, all of which harbor dirs1-like elements. five copies were found in camponothus floridanus,  <dig> in pogonomyrmex barbatus,  <dig> in harpegnathos saltator,  <dig> in linepithema humile, and  <dig> in solenopsis invicta  <cit> .

the previous though that dirs1-like retrotransposons are uncommon among eukaryotes appears to be strongly biased considering that ascomycetes, mammals and green plants, which are devoid of elements, represent more than 55% of the sequenced genomes. dirs1-like elements do not appear as ubiquitous as ty1/copia and ty3/gypsy retrotransposons but their distribution among eukaryotes appears more comparable to the penelope element distribution  <cit> . despite their loss in several lineages, the phylogenetic analysis and the distribution of dirs1-like elements in a very broad range of unikonts indicate that their genomic invasion occurred early in unikont evolution; at least prior to the bilateria radiation but probably before if we take into account the presence of dirs1-like retrotransposons in amoebozoa and fungi . this primary invasion could be found to have occurred earlier in evolution if the presence of dirs1-like elements is confirmed in excavata, plantae and chromoalveolata. though our results unequivocally indicate the presence of dirs1-like elements in unikonta, we must be cautious in our estimation of their real distribution in excavata and plantae because most of the copies identified in these taxa harbor too many indels and frameshifts in the repeated sequence structures to be studied and for them to be included in the phylogenetic analysis. the presence of dirs1-like elements in these species is only supported by similarity search analyses.

the absence of dirs1-like elements in several groups may reflect their differential success in adapting to different host species and/or a propensity for stochastic loss during evolution. nevertheless, this absence has to be confirmed in the future by investigations of deleted dirs1-like copies in these genomes. the detection of deleted copies in an apparently "unoccupied" species would be evidence of the previous existence of well-conserved dirs1-like elements.

in-depth characterization of new dirs1-like elements
to describe the diversity within the dirs1-like superfamily, we detailed the structure of  <dig> new elements, most of which represent high copy number families or species newly characterized for the presence of such retrotransposons . several features of dirs1-like retrotransposons are presented in table  <dig>  such as their length, the presence of a long orf overlap, and the structure of their repeats. the length of dirs1-like retrotransposons appears variable between the  <dig> elements from  <dig> bp in acasdirs <dig>  to  <dig> bp in skodirs <dig> , with an average length of  <dig> bp. in-depth annotation including the positions of the repeated sequences and several conserved motifs is provided in additional file  <dig>  the pol motifs seem to be highly conserved, especially the 'yl/idd' motif that is conserved in  <dig> of the  <dig> annotated elements. the 'hstr' tyrosine recombinase motif appears more variable . for example, amdirs <dig> and mcidirs <dig> harbor an 'sdlk' and 'lcpv' sequence, respectively. this suggests that the catalytic tyrosine recombinase-encoding domain sequence could be less constrained than the pol sequence. twenty-three of the elements begin and end with a trinucleotide ntt, most frequent being att . only the amdirs <dig> from a. macrogynus begins and ends with an uncommon gc-rich motif. in almost all elements, this trinucleotide appears complementary to the 3-bp circular junction. evidence of long orf overlaps was found in half of the  <dig> dirs1-like elements, which seems to depend on host species .

the element size and trinucleotide sequences beginning and ending the element complementary to the circular junction are given for each manually annotated dirs1-like element. evidence of long orf overlap is also indicated. the lengths of the different parts of the termini  as well as those of the icrs are reported. nd: not determined because caspdirs <dig> corresponds to a chimeric sequence. each newly identified element has been submitted to repbase.

previous studies have outlined the structure of dirs1-like retrotransposons, especially the nature of their termini, which complement the internal complementary regions , and the presence of a right extension sequence   <cit> . looking in detail at the repeated sequences "litr-licr-ricr-ritr-re" in these elements allowed us to reveal a rather more complex structure . whereas previous studies only allowed the description of a re sequence, we have characterized an equivalent left extension sequence  at the 5'-end of some elements, which is only complementary to the left icr. the identification of this additional le sequence does not challenge the replication model that proposes a rolling-circle intermediate. this intermediate is produced by the 3-bp circular junction that corresponds to the overlap of the two icrs complementary to the 5'- and 3'- ends of the element  <cit> . all elements harbor at least one extension, and, like dirs <dig>  most elements contain only a re. the le region has only been detected in fungi and amoebozoa species. two elements show only a le  and four other elements harbor the two extensions . we hereby propose to redefine the fine structure of the dirs1-like element's termini . in this study we call the left and right termini  the assembly of the two components: the itrs and their respective potential extension . the le and re regions are considered the external sequences of the termini that are only complementary to their respective icr sequences . the itrs are defined as the parts of these terminal sequences that are mostly complementary to each other. on a smaller scale, two parts can be distinguished within these itrs . in the conserved itr part, the two itrs are strictly complementary to each other. in the divergent itr part, the two itr sequences are mostly constrained by their respective icr and remain only partially complementary to each other, with a sequence identity that varies from 50% to 85%. itr length appears highly variable among the different elements, ranging from  <dig> bp  to  <dig> bp . likewise, the length of the icrs varies between  <dig> bp for the sum of the two icrs in acasdirs <dig> and  <dig> bp in acadirs <dig>  the right extensions vary from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp . in most cases, the sizes of the various repeats are conserved among the different elements from the same species . the conserved itr usually represents the largest part of the itr, ranging from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp , whereas the divergent itr is often small, ranging from  <dig> bp to  <dig> bp. however, in some elements from molluscs both parts have about the same size. interestingly, the boundary between these two itr parts is composed of a short sequence of at least  <dig> nucleotides that is conserved in two itrs and two icrs , which may be involved in the formation of the circular intermediate of the element before its integration.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we developed a new computational tool, redost, allowing us to describe more precisely the distribution of dirs1-like retrotransposons as well as their diversity among eukaryote genomes. these elements appear more continuously distributed than previously though, with  <dig> new higher taxa characterized to harbor these elements  and  <dig> new eukaryote species, giving a total of  <dig> species containing dirs1-like elements in their genome. the current understanding of the distribution of dirs1-like elements in eukaryota, and especially unikonta, suggests the presence of dirs1-like elements in the last common ancestor of eukaryotes. whereas some higher taxa seem clearly devoid of well-conserved dirs1-like retrotransposons , these elements appear highly conserved in some other higher taxa, such as actinopterygii and mucoromycotina. now that a large diversity of elements within the dirs1-like superfamily  have been characterized, it is possible to screen sequence datasets for the presence of dirs1-like elements using more conventional approaches like repeatmasker. this large diversity allowed us to study the phylogenetic relationships within the dirs1-like superfamily in which the different groups appear related to the host species. all of the elements included in the phylogenetic analysis as well as the subset of  <dig> annotated elements were used to define two new alignment profiles for each of the three characteristic domains of the dirs1-like retrotransposons: reverse transcriptase, methyltransferase and tyrosine recombinase. these profiles could be used in further studies or in future automatic annotation of transposable elements within genomes .

