BACKGROUND
bacterial immunoglobulin -binding proteins  are cell-anchored which can bind to specific sites on ig of the host and mediate pathogenicity in host  <cit> . protein a of staphylococcus aureus , protein g of group c and g streptococci , and protein l of finegoldia magna formerly peptostreptococcus magnus are three well-defined ibps. although the precise functions of these molecules are not fully understood, it is thought that they play an important role in pathogenicity of bacteria. spa comprises  <dig> amino acid residues with a molecular weight of  <dig> kd. the extracellular part of spa contains a tandem repeat of five highly homologous igg-binding domains designated  e, d, a, b and c, each of which contains about  <dig> amino acid residues. the overall structures of these domains are all up-down three α-helixes and all five domains of spa show ig-binding abilities  <cit> . spg  is composed of  <dig> amino acid residues, containing  <dig> highly homologous ig-binding domains identified as b <dig>  b <dig> and b <dig>  <cit> . each domain of spg consists of two pairs of antiparallel β-sheets connected by a single α-helix  <cit> . protein l is a  <dig> kd protein and contains  <dig> amino acid residues, with the ig-binding activity located in five homologous repeats, bl-b <dig>  each comprising 72– <dig> amino acid residues. the fold of the ig-binding domains of protein l is similar to that of the domains of spg  <cit> .

both spa and spg show high affinity for the interface between the second constant region of heavy chain  and ch <dig> domains  of igg crystallizable fragment   <cit> . in addition, spa can bind to fragment of antigen binding  of a subset of igs with variable region of heavy chains belonging to human vhiii family, so spa is capable of binding to other types of ig molecules besides igg  <cit> . in contrast to spa, spg binds to fab with the first constant region of ig γ chain , so spg can bind only to igg  <cit> . protein l has been shown to bind to κ light chains of ig, so it can bind to all types of ig molecules that contain a kappa light chain  <cit> .

some hybrid ibps, like protein ag, protein lg and protein la had been constructed  <cit> , and were shown to sustain ig-binding property of parental proteins and broaden ig-binding spectra. protein ag was shown to possess higher affinity for igg than spa or spg. in addition to the enhanced affinity for igg and igg-fc, protein la showed enhanced affinity for ig fab or majority of human single chain variable antibody fragment  carrying the κ light-chain variable domain or expressing the vhiii determinant. it suggested complementary effect of ig-binding in these hybrid ibps.

the single domains of spa, spg and protein l were all demonstrated to have function to bind to ig  <cit> . whether combinations of ig-binding domains of various ibps could exhibit useful novel binding remain interesting. in this study, we used the single ig-binding domains of spa, spg and protein l as basic functional units to construct a combinatorial phage library displaying randomly-rearranged molecules joined by various random linking peptides, and conducted evolutional selection in vitro with four kinds of ig molecules as bait. two kinds of novel combinations of ig-binding domains, pa-pg and pa-pl, were obtained, and might represent improved ig-binding properties.

RESULTS
distribution of various fragment sizes displayed by phage library and post-selection populations
to evaluate the ig affinity selection efficacy, some markers including phage library binding capacity, output/input ratio of phages, distribution of various fragment size etc. were measured. the library binding capacity and output/input ratio did not correspond well with the affinity selection . we found the distribution of fragment sizes changed remarkably during the selection . as figure  <dig> shows, the proportion of phage clones displaying two domains and three domains in original library was 22%, then increased dramatically and reached 80%–100% after four rounds of selection with higg and recombinant higg1-fc . in higm and higa selection, the proportion of phage clones displaying two domains and three domains also increased remarkably from 22% to 98% and 22% to 96% respectively after three or four rounds of selection . these results corresponded well with our previous experiment that also indicated that along with the rounds of selection, the proportion of phage clones displaying large fragments increased  <cit> , and it might represent effective selection.

analyses of inserted fragments of the post-selection populations
in the fourth post-selection population selected with higg or higg1-fc, twenty phage clones were randomly chosen for sequencing analysis. it was very interesting that the twenty sequenced phage clones from higg and higg1-fc selection populations displayed the same combinations, all containing pa-pg with different linking peptides . interesting results were also found about the distribution of random linking peptides. the different linking peptides showed divergent distribution in higg and higg1-fc fourth post-selection populations. of six different linking models, only pa-pg  existed in both higg and higg1-fc post-selection populations, the other five pa-pg combinations  with different linking peptides existed in higg or higg1-fc post-selection population.

*: number of sequenced phage clones; **: number of phage clones with the same inserted fragment; pa and pa: a and d domains of protein a; pg: b <dig> domain of protein g; pl: b <dig> domain of protein l; 3n, 6n and 9n: the sequence of random linking peptides composed of three, six and nine nucleotides; r: reverse sequence of original sequence.

*: number of sequenced phage clones; underlined and italic parts represent the nucleotide and amino acid sequences of linking peptide followed the second domain. 3n, 6n and 9n: the sequence of random linking peptides composed of three, six and nine nucleotides. single letter abbreviations of amino acids: h, his; l, leu; p, pro; s, ser; t, thr.

similar to the situation in higg or higg1-fc selection, the displayed molecules in higa fourth post-selection population showed the same combinations with that in higm third post-selection population, all containing the pa-pl . in the twenty one randomly picked sequenced clones, twelve displayed pa-pl and nine displayed pa-pa-pl . in contrast with the results of higg and higg1-fc selection populations, the sequences of linking peptides among pa-pl structures tended to show convergent distribution. almost all  combinations with different linking peptides existed in both higa and higm selection populations , with an exception of pa9n-pl .

*: number of sequenced phage clones; underlined and italic parts represent the nucleotide and amino acid sequences of linking peptide followed the second domain. 3n, 6n and 9n: the sequence of random linking peptides composed of three, six and nine nucleotides. single letter abbreviations of amino acids: a, ala; d, asp; e, glu; f, phe; g, gly; h, his; i, ile; k, lys; l, leu; m, met; n, asn; w, trp; y, tyr.

the ig binding properties of the representative phages
eight representative positive phage clones were chosen and tested for the ig binding properties. as figure  <dig> shows, number  <dig> to  <dig> of phage clones displaying pa-pg as well as spa-phage  possessed strong binding activity with higg and higg1-fc, but showed little binding to higm or higa, though this binding may theoretically exist through pa domain interacting with vhiii region. it was very interesting that clone  <dig> and  <dig>  which were from higg post-selection population, showed even stronger binding to higg than spa-phage as well as clone  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> which were found in higg1-fc post-selection population . clone  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> showed even stronger binding to higg1-fc than spa-phage as well as clone  <dig> and  <dig> which were found in higg post-selection population . this binding priority suggested that the linking peptides could affect the ig-binding properties. compared with spa-phage and 2l-phage , clone  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> displaying pa-pl from higm or higa post-selection populations showed remarkable enhanced binding to higm or higa  and weak binding activity with higg and higg1-fc . as spa-phage, clone  <dig> to  <dig> phages showed some weak binding to higm or higa. 2l-phage bound to higg, higm or higa obviously, but showed no binding to higg1-fc.

the ig binding properties of the novel combinatorial molecules
to test the binding properties of selected combinatorial molecules, these molecules were expressed as fusion proteins with thioredoxin using expression vector pet32a and performed western blot. all the pa-pg combinations as well as spa and spg showed strong binding to higg  and higg1-fc , and weak binding to higm  and higa . inconsistent with phage binding assays, the expressed pa-pg combinations did not show any binding advantage to higg  and higg1-fc  compared with spa and spg. in contrast to pa-pg, the expressed pa-pl combinations showed much stronger binding to higm  and higa  than 4l and spa respectively, which was consistent with phage binding assay.

the pa-pg or pa-pl combinations showed binding advantages
to test whether pa-pg or pa-pl combinations possess some binding advantages, we expressed the fusion proteins of pa3n-pg-pa, pa6n-pg from higg1-fc post-selection population, pa-pg9n, pa6n-pg3n from higg post-selection population, and pa9n-pl3n and pa9n-pl from higm/higa post-selection population to perform competitive inhibition experiments. as figure  <dig> shows, all four pa-pg combinations inhibited the binding of pa-pg-phages to higg more efficiently than spa and spg alone . furthermore, pa-pg9n and pa6n-pg3n from higg post-selection population showed more efficient inhibition than spa, spg and that both , while all four pa-pg combinations inhibited the binding of spa-phages to higg as efficiently as spa, spg and that both . similar results were obtained for inhibition of pa-pg-phages binding to higg1-fc by competitive inhibition tests as above . consistent with phage binding tests , the competitive inhibition experiments documented that the pa-pg combinations possess some binding advantages to higg or higg1-fc.

for pa-pl-phages competitive inhibition experiments, expressed pa-pl combinations inhibited the binding of pa-pl-phages to higm much more efficiently than 4l, spa alone and that both , while all pa-pl combinations inhibited the binding of spa-phage  or 2l-phage  to higm as efficiently as spa, spa and 4l or 4l, 4l and spa respectively. similar results were obtained for inhibition of pa-pl-phages binding to higa by competitive inhibition tests as above . consistent with phage binding tests , the competitive inhibition experiments showed the pa-pl combinations possess obvious binding advantage to higm or higa.

discussion
compared with spa-phage displaying five domains of spa, phages displaying pa-pl which was contained in each sequenced clone as predominant combinations in higm and higa post-selection populations exhibited a remarkable enhanced binding affinity for higm and higa . the prokaryotic expressed pa-pl combinations also showed the same binding properties . protein l binds primarily to κ light chains of i, iii, iv subtypes of igs  <cit> , while spa binds about 22% higa and 40% higm through interacting with vhiii region  <cit> . the coexistence of single domains of spa and protein l could broaden the ig-binding spectra, and achieve the binding advantage of pa-pl for higm and higa. however, the loss of other possible combinations, like pl-pl, which should have same chance to be produced in original library, and may produce enhanced affinity for κ light chains due to avidity effect, suggested that pa-pl should have additional binding advantage. considering the binding properties of protein l and spa and the structure of ig-fab, we speculated that the binding advantage of pa-pl might be produced through double-site binding to vhiii and vκ regions of fab in higm and higa. in fab fragment of higm and higa, the conformation of vh-vl is tightly fixed due to the interchain disulfide bond between vh and vl regions and non covalent interaction of vh-vl interface  <cit> . moreover, the binding sites of protein l and spa on ig-fab located on the opposite surface of the antigen binding cleft, and both interactions produce little steric hindrance to each other  <cit> . these characteristics are in favor of the double site binding of pa-pl to vhiii and vκ regions. this speculation was clearly supported by results of competitive inhibition experiments which showed that 4l, spa alone or that both couldn't inhibit the binding of pa-pl-phages to higm or higa as efficiently as pa-pl combinations .

it is predictable that pa-pg combinations would be selected in higg and higg1-fc post-selection populations. however, it was unexpected that pa-pg was so predominant while pa-pa  or pg-pg which had similar binding potential and same chance to be produced in original library was not selected . this result suggests that pa-pg combinations possess an advantage over other combinations in binding to fc regions. it was supported by the phage binding assay which showed that the pa-pg-phages selected by higg or higg1-fc exhibited stronger binding to higg or higg1-fc respectively than spa-phages  and by the competitive inhibition test which showed that pa-pg combinations inhibited the binding of pa-pg-phages to higg or higg1-fc more efficiently than spa alone or spg alone . the conformation of fc was documented flexible, mobile and easy affected  <cit> . x-ray crystal structures studies for fc and fc-ligand complex indicated that the hinge proximal region of ch <dig> domain is disordered, suggesting internal mobility, generating a dynamic equilibrium between multiple conformers  <cit> . interchange between heavy and light chain, binding to antigen and change of primary amino acid sequences of igg  would affect the fc conformation  <cit> . although spa shares a lot of binding area in igg-fc with spg, obvious difference between these two interactions was observed  <cit> . first, in spg: fc and spa: fc complex, the two helices in spa domain are located mostly in ch <dig> side of fc, the helix of spg lies wedged in the ch2-ch <dig> cleft. second, spg interacts with fc mainly through hydrogen bond, while spa through hydrophobic interaction. third, fc has a set of unique amino acids for binding to spg and spa respectively  <cit> . so, although the binding sites of spa and spg overlap, their binding nature is different, and the structure of pa-pg could produce the different binding avidity for a pair of fc sites in one higg molecule from that produced by pa-pa  or pg-pg, which was documented to possess some binding advantage, and therefore showed the selection advantage.

in this work, the proportion of phage clones displaying two and three domains also increased remarkably along with the rounds of selection , and the linking peptides were significantly selected . these results might reflect the effectiveness of the selection and the significance of selected pa-pg and pa-pl. the conformation of binding sites for ibps of higa and higm fab were fixed and stable, as well as the linking peptide among all selected pa-pl structures showed some convergent distribution. different from the native higg, the fab of higg1-fc was substituted by tnf receptor. it could produce some conformation difference between higg1-fc and native higg, and could be responsible for the divergent distribution of linking peptide in higg and higg1-fc post-selection populations. the phage binding assay and competitive inhibition test also showed comparable binding advantage for the clones from selection higg population with higg, and for those from higg1-fc post-selection population with higg1-fc . this result suggested that the combinations and special linkage of the different ibp domains could sensitively reflect the conformational change in the binding sites of ig fc.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, a combinatorial phage library displaying single domain randomly-rearranged molecules derived from natural bacterial ibps was selected with higg, higm, higa and higg1-fc. two kinds of novel combinations of ig-binding domains, pa-pg and pa-pl, which don't exist in natural bacterial ig-binding molecules, were obtained, and showed the comparable binding advantages. it demonstrated the novel binding properties.

