BACKGROUND
sildenafil is a selective inhibitor of phosphodiesterase-5a , the enzyme that hydrolyzes cgmp. sildenafil is orally effective in the treatment of erectile dysfunction. its pharmacological action is due to prolonging the signaling actions of nitric oxide  in penile smooth muscle  <cit> . interestingly, a recent publication reported a pronounced infarct size-reducing effect of sildenafil in an in-vivo rabbit model of coronary occlusion  <cit> . reduced infarct size by sildenafil has also been reported in mice and rat heart subjected to global ischemic/reperfusion  injury  <cit> . in those studies, opening of mitochondrial atp-sensitive k channels, induction of no synthase  isoforms and increased cgmp level by sildenafil were suggested to mediate a preconditioning-like cardioprotective effect  <cit> .

as regards myocardial hypertrophy, a great number of in-vivo and in-vitro studies tested the role of many signaling pathways involved in its induction  <cit> . at the same time, the role of the negative regulators such as no, atrial natriuretic peptide and cgmp have so far received much less attention until recently recognized to be of particular significance  <cit> . alternatively, drugs that modulate the no-cgmp signaling pathway like sildenafil and probably its congeners may be useful especially that sildenafil proved to be cardioprotective in models of cardiac i/r injury.

to address this issue, the present study examined the cardioprotective effect of sildenafil in a rat model of ventricular hypertrophy and myocardial cell injury induced by the β-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol. the model is characterized by technical simplicity, excellent reproducibility and an acceptable level of mortality  <cit> . previous studies in rats revealed that isoproterenol induced a dose-dependent increase in ventricular end diastolic pressure and global wall stress that were associated with compensatory hypertrophy and repair fibrosis  <cit> . however, in the present study, the following parameters were assessed: rate of survival among experimental groups, heart coefficient, myocardial cgmp level, myocardial creatine kinase activity and serum level of cardiac troponin t . in addition, the role of constitutive nos was examined by adding the nos inhibitor nω-nitro-l-arginine  to drinking water of a group of sildenafil and isoproternol treated rats.

RESULTS
cumulative survival curves 
in group i  and group iv , survival was  <dig> % till termination of study . in group ii  and group v , survival was  <dig> %  in each group. in group iii  survival was  <dig> % . by log-rank test, significant improvement in survival rate was found in group iii compared to groups ii and v .

heart coefficient, myocardial creatine kinase  activity, myocardial cgmp level and serum cardiac troponin t 
table i shows significant increase in heart coefficient in group ii  and group v  compared to group i , group iii  and group iv  denoting occurrence of cardiac hypertrophy in the former groups. also, significant myocardial cell injury in group ii and group v was indicated by the decline of myocardial ck activity and leak of ctnt into serum in these groups compared to group i. at the same time, myocardial ck activity and serum level of ctnt in group iii and group iv were normal and comparable to group i . elevated myocardial cgmp was found in two sildenafil groups  compared to other groups .

nb: isoproterenol was given at the dose of  <dig> mg/kg daily s.c. and sildenafil was given at the dose of  <dig>  mg/kg daily i.p. and nω-nitro-l-arginine was added to drinking water at the concentration of  <dig> mg/l.

values are mean ± sem. n: number of rats survived for  <dig> days

one-way anova test followed by student-newman-keuls post-hoc test. values forming homogeneous subsets are as follow: *homogeneous subset  <dig>  ** homogeneous subset  <dig> and *** homogeneous subset  <dig>  significant difference existed between different subsets 

correlation of myocardial cgmp level to other parameters
the linear regression curves shown in the figures  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  demonstrate significant correlations between myocardial cgmp level and heart coefficient , myocardial ck activity  and serum ctnt level . individual data from all studied rats were included in the correlation analysis.

discussion
dealing with cardiac hypertrophy is currently a major goal of cardiovascular research and clinical trials <cit> . the cardiomyocytes undergo hypertrophy in some pathological conditions that impose overwork on the heart e.g. hypertension, heart valve diseases, myocardial infarction, and cardiomyopathy  <cit> . such cardiac hypertrophy is initially compensatory for an increased work load, however, prolongation of this process eventually leads to congestive heart failure, arrhythmia, and sudden death  <cit> . todate, drugs targeting the renin-angiotensin system are the chief class of cardiovascular agents of special clinical utility in settings predisposing to cardiac hypertrophy based on the important role of angiotensin ii in growth of cardiomyocytes  <cit> .

in an attempt to examine other signaling pathways and other drugs, the present study probed the no-cgmp pathway and the effect of its modulation by the selective pde-5a inhibitor sildenafil in cardiac hypertrophy. the β-adrenergic agonist isoproterenol was subcutaneously injected in rats for  <dig> days to induce cardiac hypertrophy. obtained results showed that sildenafil administration one hour before daily s.c. injection of isoproterenol was associated with significant improvement in survival and significant inhibition of cardiac hypertrophy. also, the myocardium of the sildenafil-isoproterenol treated rats showed higher activity of myocardial ck activity and less ctnt leaked into the blood compared to isoproterenol-treated rats. these findings suggest that sildenafil conferred a significant anti-hypertrophic and cytoprotective effect on cardiomyocytes. conversely, the decline in myocardial ck activity and increased leak of ctnt into serum observed in the isoproterenol treated rats and in rats subjected to nos inhibition denote significant impairment in tissue energy metabolism and loss of cell integrity, respectively. in the myocardium, atp is synthesized mainly in the mitochondria through oxidative phosphorylation and transported to the contractile apparatus, where it is consumed by myosin atpase to generate force. the creatine kinase system plays an important role in myocardial energy metabolism by maintaining adp levels high at the mitochondria, where atp is generated, and low at sites of atp utilization  <cit> . this is postulated to contribute to the maintenance of a high free energy of atp hydrolysis, thereby enhancing the efficiency of the energy utilization processes  <cit> . in addition, a ck shuttle has been proposed, in which high-energy phosphate transport within the cell is facilitated by the higher diffusibility of creatine and phosphocreatine relative to adp  <cit> .

as regards cardiac troponins t, i and c, they regulate muscle contraction by modulating calcium-dependent interaction of actin and myosin. these intracellular structural proteins are released into circulation following loss of cell integrity  <cit> .

an interesting observation in the present study was that, in the presence of the cnos inhibitor l-nna, sildenafil was deprived from its antihypertrophic and cytoprotective effects in isoproterenol-treated rats. also, the significant correlations found between tissue cgmp level on one hand and heart coefficient, myocardial ck activity and serum level of ctnt on the other hand, suggest that the integrity of the no-cgmp signaling pathway plays a pivotal role in the cardioprotective effect of sildenafil.

the second messenger cgmp that was identified almost  <dig> years ago, is generated from gtp either by soluble guanyl cyclase or particulate guanyl cyclase  <cit> . the former is activated by nitric oxide  or carbon monoxide, where as the latter binds a family of natriuretic peptides consisting of atrial, brain, and c-type natriuretic peptides  <cit> . on the other hand, various phosphodiesterases regulate cgmp catabolism, including pde-5a, pde- <dig>  pde-9a, pde-10a, and pde-11a according to their tissue specificity  <cit> . among these, pde-5a is the most widely studied, and its inhibition is a primary mechanism for efficacy of sildenafil in erectile dysfunction  <cit> . previous studies have shown that inhibition of pde-5a in the myocardium enhanced coronary blood flow during exercise-induced ischemia, blunted cardiac stimulation by dobutamine and reduced contractility of adrenergically stimulated papillary muscle  <cit> . in accordance with this, inhibition of pde-5a in rat myocardium probably underlies the cardioprotective effect of sildenafil against isoproterenol-induced cardiac hypertrophy observed in the present study. at cellular level, the common denominator in all these studies is probably the increased cellular level of cgmp.

in non stimulated hearts, cgmp has been suggested to augment contractile function at low concentrations, likely via cross-talk with camp-dependent signaling, inhibiting pde- <dig> and degradation of camp  <cit> . at higher concentrations, cgmp has a negative inotropic effect by antagonizing camp via protein kinase g  or pde- <dig> stimulation   <cit> . with β-adrenergic activation, both camp and cgmp synthesis increase, with the net effect of cgmp being negative on the inotropic response   <cit> . conversely, reducing cgmp level e.g. by nos inhibition, enhances β-adrenergic responsiveness  <cit> . in addition to the negative inotropic action of cgmp, it reduces oxygen consumption and offsets the development of cardiac hypertrophy  <cit> .

consequently, pde-5a inhibition by sildenafil and cellular accumulation of cgmp would be the braking force against isoproterenol-induced cardiac hypertrophy found in the present study. consistent with this assumption, over-expression of the catalytic fragment of the constitutively active guanylate cyclase domain of the atrial natriuretic peptide receptor in mouse heart increased the intracellular concentration of cgmp within cardiomyocytes and attenuated the effects of isoproterenol on cardiac wall thickness and prevented fetal gene expression program normally associated with cardiac hypertrophy  <cit> . conversely, disruption of cardiac guanylate cyclase-a  gene resulted in mice that displayed elevation of blood pressure, cardiac fibrosis and hypertrophy  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the present study suggests that sildenafil possesses a cardioprotective and antihypertrophic effect against isoproterenol-induced myocardial injury. inhibition of cgmp degradation by sildenafil with a consequent accumulation of this signaling molecule may act as a negative regulator against cardiac hypertrophy in-vivo. understanding the downstream molecular mechanism of such effect of sildenafil, may expand the utility of this drug beyond the current use for treatment of erectile dysfunction in men. the study also revealed that integrity of function of cnos is an essential prerequisite for the cardioprotective effect of sildenafil in the adrenergically stimulated heart.

