BACKGROUND
enzymes are widely used in industrial processes, from environmental applications such as effluent treatment and bioremediation, through food and beverage processing, to fine chemical processes such as stereoselective biocatalysis  <cit> . this broad application is possible because enzymes provide highly selective catalysis  <cit> . furthermore, the use of enzymes in catalysis potentially reduces toxic or wasteful by-products, effluent load and energy consumption , thus providing an environmentally efficient alternative to many currently available chemical catalysts  <cit> .

however the application of biocatalysts can suffer from several general drawbacks. in addition to the often relatively high cost compared to current chemical catalysts, enzymes may display instability towards temperature, ph, solvents, oxidation and shear, resulting in limited suitability or shelf life. moreover, soluble enzymes cannot be easily recovered from aqueous media and hence often cannot be reused. thus, although enzymes such as lipases in particular have found extensive application in organic synthesis  <cit> , effective stabilisation remains a technical hurdle limiting use of enzymes such as pseudomonas lipases in industrial-scale biotransformations  <cit> .

to overcome some of these problems enzymes are frequently immobilised, primarily by attachment onto supports. immobilisation has several advantages including effective recovery and recycle through centrifugation or filtration and improved enzyme stability  <cit> . however, conventional support-based immobilisation techniques involve the use of costly resins, and is usually associated with a large loss in enzyme activity compared to the native enzyme, as well as a reduction in the specific and volumetric activity of the biocatalyst to approximately 10% due the limited loading capacity of these supports  <cit> . an alternative to immobilisation onto supports is self-immobilisation through cross-linking of the enzyme. this negates the need for an immobilisation matrix, thereby reducing the cost, and increasing specific and volumetric activity.

currently there are a number of published or patented methods for self-immobilised biocatalysts, of which the most relevant are cross-linked enzyme aggregates , cross-linked spray dried enzyme , cross-linked enzyme from solution  <cit> , and cross-linked enzyme crystals . in particular clec, and more recently clea, have shown application in biocatalysis  <cit> . however, the clec technology requires enzyme of high purity which is also easily crystallisable, and therefore has been relatively expensive and limited in range, which has adversely affected its commercial applicability. the alternative clea process depends on initial precipitation of the enzyme, followed by cross-linking. this is a less expensive and relatively simple process that concomitantly purifies the enzyme to a degree during the partially selective precipitation step. however, both clea and clec technology may result in diffusion constraints with increasing particle size  <cit> .

we have discovered that it is possible to self-immobilise enzymes in an emulsion while retaining activity  <cit> . this relatively inexpensive method allows for formation of spherical catalytic macro-particles  that would be of interest to synthetic chemists. moreover the method permits size control and incorporation of macro-structure into the self-immobilised particle during the immobilisation process. this could provide advantages for control of substrate-enzyme interaction, perhaps improving overall activity.

the enzyme sub-class of lipase  was chosen as the initial enzyme for investigations due to its biocatalytic importance for chiral resolution of chemicals and pharmaceutical intermediates. lipases typically possess a hydrophobic surface, often containing a 'lid' region associated with the active site  <cit>  , and it is believed that this surface associates with the hydrophobic phase at the interface between hydrophilic and hydrophobic fluids. within a water-in-oil emulsion, these proteins would therefore tend to localise and orientate at the spherical interface of the emulsion droplet. subsequent cross-linking of the protein would then form a self immobilised particle .

the aim of the current research was to explore the concept of emulsion based immobilisation of enzymes, to determine whether it was capable of providing suitable catalysts, and to investigate some of the characteristics regarding the inclusion of structure into these self-immobilised enzyme particles.

RESULTS
visualisation
lipase and bovine serum albumin  were immobilised using glutaraldehyde in a water-in-mineral oil emulsion with nonoxynol- <dig> as the surfactant. as anticipated, optical and scanning electron microscopy analysis of the spherezymes revealed spherical particles , as would be associated with protein immobilisation within emulsion droplets.

particle size
from the sem images, the size of the individual spherical particles were determined to be between  <dig> – <dig> μm in diameter . however from laser light scattering experiments it appears that the particles aggregate with a size distribution between  <dig> and  <dig> μm. using the current standard procedure for spherezyme formation the average particle size diameter was  <dig>  μm, .

the size of both the individual sphere particles and the aggregate particles could be controlled by manipulating the process conditions. upon halving the lipase concentration, the particle size distribution shifted to smaller particle sizes . when both the lipase amount was halved and surfactant omitted, the distribution shifted to larger particle sizes . as means of separation during application, enzyme activity could be retained without loss by filtration on typical biological filters .

aggregate formation could be due to agglomeration through low charge , hydrophobic interaction, or through secondary cross-linking of the spheres through residual free aldehydes from the cross-linking process. as low zeta potential can result in agglomeration , the zeta potential of an emulsion containing albumin prior to crosslinking was measured. as a rule of thumb, particles having zeta potential values greater than ±  <dig> mv tend to be more stable, while conversely values smaller than ±  <dig> mv indicate a tendency to agglomerate  <cit> . the average zeta potential obtained for albumin spheres was - <dig> ±  <dig>  mv, with n =  <dig>  indicating a low tendency for agglomeration. particle agglomeration may also be reduced through steric hindrance/repulsion . the aggregates could be dispersed through mild sonication. as albumin is hydrophilic, this would suggest that the aggregates are formed by covalent cross-linking. post-treatment with amino acids appears to reduce this effect  <cit> .

yield
the mass yield of lipase incorporation into the spherezymes was  <dig> % ±  <dig> % sd. this suggests that enzyme incorporation was near complete.

specific density
the enzyme particles had a density between  <dig>  and  <dig>  g.ml- <dig> according to their buoyancy in salt solutions. as a standard separation technique, activity could be fully recovered by centrifugation at  <dig> × g on standard bench-top centrifuges.

effects of cross-linking method on activity
initial experiments with glutaraldehyde treatment of lipases in an emulsion resulted in large loss of activity . however later it was discovered that the lipases could be protected in some cases against glutaraldehyde deactivation by the use of a 'protectant', typically a substrate, which is proposed to occupy the active site during the cross-linking process. addition of  <dig> μl  tributyin to the reaction mixture increased the activity of p. fluorescens lipase on p-nitrophenyl butyrate  <dig> fold, from less than  <dig> percent to 125% of original free lipase activity . optimisation of the ratio of immobilisation reagents provided a further tenfold improvement in activity on p-nitrophenyl butyrate.

changing to a combination of glutaraldehyde and ethylenediamine  as a cross-linker  <cit>  provided benefits. after  <dig> hours protein cross-linking with  <dig> μl of pre-mixed glutaraldehyde eda cross-linker, the p-nitrophenyl palmitate activity increased from  <dig> to  <dig> μmol.min- <dig> mg- <dig> and p-nitrophenyl butyrate activity from  <dig> to  <dig> μmol.min- <dig> mg- <dig> compared to glutaraldehyde alone, indicating improved access of the substrate to the enzyme, possibly due to the formation of longer cross-linking chains compared to glutaraldehyde cross-linking.

the reproducibility of the method is important for possible application of this technique. five batches of p. fluorescens lipase spherezymes were produced. against the smaller p-nitrophenyl butyrate substrate the activity of the spheres was 159% ±  <dig> % of that of the free enzyme for fourteen samples with a standard deviation of ±  <dig> % between batches. this increase in activity may be attributed to hyper-activation of the enzyme, probably due to the locking open of the lipase active site lid or other modification of conformation during the immobilisation process.

apart from the p. fluorescens lipase, the method was successfully applied to lipase from candida. rugosa, rhizopus. oryzae as well as wheat-germ lipase. wheat-germ lipase, r. oryzae and c. rugosa lipase spherezymes maintained 40%, 18% and 54% activity respectively on p-nitrophenyl butyrate as the substrate.

biocatalyst recycle
as enzymes may be expensive, re-use of the catalyst is often a necessity. the p. fluorescens lipase particles were recycled  <dig> times with washing by centrifugation with no observable loss of activity on p-nitrophenyl butyrate. denilite® laccase spherezymes were also investigated, using pyrogallol as a substrate. the spheres were reacted ten times with pyrogallol with recovery and washing between each reaction. laccase activity after these ten recycles retained significant activity compared to the original activity of the spheres .

combined protein particles
the immobilisation of multiple proteins in single spherezymes was investigated. the results of including bsa in combination with p. fluorescens lipase provided a strong indication of the predicted selective migration of lipase to the phase interface. the difference in molecular mass of the two p-nitrophenyl esters used to assay activity permitted evaluation of the mass transfer properties of the spheres based on substrate size. an important observation was that although absolute specific activity decreased with increasing percentage bsa inclusion in the particles , the lipase specific activity  increased for p-nitrophenyl palmitate . this was not observed in the case of p-nitrophenyl-butyrate , indicating that it was specifically a surface related phenomenon.

combination immobilised enzyme particles were formed using co-immobilised p. fluorescens lipase and denilite® laccase , and were able to catalyse both hydrolysis and oxidation reactions. the ratio of p-nitrophenyl palmitate to p-nitrophenyl butyrate was used as an indication of surface to volumetric activity and hence distribution of enzyme within the particle. similar to the data where lipase was combined with bsa, it appears that the lipase selectively migrated to the exterior of the particle since in the dual enzyme particles  there was a doubling of the ratio of p-nitrophenyl palmitate to p-nitrophenyl butyrate activity compared to the lipase particles .

activity in organic solvents
the application of enzymes, and particularly lipases, in organic solvents is quite common in biocatalysis, and hence a new immobilisation method should preferably provide an organic solvent-tolerant catalyst. the p-nitrophenyl palmitate hydrolysis in water-saturated n-heptane  <cit>  using spherezymes prepared from p. fluorescens lipase was compared to non-immobilised enzyme based on equivalent mass. the hydrolytic activity of spherezymes lipase on p-nitrophenyl palmitate was calculated to be  <dig>  fold higher than that of non-immobilised lipase in water saturated n-heptane .

to evaluate the synthetic capacity of p. fluorescens lipase spherezymes, they were used to esterify -menthol present in a diastereomer mixture  that had been generated from hydrogenation of thymol. four sequential reactions were performed, each for  <dig> hour reaction times, and an average conversion of  <dig> % ±  <dig>  menthol to -menthyl acetate was obtained with a consistent eep of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  , which is similar to the results achieved by chaplin et al   <cit> . an additional recycle was performed to determine the eep at near maximum conversion, where the incubation time was extended to  <dig> hours, and this provided a conversion of  <dig> % ±  <dig>  and an eep of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  on the menthol racemate.

effects of lyophilisation
in order to preserve the activity and shelf-life of the spherezymes, lyophilisation was investigated as a possible preservation technique. p. fluorescens lipase spherezymes were lyophilised, and the effect of the lyo-protectant 5% m/v mannitol on enzyme activity was assessed. the particles, lyophilised in the presence of protectant maintained  <dig> % residual activity against p-nitrophenyl butyrate. without protectant only  <dig> % activity was maintained.

discussion
self-immobilised enzymes  provide 10– <dig> times higher volumetric activity than carrier bound immobilised enzymes  <cit> , providing significant potential advantages for commercial reactions.

these initial experiments have shown that enzymes can be self-immobilised as catalytically active spherical bodies using an emulsion based technique in the presence of surfactants and active site protectants. the technology was successfully applied to four lipases and a laccase. co-immobilisation of lipase with other proteins, bsa or laccase, was also shown. the ability of the biocatalyst to be recovered by centrifugation and recycled was also demonstrated using both enzyme classes immobilised with this technology.

the technique also permits control of particle size, and hence surface area. the control of surface area to volume allows for optimisation of reactant diffusion. interestingly a modification of the clea process has recently been published  <cit>  in which an emulsion based technique is used to control particle size, although in his case the emulsion is broken during the immobilisation process, and the resultant product forms fibrous aggregates rather than spheres.

the need for addition of surfactants is moderated by the surfactant properties of the enzyme itself, particularly in the case of proteins possessing surfactant properties. for example, in the current results the reduction in particle size when lipase amount was decreased is possibly due to the lipase surfactant activity. excessive surfactant addition can cause bridging flocculation, leading to agglomerates, thus resulting in apparent larger average particle size during analysis  <cit> . this indicates that the level of surfactant activity of protein utilized in spherezyme manufacture should be determined and taken into account when formulating the emulsions. when the surfactant was removed, the size distribution increased as would be expected.

the spheres had a particle size of  <dig> – <dig> μm, and formed aggregates of  <dig> –  <dig> μm, with a mean of  <dig> μm. we suggest that this size range would be an ideal compromise of surface area to recoverability by filtration or centrifugation. adjustments to the particle size range can be made through controlling surfactant type and concentration in combination with agitation rate and method. the density of the particles was only slightly greater than water, while the zeta-potential of the spherezymes was - <dig> ±  <dig>  mv, indicating low tendency for flocculation or agglomeration, and hence the particles remained suspended in the reaction medium with only mild agitation.

mass yield determinations suggest an approximate 100% mass recovery. we have also optimised immobilisation methods to achieve greater than 100% enzyme activity yields for p. fluorescens lipase spherezymes compared to the native lipase, as determined by release of p-nitrophenol from p-nitrophenyl butyrate. many lipases, such as pseudomonas and candida rugosa lipases have "lids" in the region of the active site  <cit> . these lids are opened in the presence of hydrophobic interfaces, thereby activating the enzyme  <cit> . the observed hyperactivation may be due to the fixed opening of the lipase "lid" or other structural modifications. immobilised lipase activity exceeding that of the native lipase has also been observed using the clea technique  <cit> . in addition, we have shown that the surface properties of the spheres could be modified by attachment of amines, such as the hydrophobic phenylglycine, further modifying the hydrophobic properties of the enzyme  <cit> .

preliminary experiments were performed using multiple proteins to demonstrate inclusion of structure during immobilisation. initially albumin was selected due to its hydrophilic nature and relatively large number of lysine residues with approximately three times that of lipases  which would aid in cross-linking. it was anticipated that the lipases would migrate to the phase interface and orientate due to the hydrophobic surface prior to cross-linking. this feature was also investigated by co-immobilisation of laccase and lipase, where conversely the laccase tends to possess fewer lysine residues . the more hydrophobic of the two proteins  appeared to migrate to the surface of the emulsion droplets. where combination enzymes are involved, such a structure may be used to catalyse multiple reactions. moreover, an external protein or enzyme may protect an internal enzyme from inactivation, such as by gas bubbles  <cit> .

the immobilisation of enzymes tends to make them more stable in unusual environments. for example improved lipase  activity in organic solvent has been observed after immobilisation in some instances using the clea technique  <cit> . the activity of lipase spherezymes in n-heptane demonstrated that the self-immobilised particles are better suited to working in n-heptane than that of the non-immobilised enzyme, which tends to clump in organic solvent. as the immobilised particles are generated in a water in oil emulsion, it is therefore likely that active biocatalysts successfully produced by this method will be comparatively stable in organic solvents.

CONCLUSIONS
we have successfully demonstrated the concept of creating structured self-immobilised spherical enzyme particles through the use of an emulsion based process. they are relatively inexpensive to manufacture, and sufficiently robust to retain activity after centrifugation or filtration for recycling, and active in both in aqueous and organic media. the capacity to orientate the enzymes either towards or away from the interface  and the ability to manipulate the radial location of component proteins when immobilising two or more proteins could also allow for optimising activity, especially for large substrates. this technique allows for the incorporation of fine structure into immobilised enzyme bodies, allowing for the generation of more sophisticated biocatalysts.

