BACKGROUND
hormone signaling is a very important feature in metazoans, allowing communication between cells or organs within the organism. two components of these signaling systems are of particular importance, the hormone and its receptor. the nuclear hormone receptor  superfamily includes ligand dependent transcription factors that play a central role in various physiological processes as diverse as reproduction, development, and control of homeostasis  <cit> . they share a common structural organization and exhibit a highly conserved dna binding domain  and a moderately conserved ligand-binding domain . some members of this superfamily are liganded receptors  but many lack identified ligand and are therefore called "orphan"  <cit> . some orphan receptors are 'true' orphans in the sense that they do not possess a bona fide ligand-binding pocket , like the members of the nr <dig> subfamily , and are regulated by other mechanisms  <cit> . alternatively, the crystal structures of several orphan receptors such as hnf <dig> were found to have a phospholipid constitutively bound to a large ligand binding pocket  <cit> . the functional and evolutionary implications of these constitutive ligands remain discussed. other orphan nuclear receptors have a ligand binding pocket and thus have the potential to bind compounds. it is still not known whether those receptors have natural ligands, still to be discovered. undoubtedly, the existence of such orphan receptors with physiological or developmental activities constitutes both a major challenge for understanding nuclear receptor evolution and a potential opportunity for pharmacology  <cit> .

the existence of orphan and liganded members in the nr family raises the question of the evolution regarding their ligand binding ability. whether the ancestral nr was liganded or orphan and more generally how nr ligand binding ability evolved has been recently debated  <cit> . in general, it is still unclear if there is a correlation between the evolution of the hormone repertoire and nrs. moreover the mechanisms underlying this coevolution are of particular interest  <cit> .

among the scenarios of nr evolution that have been proposed, one suggests that the ancestral nr was a ligand-independent transcription factor which acquired the ability to be regulated by ligands several times during evolution  <cit> . this hypothesis was based on the observation that compounds of similar chemical nature bind to divergent nrs and on the contrary compounds of very different nature bind to closely related receptors. for instance, orphan receptors are found in all families of nrs, and steroid receptors are not monophyletic but are located in two different subfamilies within the nr superfamily: the ecdysteroid as well as the sex steroid receptors. interestingly, the evolution of sex steroid hormone receptors has also been used as an argument for an alternative hypothesis, the ligand exploitation model  <cit>  . phylogenetic trees show that sex steroid hormone receptors are grouped with errs as the nr <dig> subfamily, following the official nomenclature  <cit> . they contain receptors that bind estradiol , that form the nr3a group as well as mineralocorticoids , glucocorticoids , progesterone , and androgen  that form the nr3c group. all known ligands in this subfamily can be seen as variations around the archetypical sterol skeleton. consequently, thornton et al. suggested in the ligand exploitation model that the ancestral steroid receptor was a high affinity estradiol receptor  <cit>  and the other steroid receptors that originated later on, experienced, following gene duplication, shifts in their binding affinities to eventually bind to their extant ligand. the model in fact suggests that the newly duplicated receptors  exploit as ligands chemical species that serve as intermediary compounds in the "ancestral ligand" synthesis pathway   <cit> . according to this view, orphan receptors, like errs, secondarily lost the ability to have their activity regulated by a ligand and became orphan. interestingly, within the nr <dig> family, two receptor subfamilies, errs and ers, appear to be ancient since they are found in a wide variety of metazoans including deuterostomes and protostomes, whereas, up to now, mrs, grs, prs and ars have been found only in vertebrates. the only non-vertebrate ers that have been described so far were from mollusks and were shown to be unable to bind estradiol  <cit> . since the ligand exploitation model implies an ancestral estradiol-binding er and since all liganded er found so far come from vertebrates, and to improve taxonomic sampling, the er orthologues from the basal vertebrate lamprey and the invertebrate chordate amphioxus were characterized here. indeed, lamprey and amphioxus are located at key positions in the chordate phylum  <cit> . moreover, amphioxus  is much less derived than urochordates in its morphology as well as in its genome organization  <cit> . indeed, amphioxus and vertebrates share a similar general body plan whereas urochordate morphology is more derived. for instance, during metamorphosis of some urochordates, the tadpole-like larva transforms into an adult that looks so different that it was first considered as a mollusk  <cit> . moreover the urochordate genome is fast evolving  <cit> , with for instance the loss of the clustering of the hox genes  <cit> . there is no er in the sequenced genome of ciona intestinalis  <cit>  or in the sea urchin  <cit> , one er was previously cloned in lamprey  <cit> , only one er was found in the amphioxus genome  <cit> . these reasons make lamprey and amphioxus excellent models to study the evolution of estrogen signaling pathway at the origin of vertebrates. in this study, we cloned the unique er from amphioxus  and characterized it, as well as the previously cloned but uncharacterized lamprey er . amphier is an orphan receptor, showing no affinity to the estrogen hormone estradiol, when in contrast, the lamprey er behaves as a "classical" vertebrate er. as no er from invertebrates studied so far binds estradiol, we propose that the ancestral er  was not a receptor for estradiol and gained later on during evolution the ability to bind the hormone.

RESULTS
cloning of the er from amphioxus 
using degenerate primers designed to match motifs in the most conserved part of vertebrate ers in the dna binding domain, a single gene fragment from total rna of an adult branchiostoma floridae was amplified, cloned and sequenced. rapid amplification of cdna ends  was utilized to obtain the full-length cdna. from this sequence, a new set of specific primers were designed and used to amplify the full length open reading frame of this gene. the obtained cdna  is  <dig> bp long and encodes a  <dig> aa long putative protein  that harbors the classical features of an er with the  <dig> main functional domains , among which a highly conserved dna binding domain  and a less conserved ligand binding domain . the dbd shares an 82% sequence identity with the human erα one  and much less with the other nr <dig> receptors . the same pattern is observed for the lbd, although this domain is less conserved since it exhibits only 34% amino acid identity with human erα  and about 20% with other steroid receptors . the three other domains, namely the a/b region in the n-terminal part, the hinge between dbd and lbd, and the short c-terminal end of the protein, are more divergent, which is a general pattern for nrs  <cit>  . the recent release of the amphioxus genome confirmed the presence of a single er gene  <cit> . in contrast the previously described lamprey er is more similar to the human erα with its dbd sharing a 93% sequence identity  and its lbd sharing 55% sequence identity   <cit> .

phylogenetic analysis of ers
the orthology relationships of the amphioxus and lamprey er sequences were studied in a phylogenetic analysis of the nr <dig> family using an exhaustive dataset comprising  <dig> members of the nr <dig> subfamily as well as sequences of rxrs as an outgroup. the dataset included the  <dig> currently known mollusk er sequences , as well as the  <dig> nr <dig> sequences previously known from amphioxus . in the resulting phylogenetic tree, the sequence of lamprey er branches within the er clade with a high bootstrap support , at the expected position before the split of vertebrate erα and erβ , as previously shown  <cit> . the sequence of amphier branches within the ers and is located at the base of the vertebrate estrogen receptor group, before the split of erα and erβ but after the split of the mollusk ers . however its precise position within the er group is poorly supported .

such low bootstrap supports reveal either the weakness of the phylogenetic signal contained in er proteins, or the presence of two incompatible signals in the data, one supporting the observed position of amphier within ers, and the other supporting another position. whereas the weakness of the signal is not testable, the long branch leading to amphier in the tree suggests that sites that have undergone a large number of substitutions may account for one of the two signals. such sites may be saturated to the point that phylogenetic methods are not able to correctly recover their evolution, a situation leading to the long branch attraction artifact  <cit> . it is therefore important to correctly characterize sites that support the er position of amphier: if only fast-evolving sites support this hypothesis, it is probably due to long branch attraction, and an alternative branching should be favored. alternatively, if slowly-evolving sites support this position, one can confidently identify amphier as a bona fide er. to characterize sites with respect to their evolutionary rates and the amphier position they favor, both site likelihoods and site evolutionary rates were computed for all possible positions of amphier.

first, amphier was pruned from the tree shown in figure 2b, and then re-grafted in all  <dig> remaining branches. this yielded  <dig> topologies, for which site likelihoods and site evolutionary rates could be computed using phyml-alrt. this allowed us to obtain an evolutionary rate per site averaged over all possible positions of amphier, and therefore independent from the precise position of amphier in the tree. additionally, as likelihoods were computed for each of the  <dig> positions, these positions could be compared according to the approximately unbiased test . out of all the  <dig> resulting trees,  <dig> could not be distinguished with the au test and had a likelihood significantly better than all the other ones . of these  <dig> topologies, all but three place amphier within the er clade . the remaining topologies  place amphier either at the base of the nr3c clade , within the nr3c or at the base of  . because site evolutionary rates had been computed, sites having a higher likelihood for the "alter-er" trees could be compared with sites favoring the "er" topologies with respect to their evolutionary rates. interestingly, the sites pleading for the "alter-er" trees evolve significantly faster than the sites pleading for the "er" trees . this suggests that the "alter-er" signal in the alignment is probably due to long branch attraction to the nr3c subtree, which might also be at the origin of the low bootstrap support  for the position of amphier. conversely, this suggests that amphier should be considered as an er, as the signal at the origin of this position does not seem to be artifactual.

an additional test can be run to further confirm this hypothesis, and consists in reestimating the phylogeny using only slowly-evolving sites. for that purpose, the distribution of expected relative evolutionary rates across sites of the alignment was plotted, as found by phyml-alrt  <cit>  . fastest-evolving sites were removed from the dataset based on three different rate thresholds , and trees were reconstructed based on the alignments containing only the remaining slowly-evolving sites. these operations did not impact the monophyly of ers  or the statistical support. this shows that the clustering of amphier with vertebrate ers does not come from saturated sites, which argues against long branch attraction being at the origin of this position  <cit> . accordingly, complementary phylogenetic analyses with different methods  gave similar results . from these studies we conclude that amphier does indeed belong to the er subfamily, which is confirmed by the general conservation of the exon-intron structure of amphier with human erα, especially at two exon-intron splice sites in the dbd and in the lbd after helix  <dig>   <cit> .

chordate ers, including amphioxus er and lamprey er, are able to bind estrogen specific response elements 
to test whether the lamprey er and the amphioxus er are able to bind dna on specific estrogen response elements , electrophoresis mobility shift assays were performed using a radiolabeled consensus ere sequence . these experiments show that, like vertebrate ers, amphier and lamper are able to bind dna specifically on a consensus ere. this binding is specific, since a 100-fold excess of non-specific dna was not able to compete for binding, whereas a 100-fold excess of cold ere completely suppressed it . ers contain two major conserved signatures in the dbd, the p-box , responsible for the binding specificity to response elements, and the d-box, also involved in the dna binding specificity of the er dimers . the p-box is highly conserved in all known ers, including amphier and lamprey er and is different from other nr <dig> members. amphier and lamprey er also have a well conserved d-box, amphier d-box containing just a few conservative mutations, . since the three characterized mollusk ers  also bind eres and since the p-box and d-box are well conserved in all known ers, including those from mollusks, ere binding appears to be a feature specific to all ers.

lamprey er, but not amphioxus er, is able to induce transactivation of a reporter gene in response to estradiol stimulation
the transactivation ability of lamprey er and amphier was then compared with that of human erα. amphier failed to induce transcription of a reporter construct containing a consensus ere in front of a minimal promoter in transfected mammalian cells after stimulation by the natural vertebrate er ligand, estradiol  as well as a wide variety of other vertebrate er ligands  . in order to improve the detection sensitivity, was also tested the transactivation capacity of amphier in response to e <dig> as a construct containing only the lbd fused to the gal <dig> dna-binding domain. in this case again, no activation was detected . in agreement with this result, no recruitment of the coactivator src <dig>  was detected in mammalian two-hybrid assay . however lamper is activated by e <dig>  with an intensity comparable to humanerα , which suggests that the lamprey er is a high affinity e2-dependant transcription factor.

since amphier is able to bind dna but is unable to activate transcription of a reporter gene, the dominant negative capacity of the amphioxus protein was tested. a dose-dependent decrease in the reporter gene activity was clearly visible in  <dig> different cell lines when increasing amounts of the amphier plasmid were added together with constant amounts of human erα or erβ in transient transfection experiments. this decrease was observed both with synthetic consensus eres  and with the natural ere present in the classical er ps <dig> target gene . apparently, amphier is able to compete with human erα or erβ for binding to the ere sites present in the reporter constructs, and in doing so, prevents erα and erβ from inducing transcription, which results in a decrease in reporter gene activity. thus, in contrast to aplysia, octopus or thais er  <cit> , amphier does not display constitutive transcriptional activity under our experimental conditions and rather exhibits an inhibitory effect . this clearly shows that the absence of transcriptional activity observed here is not an artifact linked to a poor expression of the construct but rather reflects the inability of amphier to activate transcription in mammalian cells.

lamper is an estradiol receptor whereas amphier is not able to bind er ligands except the synthetic compound bisphenol a
in order to confirm that lamprey er is an e <dig> receptor and to better understand the molecular basis behind the inability of the amphier to become transcriptionally activated by estradiol stimulation, e <dig> binding by lamprey er and amphier was tested in vitro. for that purpose, limited proteolysis assay allows to assess whether addition of different putative ligands can induce a conformational change in amphier  <cit> . using this method the ligand induced conformational change of the lbd is revealed by the alteration of the receptor sensitivity toward proteolytic digestion by trypsin. as expected, e <dig> was able to protect human erα from proteolysis . interestingly lamprey er was also protected from proteolysis by e <dig> even at the lowest concentration tested , thus confirming the results of the transactivation assays that the lamprey er is a high affinity e <dig> receptor. in contrast no protection of amphier by estradiol was observed, even at very high ligand concentrations  . since estradiol does not protect amphier from proteolysis, several other classical er ligands were tested, such as the synthetic er agonists diethylstilbestrol  <cit> , 4-hydroxy-tamoxifene  <cit>  or bisphenol a   <cit> , the natural agonist 3β-androstenediol  <cit> , the phytoestrogen enterolactone  <cit>  or the synthetic er antagonist ici- <dig>  <cit> . all compounds were able to bind to human erα  as expected, whereas none but bpa was able to bind to amphier . however, bpa did not induce transactivation by amphier in mammalian cells reporter assay, and did not induce recruitment of the coactivator src <dig> either .

in order to rule out the possibility that amphier is activated by a compound related to e <dig>  a large panel of  <dig> other steroids and cholesterol derivatives were tested for their ability to bind and activate amphier. none of the tested compounds, even at high doses, had any effect on amphier transcription activity . accordingly, no recruitment of the coactivator src <dig> by amphier was detected in mammalian two hybrid assays . the most probable explanation is thus the lack of binding by those compounds to amphier .

taken together these results show that the er from lamprey behaves as a "classical" er since it binds dna on a classical ere and is activated by binding e <dig>  on the other hand, though the single er from amphioxus is able to bind the ere, it does not bind any tested er ligand and cholesterol derivative, except bisphenol a. however, no transcriptional activity was detected upon stimulation by any of the tested ligands. since none of the mollusk ers sequenced up to now binds e <dig> either, our data suggest that e2-binding by er is restricted to vertebrates, implying that vertebrates specifically gained the ability to be regulated by e <dig> .

ancestral reconstruction of steroid receptors
in previous analyses that discussed the evolution of ers, it was argued that estradiol binding was an ancient function of all sex steroid receptors  and that the binding to other steroids was more recent, with estradiol binding ability getting restricted to ers  <cit> . those conclusions were based on the reconstruction of the ancestral sr sequence  <cit> . since the finding that estradiol binding is not shared by all ers but restricted to vertebrate ers contradicts this hypothesis, and to get better insight into this apparent contradiction, the sequence of the ancestral steroid receptor was reestimated. when the ancestor  was first "resurrected", only one non-vertebrate sequence was available  <cit> . the impact of more non-vertebrate sequences  was thus tested on the reconstruction of the ancestor of steroid receptors. the sequence of the ancestral steroid receptor , at the node grouping ers and nr3c, was inferred using paml  <dig>  <cit> , from the alignment described previously  and the topology shown in figure 2b. the predicted sequence resembles ancsr <dig>  with  <dig> out of  <dig> amino acids involved in ligand binding  <cit>  being er-like . however, important differences were noticed between ancsr <dig> and ancsra. first one of the  <dig> amino acids making direct contacts with e <dig> is different in ancsr <dig> and ancsra: at this position, ancsr <dig> is vertebrate-er like  whereas the amino acid is different in ancsra and is mollusk-er like  and mutations at this site have been shown to impair erα activity in human  <cit> . second, when a phylogenetic tree is built including both ancestral sequences ancsr <dig> and ancsra as well as various nr <dig> sequences, ancsra branches deep in steroid receptors as expected since it was built on the same dataset  but ancsr <dig> branches close to the vertebrate ers, which is surprising. in order to determine whether the taxonomic sampling, and not details of the alignment, was responsible for these differences, we calculated a second sr ancestral sequence  using a smaller dataset: taxon sampling was reduced by removing most of the non-vertebrate steroid receptor sequences from the alignment . in this case, ancsrb branches next to ancsr <dig>  closer to the er clade than to ancsra . this result clearly shows that the reconstruction of ancestral sequences is influenced by the set of sequences available and that restricted taxonomic sampling biases ancestral sr sequences towards vertebrate er sequences. therefore conclusions based on such an analysis  should be considered as only tentative, since taxonomic sampling of available steroid sequences is very much vertebrate-centered. overall, taken together, our data do no support the hypothesis that the ancestral steroid receptor was an estradiol receptor.

discussion
the amphioxus er does not bind estradiol
in this paper we cloned and functionally characterized the lamprey and amphioxus orthologues of the human estrogen receptors. our results show that lamper binds estradiol whereas amphier does not. we propose that  <dig> types of ers can be distinguished, depending on their ligand binding properties: vertebrate ers  are the only bona fide estradiol receptors, mollusk ers do not bind estradiol and are constitutively active transcription factors and amphier does not bind estradiol and is transcriptionally silent in mammalian cells. this is supported by two points:  the experimental approach developed here is biologically relevant since the binding of bisphenol a  to amphier was observed using the same experimental conditions as for e <dig> suggesting that amphier is correctly folded and that a ligand binding pocket is likely to be present.  one of the three key amino acid positions within the lbp of amphier  diverges from vertebrate ers , whilst the two other key positions  are conserved with the vertebrate ers , suggesting that potential contacts between amphier and estradiol are impaired. accordingly, a recent in silico study of amphier ligand binding ability confirmed an "unusual ligand recognition in amphioxus er"  <cit> .

it was unexpected that no effect of the synthetic er agonist bpa was detected in the transactivation assay of the receptor in mammalian cells since bpa induces a conformational change of amphier. this apparent absence of coactivator recruitment  resulting in no transcriptional activity in response to bpa can be interpreted in several ways:  because of the different geometry of the ligand-binding pocket in amphier, bpa behaves as an antiestrogen  and blocks the transcriptional activation properties of amphier, for instance by inducing a conformational change that does not allow coactivator recruitment  or by excluding amphier from nucleus .  alternatively, the coactivator interface of amphier does not fit with mammalian coactivators, resulting in artifactual loss of activation. however, the conservation of the amino acids involved in co-activator interaction, compared to human erα does not support this hypothesis . among the divergent sites, at a position implicated in the charge clamp necessary for coactivator contact, amphier contains an aspartate  instead of a glutamate in humanerα . importantly, the divergence  is conservative and preserves the negative charge of the amino acid, which is important for interaction with the lysine from helix  <dig>  to form this charge clamp  <cit> . in addition, a unique orthologue of the p <dig> family of coactivators was found in the amphioxus genome  <cit>  and its overall conservation with its  <dig> human ohnologues  is good.  interaction between mammalian chaperones like hsp <dig> and amphier is impaired, leading to improper binding to the hormone  <cit> . taking these results into account, it will be interesting to test the effect of bpa on the subcellular localization of amphier and to study if other related compounds are able to bind and/or activate amphier. in addition, it will be important, when cell cultures from amphioxus are available, to check the activity of amphier in a monospecific transient transfection assay. it should be remembered that some orphan receptors such as errs are thought to have no natural ligands even if they are able to bind synthetic compounds  <cit> . more generally, the precise status of amphier in terms of ligand binding remains an open question. it is nevertheless clear, and this is an important issue for the current evolutionary debate, that amphier is not able to bind estradiol.

is there any receptor for estradiol in amphioxus?
the observation that amphier does not bind e <dig> is indeed a surprising observation since e <dig> was detected in amphioxus by ria, the hormonal production being correlated with breeding season  <cit> . several aspects of steroid metabolism were described in amphioxus  <cit>  and the homologues of many enzymes necessary for estradiol synthesis in mammals were cloned from amphioxus ovaries  <cit> . of particular interest is the report of an aromatase gene  in amphioxus, which suggests that the crucial step in estradiol synthesis is indeed possible in amphioxus. these experimental data were recently confirmed by the analysis of the complete amphioxus genome sequence  <cit> . it may be that, in amphioxus, the active sex hormone is an e2-derivative  <cit>  or another sex hormone, like in the case of androgens in lamprey  <cit> , and this derivative is still to be discovered. in a similar way, we recently demonstrated that the amphioxus tr orthologue does not bind t <dig> or t <dig>  the classical thyroid hormones, but deaminated derivatives triac and tetrac, which are able to induce amphioxus metamorphosis  <cit> .

a second possibility is that e <dig> itself has a central role in sex maturation in amphioxus, and that the functional estrogen receptor in amphioxus is different from amphier. several candidates are possible. first, there is another steroid receptor in amphioxus   <cit>  that exhibits several er-like features. its p- and d-boxes are closer to ers than to vertebrate nr3c . the sequence identity of its lbd with human erα  and with nr3c members  are similar. moreover, most of the amino acids involved in ligand binding are more er-like than ar-, pr- or mr-like . however it is the only nr3c receptor  found in the amphioxus genome. thus if amphinr3c plays the role of an estradiol receptor, this suggests an absence of a "classical" steroid receptor able to bind testosterone, progesterone or corticoids. alternatively, a non-nuclear receptor could mediate e <dig> action in amphioxus. indeed, several non-genomic effects of estradiol were reported in mammals involving gpcrs . for instance, very recently, a high affinity receptor for the steroid androstenedione linked to the membrane, was described in lamprey  <cit>  and a gpcr with high affinity for progestines was isolated from sea trout  <cit> .

implications for the evolution of ers
the absence of e <dig> binding by the amphioxus estrogen receptor has interesting consequences for the evolution of srs and ers. indeed, only the well characterized gnathostome ers and the lamprey er  have been shown to mediate e <dig> action. outside vertebrates, all the ers studied so far  do not bind e <dig>  <cit> . parsimony implies that the function of estradiol in the bilaterian ancestor was not mediated by er and that er had another function. only later during evolution, in the vertebrate lineage, er would then have gained the ability to be activated by e <dig> and to mediate the hormonal action of this compound . the alternative scenario  is more costly in terms of evolutionary events, even if the hypothesis of an nr3c orthologue binding e <dig> is taken into account. thus, taken together, our results do not support previous scenarios of steroid receptor evolution based on a reconstruction of the ancestral steroid hormone receptor ancsr <dig>  <cit> .

to describe the evolution of a protein, being able to study ancestral sequences at different nodes of a phylogeny would obviously provide historically relevant information that is not available otherwise  <cit> . however such sequences have disappeared long ago and can only be statistically estimated. the accuracy and bias of these estimations therefore need to be investigated. indeed, functional studies of ancestral sequences are of any value only if the ancestral reconstruction is reliable enough. the confidence associated with the previously published ancestral steroid receptor is quite low. indeed, the overall accuracy of the reconstruction of the lbd  was only 62%  <cit> . this is similar for the ancestor inferred here  on an enriched dataset, with an overall accuracy of the dbd+lbd of 70%. moreover, amino acid uncertainty was high at many sites of ancsra and ancsr1: more than  <dig> sites have more than  <dig> possible amino acid with a probability superior to  <dig> . if one were to make an exhaustive study, one would need to reconstruct and test more than  <dig> potential proteins . in fact several of the sites involved in ligand binding have low probabilities. examples of more reliable reconstructions of nuclear receptors have been published, e.g. the ancestor of mr and gr  in which the overall accuracy of the lbd was above 99%, with no disrupting mutation at any site  <cit> . the reconstructed ancestor of rars also showed a high average confidence . this discrepancy between results obtained on the ancestor of all steroid receptors or merely of mr and gr for instance, can be explained by the higher sequence divergence observed among all srs than simply among subfamilies mr and gr . consequently, the uncertainty associated to the sequence of the ancestral steroid receptor as estimated with nowadays methods is probably too high to provide a firm basis for evolutionary conclusions. moreover, the phylogenetic reconstruction of ancestral sequences has been shown to be biased towards the most frequent  amino acids, resulting in an under-estimation of the less frequent amino acids . in reconstructions of ancient proteins, where the evolutionary signal has been lost due to a high number of substitutions, such biases might be problematic. thus, current reconstruction methods do not seem powerful enough to infer a biologically meaningful ancestral steroid receptor given the amount of divergence between sequences.

nonetheless, all these reservations put aside, it is surprising that the previously reconstructed ancestral sr, is vertebrate er-like. as almost all the extant sequences used as matrix for the reconstruction came from vertebrates and led to the estimation of a "vertebrate-like" ancestral sequence, the same ancestral steroid receptor as previously published  <cit>  was estimated, but adding more sequences from various taxa. this reconstruction was done using a phylogeny equivalent to the one previously published  <cit> . using this approach, the new ancsra is more divergent from vertebrate ers than ancsr <dig>  interestingly ancsr <dig> was shown to bind e <dig> with a very low affinity , suggesting that ancsra may be an even worse estradiol receptor.

the bias of ancsr <dig> towards vertebrate ers is explained by a lack of non-vertebrate sequences used for the reconstruction. indeed, removing some non-vertebrate sequences from our dataset leads to an estimation of an ancestral steroid receptor that is more "vertebrate er"-like . the clustering of ancsrb with the er clade and the exclusion of ancsra from the er clade were supported with good statistical values . those data show that ancsr <dig> reconstruction was probably sensitive to the vertebrate bias in the data set . overall, we suggest that analysis based on ancestral reconstructions should be taken as tentative, especially in case of low statistical confidence and limited taxonomic sampling. in case of the ancestral steroid receptor, even if exhaustive taxonomic sampling is necessary, phylogenetic signal is weak and the resulting confidence is quite low. thus we think that even if the ancestral sequence built here is biologically more relevant than previously calculated ones , it remains quite uncertain. consequently conclusions regarding the ancestral steroid receptor should be based mostly on comparative characterization of extant receptors. in that case, all the data based on invertebrate er receptors  support an ancestor of steroid receptors that was not able to bind estradiol. this conclusion will obviously require the functional characterization of ers from other protostome phyla in order to carefully check if this observation is general. thus, available data converge towards a re-evaluation of the ancestral status of estrogen receptors.

sequence conservation reflects functional constraints: ligand binding ability is more recent than dna-binding ability
from our and previous studies, only vertebrate ers are able to bind and activate transcription under estradiol stimulation  <cit> . the lbd of amphier is more divergent from its vertebrate counterparts  than the lbd of other liganded amphioxus nuclear receptors such as amphirar , which has been shown to bind the same ligand as its vertebrate homologue  <cit> . this suggests that a conserved functional feature  is reflected in the sequence conservation of the lbd.

the same observation can be done concerning the dbd since all ers, including amphier, have a highly conserved dbd and are able to bind eres. thus, for this domain also, a conservation of the function is reflected in sequence conservation.

accordingly with this notion, the lbd of invertebrate ers is highly divergent but their dna binding domain, as well as other functionally important domains not directly linked to ligand binding such as the dimerization interface, or the amino acids responsible for interaction with the co-activators  <cit>  are well conserved. this is true for amphier as well as mollusk ers. this strongly suggests that amphier is a bona fide nr regulating ere-containing genes in an e2-independent manner. post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation or the presence/absence of other receptor-interacting proteins such as transcriptional coactivators have been shown to regulate unliganded nuclear receptors  <cit> . whether one of these mechanisms acts to regulate the activity of invertebrate ers or if those receptors have unknown ligands still to be identified remains to be explored. anyway our observations strongly suggest that for ers, the dna binding function of the receptor as well as its interaction with co-regulators have been conserved due to selective pressure. interestingly, when studying the ancsra, the p- and d-boxes in the dbd are er/err-like , suggesting that er/err dna binding ability is ancestral, in accordance with the fact that these are the only receptors of the nr <dig> family found in invertebrates. this difference in the selection pressure between dbd and lbd has been proposed to be a general evolutionary pattern for the whole nr family  <cit> . the plasticity of the ligand binding ability of nrs was recently illustrated in the case of rxr-usp where the ability of the receptor to be regulated by a ligand was suggested to have been subject to several successive episodes of gain and loss during evolution  <cit> .

evolution of endocrine systems: refinement of the ligand exploitation model
the ligand exploitation model hypothesizes how new hormones and new receptors appear during evolution. it suggests that the ancestral ligand is the last metabolite of a synthesis pathway  <cit> . according to this model, the ancestral steroid ligand was estradiol . during evolution, other steroid receptors appeared by duplication of the ancestral er and gained the ability to bind other steroids, intermediate in the synthesis pathway .

our findings on the evolution of ers do not support the ligand exploitation model, since our data strongly suggest that the ancestral er did not bind estradiol. however, as estradiol has been detected in deuterostomes as well as protostomes , steroid signaling may have been already present in bilaterian ancestor. however, up to now, the ancestral steroid molecule remains to be determined. if estradiol is an ancient hormone, it then probably bound another receptor and later on er gained the ability to recognize it, as did other steroid receptors for their extant ligand. thus the evolution of steroid system intermingles two distinct processes, the evolution of the receptor on one hand, and the evolution of the ligand on the other.

the receptor can evolve by point mutations and change its affinity for a ligand towards another. this idea was convincingly exemplified in the case of corticoid receptors  for which it was recently demonstrated that ability of the ancestral vertebrate corticoid receptor to bind gnathostome-specific hormone aldosterone  was a by-product of its ability to bind the ancestral ligand 11-deoxycorticosterone   <cit> . gr gained the ability to bind cortisol only in the gnathostome lineage, in parallel to endogenous synthesis of the hormone  <cit> . this detailed study shows that a receptor binding a given ligand can acquire affinity for compounds present in the cell that are structurally close to its natural ligand: this refines the ligand exploitation model, since new ligands are not necessarily precursors of ancient ligands, simply compounds present in the cell and structurally close to the ancestral ligand. similar conclusions were drawn previously in the case of rar evolution  <cit> . it has to be emphasized that the pool of available compounds is also subject to evolutionary changes in parallel. for instance, the spatiotemporal production of estradiol is variable in the different vertebrate groups . glucocorticoids differ in mouse  and in human , with both hormones being gr ligands  <cit> . there are several androgens in teleost fishes, with 11-ketotestosterone being teleost-specific  <cit> . as there are  <dig> androgen receptors  in teleost fishes, from a whole genome duplication  <cit> , the study of the ligand-binding ability of those ars is a potentially interesting case for the evolution of endocrine systems. as highlighted by bridgham et al. , lamprey does not produce cortisol  <cit> . in accordance, their genomes do not contain the sequence corresponding to the enzyme responsible for cortisol synthesis  and in general classical steroids except estradiol are rarely found in lamprey. this suggests that the steroids actually found in lamprey are different from the ones found in mammals . those cases exemplify the largely underestimated diversity of endocrine systems: except for lamprey and some teleost fishes, the hormonal pool of animals remains largely unknown. as proposed for the study of steroid receptors, a comparative approach should be applied to determine the metabolism of steroids in poorly studied animals. indeed, the hormonal pool of such animals is usually evaluated from the presence/absence of putative orthologues of mammalian enzymes. as the enzymatic machinery involved in hormonal metabolism has a very labile activity , equating orthology with functional identity might be unreliable.

the evolution of steroid receptors can be replaced in the more general context of ligand-nuclear receptor co-evolution. the evolution of the nr1h subfamily, that includes receptors for other steroidal compounds, like the major transcriptional regulator of bile salt synthesis farnesoid × receptor , the pregnane × receptor , the vitamin d receptor  or liver × receptor /ecdysone receptor , has been extensively studied and is not in line with the ligand exploitation model  <cit> . for instance, comparative functional studies of fxrs from various chordate species showed that the vertebrate fxrs bind "late" cholesterol derivatives  but are thought to have evolved from an ancestral fxr that bound early cholesterol derivatives   <cit> .

in other cases, the evolution of ligand binding is more "chaotic" with close orthologs having a selective ligand binding ability that varies extensively   <cit> .

these complex histories are probably linked to specific function of some of those nrs, considered as xenotoxic compounds "sensors". this tight relationship with the unstable environment probably makes receptors like fxr and especially pxr more prone to fast evolution  <cit> . yet they illustrate the impressive variety of scenarios of nr evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
in this article, we demonstrated that vertebrate ers  are estradiol receptors whilst non-vertebrate er  are not. the most parsimonous scenario proposes that the ancestral er was not able to bind estradiol and that it had another function. it later gained the ability to be regulated by estradiol, specifically in the vertebrate lineage. however, additional critical data remains to be discovered in poorly studied taxa  <cit> . to fully understand the evolution of steroid signaling pathway, a larger number of taxa need to be targeted for detailed comparative studies. more precisely, ers and other steroid receptors should be cloned from widely distributed taxa, especially in protostomes. enzymes involved in steroidogenesis should also be cloned and characterized, to understand the evolution of steroid availability. in order to avoid the blinders of a "vertebrate-centered" view, it is of particular importance to establish the steroid hormone repertoire of an enlarged animal panel, including more protostomes. the description of various endocrine systems will certainly be relevant to the early evolution of hormone signaling.

