BACKGROUND
alternative reproduction tactics  enable fish to exploit a wide spectrum of resources and to respond to conditions such as an imbalance of sexes in the population  <cit> . the opportunity for arts in fishes arises largely as a consequence of external fertilisation. access to eggs for fertilisation can be by adult males or alternatively by precociously mature parr variously described as 'satellite males' or 'sneakers'  <cit> . the mature parr succeed mainly through speed or through being inconspicuous to adult males who might otherwise drive them off. the approach taken by an individual fish is believed to depend on the balance of energetic cost against reproductive payoff. the energetic cost of adult male reproduction in salmon is very high and few adults return to reproduce a second time  <cit> . however, the payoff is also high because an adult male can dominate an egg-laying female and almost all offspring are sired by that male. the energetic cost for a juvenile male  may be much less but only a small number of eggs may be fertilised by that male.

the decision to mature precociously or remain immature for another winter has been modelled as a threshold trait  <cit> . a threshold level which takes into account parameters such as growth rate, body size and condition must be reached before the parr can mature. both genetic  <cit>  and environmental factors  <cit> , which include social structure, are believed to play a part in attaining this threshold. for example, where environmental factors have been largely excluded by removing wild fish to a hatchery, the proportion of mature parr offspring was related to the source river of the parents suggesting involvement of a genetic component  <cit> . however, an environmental component was intimated by a study that showed tributaries of a single river had size thresholds for precocity that depended on the altitude of the tributary  <cit> . precocity levels of 20% have been reported in scotland  <cit>  though levels as high as 65% have been reported for more southerly rivers  <cit>  possibly as a result of the warmer waters and faster growth of the fish.

in cultured salmonids levels of precocity can vary depending on the genetic stock but high levels lead to reduced productivity and can present a health risk to the fish population through the negative effect of testosterone on immune function  <cit> . in the wild, fish that fortuitously find a better food source may grow faster and become socially dominant. hatchery-reared fish are well fed yet growth and social hierarchy are still factors that influence the choice to mature precociously or undergo the parr-smolt transformation. in ireland, wild atlantic salmon generally remain in fresh water until the parr-smolt transformation at year 2+ or later  <cit> . they feed heavily in the marine environment for one year  or several years  before returning to their native streams to spawn. in the hatchery environment the majority of salmon parr are expected to smolt at year 1+: populations generally show a bimodal growth distribution in the previous autumn  with larger fish preparing to smolt while the minor group of smaller fish will smolt a year later  <cit> .

the juvenile male parr has three possible life trajectories: it can remain immature, it can undergo the parr-smolt transformation, or it can mature precociously prior to the parr-smolt transformation. precocious parr are more likely to be those juvenile parr that have grown rapidly; they then transfer their energies into gonad development at the expense of bodily growth. at some point the balance will change when the immature parr out-grow the sexually mature parr and the social structure may again change  <cit> .

the brain-pituitary-gonad  axis is the key regulator of sexual maturation. neuron stimulation of the brain leads to stimulation of the pituitary through gonadotropin releasing hormone  which releases relevant hormones, such as follicle stimulating hormone  and luteinising hormone  into the blood plasma for transport to the effector tissue. in the testes lh induces the production of testosterone which then affects various aspects of male physiology, secondary sexual characteristics and behaviour. in this study our goal was to develop a comprehensive picture of gene expression in the gonad and brain in precocious males, and compare mature parr testes to adult testes. however, in an extension to this study, we also aimed to develop resources and investigate interactions between sexual maturation and the parr-smolt transformation. there are now several genomic resources available to the atlantic salmon research community. the canadian grasp project  <cit> , the norwegian salmon genome project http://www.salmongenome.no and the eu salgene project http://www.salmongenome.no/cgi-bin/sgp.cgi all have provided large numbers of cdna sequences for the dna databases. we have developed a new atlantic salmon cdna microarray that is specifically targeted at sexual maturation and the parr-smolt transformation: this is the first description of this array. the focus was on generating single tissue libraries of key transition stages from subtracted salmon cdna libraries: we have observed that novel regulated genes are more likely to be represented in these subtracted libraries between two conditions than in single condition cdna libraries  <cit> .

adult maturation differs from precocious maturation in a number of important aspects; adult fish mature in fresh water after a sustained period of growth at sea having undergone the parr-smolt transformation either one or several years earlier. we have therefore also considered whether some of the identified genes differed in expression between precocious males and returning males.

RESULTS
microarray analysis of precocious testes
non-precocious parr were significantly longer and heavier than precocious parr . the difference in weight  and length  in the two populations were both shown to be significant . it is generally accepted that males which grow at a faster rate are more likely to become precocious than slower growing male parr  <cit> . however, once this life history choice has been made , sexual maturation proceeds at the expense of somatic growth.

total rna, isolated from precocious and non-precocious parr testes was shown to be intact by both northern blot and analysis using the agilent  <dig> bioanalyser. all samples used subsequently had rin values between  <dig> and  <dig>  <cit> . suppression subtractive hybridisation  was used to enrich for genes differentially expressed during the process of precocious maturation  <cit> . two pairs of libraries related directly to this study of precocity  while other ssh libraries related to different tissues  or different aspects of sexual maturation . furthermore, there was a selection of testes full-length  and undifferentiated gonad  clones from other sources both salmon  <cit>  and trout .

three pools each of four individual precocious testes were compared by microarray analysis to three pools of ten pooled non-precocious testes . although not allowing a direct comparison of individual fish this loop design provided scope to look at individual pools yet maintain a compact design with dye balance and a minimum number of hybridisations  <cit> . this data series has geo accession number gse <dig>  a list of significant differentially expressed clones  was compiled. this list of  <dig> clones was cut down to approximately  <dig> for sequencing based primarily on fold changes in expression . a shortened version of this table is provided as table  <dig>  most clones  showed homology to known database sequences, however 17% were found to have homology to unidentified ests and 8% 'failed' sequencing. 'failed' sequences encompassed short sequences , poor sequences , and no sequence . between pool variation was also examined in limma. for the p pools  <dig> of the  <dig> top clones were identified in all three pools and  <dig> in at least two of the pools. for the np pools  <dig> of the top  <dig> clones were identified in all three pools and all  <dig> in at least two of the pools. this indicated that no individual sample was excessively influencing the overall precocious versus non-precocious comparison.

1clones on this list may already have been sequenced in other projects . accession numbers are given where available.

2an upward arrow indicates up-regulation in precocious males

3blast accession numbers starting with tc indicate sequences in the tigr database.

from table  <dig> it would appear that the protein translational machinery has been substantially down-regulated in precocious males: genes for the heat shock proteins , the elongation factors  and the ribosomal proteins  attest to this. cathepsin b was up-regulated in the maturing testes as too was an antileukoproteinase similar to trout ovulatory protein : this suggests regulated re-structuring of the gonad in a similar manner to what happens in the ovary. apolipoprotein  e is involved in lipoprotein uptake and processing; it is a carrier for lipid into the cells and subsequently mediates the exchange of lipids and cholesterol in ldl. lipoprotein lipase , which digests plasma lipoproteins releasing lipids which apolipoproteins including apoe can internalize  <cit> , was also identified as an up-regulated gene in the precocious testes. possibly apoe is required for transport of cholesterol into the leydig cell mitochondria in order to make available cholesterol for steroidogenesis or for transport of lipid needed either as a energy source or for cell membrane biosynthesis in gametogenesis  <cit> . anti-mullerian hormone  was strongly down-regulated in the precocious male testes. amh has growth factor activity with a tgfbeta-like c-terminal domain and is known to have roles in mullerian duct regression, sex determination, sex differentiation and gonad mesoderm development  <cit> . its role in testicular differentiation in fish was suggested when a spermatogenesis-preventing substance was isolated from eel  <cit>  and further reports confirm significant regulation in other fish  <cit> . another up-regulated gene was gonadotropin-releasing hormone receptor . the expression of gonadotropin-releasing hormones  and their receptors in the gonads of fish and many other species has been reported previously  <cit>  and suggests paracrine/autocrine control on gonad development. although in fish there are multiple forms of gnrh peptides and gnrh receptors there appears to be one form of gnrh and gnrh-r in the gonad which varies in expression considerably depending on reproduction status  <cit> . increased gnrh-r <dig>  as reported in this study, is associated with the later stages of spermatogenesis in rainbow trout  <cit> . another gene more often associated with the pituitary that shows differential expression in the testes is growth hormone . down-regulation, as seen here, probably relates to the full maturity of these testes  and the higher reported levels of receptors for growth hormone in recrudescent testes  <cit> ; if gene transcription is being switched off lower levels might be expected that in the immature parr where levels may be quite steady or rising in preparation for the parr-smolt transformation  <cit> .

quantitative pcr on pooled precocious testis
in order to confirm the findings of the microarray analysis on the testes tissue a number of genes were selected and further investigated using real-time quantitative pcr. these qpcr experiments were carried out on the same pools used for microarray hybridisations. several potential housekeeping genes were analysed for use as a reference gene in quantitative pcr. our goal was to identify a gene that could be reliably used as a reference in both the precocious samples and the adult maturing samples. most of the genes examined  were significantly differentially regulated in at least one developmental stage, but changes in succinate dehydrogenase  expression levels were not significant  . relative expression was therefore calculated using the delta delta c method  <cit>  using succinate dehydrogenase  as the reference gene. preliminary quantitative pcr experiments were set up to analyse the expression patterns of the genes from the panel using biological pools of non-precocious parr testes and precocious parr testes . nine genes were selected for qpcr based mainly on the number of times the gene was independently identified on the array and on an examination of both fold changes and levels of significance. of the genes selected only cathepsin b showed a discrepancy between microarray analysis and qpcr. it appears that the microarray ssh clone was similar to genbank accession no. nm_ <dig>  but that the qpcr primers were designed to est eg <dig>  this est is also described as 'cathepsin b' but is a different isoform - different enough that the  primer is specific for this form. it is open to speculation why one form may be down-regulated more than 2-fold  while, as the microarray suggests, another form appears up-regulated more than 2-fold. the fold changes in differential regulation were frequently larger by qpcr than by microarray: amh levels by microarray analysis were ~ <dig> -fold down-regulated in precocity yet qpcr showed the fold down-regulation to be as much as 59-fold.

quantitative pcr on individual testis
after validation using fish pools, qrt-pcr of individual fish was carried out on a number of the genes . as stated previously amh was known to have roles in mullerian duct regression and sex differentiation so it was an interesting candidate. guanine nucleotide binding protein  beta polypeptide 2-like  <dig> , also known as rack <dig>  plays a part in cellular signalling pathways  <cit>  and is known to compete with hsp <dig> for binding to hypoxia-inducible factor 1alpha   <cit> . both alpha- and beta-globin were down-regulated in the testes in precocity and, like type  <dig> collagen , they were identified more than once independently on the array. in order to add value to this data maturing adult testes sampled in july and november were also analysed: whereas november testes are likely to be almost mature , july testes will be at a much earlier stage of maturation . all expression levels were normalised to the succinate dehydrogenase reference gene .

1clone included a microsatellite

amh expression in individual precocious testes was down-regulated approximately 20- to 1070-fold in different individuals. adult maturing testes followed a similar pattern where the more mature november adults showed high levels of down-regulation  and the less mature july adults showed only  <dig> - to  <dig> -fold down-regulation. there was more variability in the precocious levels of amh expression than the november adults; though the number of the latter is very low , this might suggest that maturation is much more synchronised in the latter. amh levels were also generally lower in the november adults than in the precocious fish - five of the seven precocious males had levels much higher than the three november adults.

guanine nucleotide binding protein  beta polypeptide 2-like  <dig>  showed a similar pattern of expression to amh, with down-regulation in precocious parr and in november adults compared to non-precocious parr and july adults though fold changes in expression level were small, approximately 1/ <dig> those of amh. collagen  and beta-globin also showed down-regulation in precocious parr but july adult levels were lower than november adults. statistical analysis by kruskal-wallis and dunn's multiple comparisons tests demonstrated that expression in the precocious testes was significantly different from that in the non-precocious testes for all genes  as it was also for july v november maturing adults. for amh and gnb2l <dig> expression in precocious testes was similar to that of adult november testes and expression in non-precocious testes was similar to that of adult july testes . for beta-globin non-precocious testes were significantly different from all other testes types .

microarray analysis of precocious brains
precocity effects on brain gene expression were also measured by microarray analysis. here two pools of five precocious brains were compared directly to two pools of five non-precocious parr brains . data was analysed with limma to determine which genes were differentially regulated between the pools for the two tissue types . this data series has geo accession number gse <dig>  an initial list of  <dig> clones  was reduced to a top  <dig> clones  and  <dig> that were sequenced are presented . a shortened version of this table is provided as table  <dig>  the fold changes in expression level were small compared to changes in testes expression with a maximum of  <dig>  fold up-regulation for an unknown est and  <dig>  fold down-regulation for vasotocin- <dig>  approximately 50% of the top  <dig> clones were derived from brain-related libraries. alpha-globin was identified five times on the array and beta-globin three times: both genes showed consistent down-regulation of  <dig>  fold and  <dig>  fold respectively. other genes that were identified more than once included beta-tubulin , elongation factor  <dig> alpha , apolipoprotein e , suppressor of g <dig> allele of skp <dig>  and vasotocin- <dig> ; the only inconsistency was that one copy of g <dig> allele of skp <dig> was up-regulated  <dig> × and the other copy was down-regulated  <dig> ×. several of the clones represented definite ests which were highly homologous to other ests in the ncbi and tigr databases but for which identities were ambiguous. again between pool variation was examined in limma. of the  <dig> genes showing significant differential regulation  between the precocious and non-precocious brain samples,  <dig> also showed significant differential expression between one of the biological replicates, i.e. pb <dig> v pb <dig>  or npb <dig> v npb <dig> . this is possibly a symptom of the small expression changes and subsequent limitations of the analysis; however 84% of the genes were still unique to the precocious versus non-precocious comparison. from a physiology perspective it could also be argued that the brain has multiple roles to play at any one time and is therefore more affected by the environment than the testes. individual fish may thus, depending on slight variations in conditions such as social status, availability of food, etc., show more variation in brain expression than in gonad expression. interestingly all eight globin clones were included in the  <dig> clone overlap with the pb <dig> v pb <dig> comparison and isotocin and both vasotocin clones were included in the  <dig> clone overlap with the npb <dig> v npb <dig> comparison.

see footnotes to table  <dig>  in addition:

4first 539bp do not align to myelin p0-like glycoprotein : 318/ <dig>  align to s. salar est ge77456

quantitative pcr on pooled brains
in order to validate the findings of the microarray analysis on the brain tissue a number of genes were selected and further investigated using real-time quantitative pcr. these qpcr experiments were carried out on pools of five brains . the reference gene used was ubiquitin . changes suggested by microarray analysis were generally confirmed by qrt-pcr, however, unidentified clone 02a <dig> and beta-globin, both of which appeared down-regulated on the array, were shown to be relatively unchanged by qpcr . melanin-concentrating hormone , which was in the top  <dig> list, appeared to be up-regulated on the array in precocity. this gene was examined in  <dig> precocious individuals  and in  <dig> non-precocious individuals . on average mch was up-regulated approximately  <dig>  fold in precocious males.

although many studies of male precocity in salmonids have reported the association of physical features of fish with life trajectories  <cit>  it is only recently that a number of papers have reported the use of genomic approaches to investigate genetic changes associated with these life trajectory decisions in salmonids  <cit>  and other species  <cit> . the array described herein has been generated from clones which have been selected in relevant tissues for their role in processes that are likely to be involved in precocity. ssh is a commonly used molecular technique to enrich for genes differentially expressed between two populations  <cit> . here it has been used to enrich for precocity- and maturation-related genes in brain, brain-related and testes tissue. furthermore, as the parr-smolt transformation and sexual maturation are often considered competing processes, smolting ssh libraries  may also be relevant to precocity.

in all  <dig> genes were determined to be differentially expressed between precocious and non-precocious gonad pools  and  <dig> genes between precocious and non-precocious brain pools . in both cases there were approximately  <dig> times more genes down-regulated than were up-regulated. this suggests a turning down of non-essential processes and the turning up of specific pathways. some patterns of expression suggested the involvement of specific physiological processes. however, both the relatively small number of unambiguously identified genes and the paucity of go terms for these meant that a thorough go analysis was not possible. gene expression changes in the brain were small but this is reflected by other papers on brain expression  <cit> . it is a common observation that brain expression changes are often less than 2-fold which has been noted in fish  <cit>  and in other species  <cit> . microarrays have been reported before to show smaller changes in expression than the more robust technique of qpcr and indeed we have found this ourselves in related studies  <cit> . alternatively, the microarray signal represents all targets that hybridise to the probe whereas qpcr being primer-based may distinguish between different targets and be more discriminatory.

apolipoprotein e was down-regulated in the brain whereas it had been up-regulated in the gonad . it is unlikely that the specific role of apoe is the same in both brain and testes. apoe is involved in neural regeneration of the peripheral nervous system through the redistribution of cholesterol  <cit>  therefore it is possible that it is in this role that apoe affects brain development in the precocious male. down-regulation of both isotocin  and vasotocin was evident in the brain of precocious male fish, however all three clones representing these genes on the array were also differentially expressed between the two npb pools . this suggests some important variation in the ten non-precocious individuals that made up the two pools. up-regulation of vasotocin, and to a lesser extent isotocin, is more often associated with reproduction especially through the known effects of vasotocin on social behaviour  <cit> . however, differences in the effects of vasotocin administration on aggression and/or courtship are clearly seen between fish species with some showing increased and others decreased aggression  <cit> . there are also seasonal variations in transcript levels of both vasotocin and isotocin in, for example, the masu salmon which in addition show changes between immature parr and precocious males  <cit> . it has been observed that the protein levels of these hormones do not correspond to the levels of their mrnas - vasotocin transcript levels are low in nov in immature parr when vasotocin protein levels are near maximal  <cit> . furthermore, vasotocin is also involved in osmoregulation, cardiovascular activity, stress and metabolism  <cit> . because precocity possibly interferes with normal progress through the parr-smolt transformation, the relative decrease in vasotocin we observe in precocious fish may be linked to an early regulatory effect on osmoregulation, and the variation we observe in the non-precocious individuals may be due to early preparation for smolting in some fish.

another gene that appeared to be up-regulated  in the brain was melanin-concentrating hormone . mch is expressed as a pro-hormone mainly in the hypothalamus and processed in the pituitary where the mature short peptide  stimulates the aggregation of melanosome in melanophores resulting in the silvering of the fish  <cit> . this is somewhat at odds with the expected inhibition of silvering in precocious fish where the parr-smolt transformation is delayed. receptors for mch are, however, distributed much more widely than the brain and hypothalamus suggesting that the functional roles of mch  are much more diverse than melanin concentration  <cit> . the dna sequences of the mch <dig> and mch <dig> isoforms of chinook salmon mch are very similar and are unlikely to be distinguished on the microarray. because both mch isoform sequences are not available for salmo salar, two fragments were isolated and sequenced from salmo salar cdna using primers based on the chinook sequences  <cit> . quantitative pcr  of individual samples from the pb <dig> and npb <dig> pools showed approximate  <dig> -fold up-regulation of mch <dig> and  <dig> -fold up-regulation of mch <dig> in the precocious samples. mch <dig> levels  were at least  <dig> times lower than mch <dig> levels  so comparisons of mch <dig> levels between individuals were not reliable; however there was still considerable variability in the levels of mch <dig> in the ten individuals. an approximate 290-fold difference  between the highest and the lowest individuals may reflect sampling inconsistency where some specialised regions of the brain may have been mistakenly included .

alpha- and beta-globin gene expression was down-regulated in the precocious brain as they had been in the testes. surprisingly all eight globin clones were also differentially expressed between the two pools of precocious brains ; this was eight of the nine sequenced clones in a list of twelve clones . although the melting point curve on qpcr showed a single peak, it was noticeable during the optimisation of beta-globin primers that there were at least two forms amplified. haemoglobin multiplicity in teleosts is common: embryonic forms give way to adult forms and it also has been suggested that fish which travel great distances across temperature differentials show more multiplicity  <cit> .

there are some interesting similarities and differences between our precocious males and those of aubin-horth  <cit> . both studies show down-regulation of genes in precocious males was more pronounced than up-regulation; we see down-regulation of glutamine synthetase and rpl13a which ties in with the above study but we also see down-regulation of vasotocin, isotocin and type ii keratin k <dig> which seems at odds with the aubin-horth study. also alpha- and beta-globin are oppositely regulated in both studies. possibly the differences seen in the two studies relates to the different times of fish sampling which were october for the aubin-horth study and three months later in january for our study. we chose to collect both groups of males in january when precocity was externally evident . in january the testes could therefore be best described as mature, possibly on the point of regression whereas in october they are likely to be recrudescent. since maturation is controlled by the hpg axis, in october the brain will be signalling the gonads to mature and to begin steroidogenesis, and accompanying this there will ensue a range of behavioural changes. therefore it is possibly not surprising that the aubin-horth study shows up-regulation of genes involved in reproduction and this study shows some opposite effects.

furthermore, our control group  may be preparing for the parr-smolt transformation . there may therefore be some changes in brain precocity expression which are confounded by brain smoltification expression. in a separate experiment , the same genes were followed in a brain smolt time-course from january to may. from this it is clear that most of these genes do not change significantly over the period of smoltification and therefore it is unlikely that down-regulation in precocity is really up-regulation in smoltification. it is however interesting that in the aubin-horth study several genes, including beta-actin, cathepsin d, an elongation factor, beta tubulin and both vasotocin and isotocin, showed relative up-regulation in 'early migratory' fish that also showed up-regulation in our immature parr.

the fish used in this study are from a hatchery-reared stock that has been developed from a small number of originator males and females and should therefore be of relatively homogeneous genotype. we do not necessarily expect that hatchery and wild salmon will behave in the same way. it has been shown that the rearing environment of atlantic salmon has an effect on gene expression and additionally that this effect interacts with mating tactic  <cit> . in a study that used a cichlid microarray to compare wild and laboratory reared salmon from the same source it was clear that some differences in expression between immature male brains and precocious brains were dependent on the rearing environment  <cit> . this in itself suggests that the sneaker tactic/phenotype does not develop by one unique route and therefore that gene expression profiles may differ from one individual to another due to environment. also it must always be remembered that for many regulators such as isotocin and vasotocin, because of storage, secretion and blood clearance considerations, transcript levels in the brain and gonad may not directly correlate with protein levels in the plasma, and that plasma levels do not necessarily reflect activation of the system as the hormone receptor in the effector tissue may be down-regulated to prevent effects  <cit> . as noted above, isotocin and vasotocin blood plasma levels may be high leading to activation of a pathway or process but transcript levels could be low because either the hormone was released from stores  or a feedback mechanism was down-regulating transcription. it is a complicated issue where the specific biology is known to vary between different fish species and even within species of the family salmonidae

CONCLUSIONS
a custom-built salmonid cdna microarray has been used to compare expression changes in the brain and gonad during the process of precocious sexual maturation in atlantic salmon. transcriptional regulation in the brain was minor compared to the testes. microarray analysis suggested a general down-regulation of housekeeping functions and more specific up-regulation of a number of genes. distinct expression profiles for both brain and gonad will be determined by maturation stage  and environmental factors. anti-mullerian hormone plays a major role in the development of the maturing gonad as too does lipid mobilisation through the apolipoproteins and lipoprotein lipase.

