BACKGROUND
the human pathogens mycobacterium tuberculosis and corynebacterium diphtheriae, as well as many related species of the order corynebacteriales, share a distinctive cell wall architecture that plays an important role in virulence and imparts effective protection against harsh environmental conditions and resistance to therapies  <cit> . one unique feature of these cell walls is the presence of long-chain α-alkyl, β-hydroxy fatty acids, called mycolic acids, which form a second bilayer close to the cell surface that is similar to the outer membrane of gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . the enzymes and regulatory mechanisms involved in biosynthesis of the cell walls are primary targets for the development of new drugs.

a great deal is known about these bacterial cell walls . the plasma membranes are rich in phospholipids, such as phosphatidylglycerol, diphosphatidylglycerol and phosphatidylinositol . while inositol is an essential polyol in eukaryotes, in eubacteria it is present only in the order corynebacteriales where it serves both as a cell wall component and as a building block of mycothiol , the major antioxidant in mycobacteria, similar to glutathione  <cit> . one function of pi is to anchor cell wall lipoglycans, specifically pi mannosides , lipomannan  and liporarabinomannan , to the plasma membrane  <cit> . the biogenesis of lam is performed in consecutive steps in the following order: pi→pim→lm→lam.

in mycobacteria, there is a three-step process for synthesis of pi. step  <dig> is cyclization of glucose-6-phosphate to 1d-myo-inositol-3-phosphate, a reaction that is catalyzed by a myo-inositol phosphate synthase, ino <dig>   <cit> . in step  <dig>  the 1d-myo-inositol-3-phosphate is dephosphorylated by inositol monophosphatase   <cit>  to yield myo-inositol. step  <dig> is the transfer of diacylglycerol  from cytidine diphosphate-diacylglycerol  to myo-inositol by a pi synthase, pgsa   <cit> . the enzymes ino <dig> and pgsa are essential for the viability of mycobacteria <cit> . an ino <dig> mutant of m. tuberculosis grows in vitro only in the presence of high inositol concentrations and was no longer able to kill scid mice . in mycobacterium smegmatis, ino <dig> has been shown to be essential for growth in the absence of exogenous inositol  <cit> . ino <dig> has therefore been proposed as a target for the development of new antibiotics  <cit> .

in contrast to the wealth of knowledge about the biogenesis of cell walls, little is known about the regulatory circuits that control these processes  <cit> . ipsa was chosen as target for further studies from a set of mutants strains as a Δipsa mutant displayed a drastically altered cell morphology hinting towards a function in the control of cell wall biosynthesis. the catabolism of myo-inositol has been examined in c. glutamicum <cit>  but regulation of myo-inositol formation has not been deeply investigated up until now. here, a regulator of inositol synthesis in the model organism c. glutamicum is described. named ipsa, it is a novel laci-type regulator that acts as an inositol-dependent transcriptional activator of the myo-inositol phosphate synthase gene. ipsa function is conserved throughout corynebacteria and mycobacteria, including the prominent pathogenic species c. diphtheriae and m. tuberculosis.

RESULTS
ipsa is a novel laci-type regulator conserved in the corynebacteriales
ipsa was assigned by homology to the laci family of transcriptional regulators, which often coordinate the available nutrients with the expression of catabolic genes  <cit> . the corresponding genomic loci display a remarkable level of conservation across the corynebacteriales . in previous studies, the structure of ipsa  was analyzed ; its physiological function is the subject of this study.

ipsa deletion affects cell shape and growth
to gain insight into the function and possible target genes of ipsa, an in-frame deletion mutant was constructed. growth rates and final backscatter of Δipsa cells were significantly below control levels using minimal medium with glucose as carbon source, and these shortfalls increased in magnitude with successive subcultivation . the morphology of the mutant strain was altered, as revealed by fluorescence microscopy with staining of dna ) and membranes . Δipsa cells formed chain-like structures and failed to divide properly. dna in the cells was unevenly distributed and was frequently found in the extracellular space, indicative of severe damage to the cell membrane and/or the cell wall . membrane staining revealed several intact cell septa in the unshaped mutant cells.

both the growth defect and altered morphology could be partially overcome by plasmid-encoded ipsa under control of the native or an inducible promoter . these efforts revealed that increased levels of ipsa also affect growth of c. glutamicum. full restoration of the wild-type phenotype was only achieved when ipsa was reintegrated into the mutant strain  and expressed from its native promoter . when the cells were cultivated with myo-inositol instead of glucose as carbon source, no differences were observed between the wild-type and Δipsa strains in terms of growth and morphology .

the impact of ipsa mutation on transcription
to elucidate the transcriptional changes caused by the deletion of ipsa, dna microarray experiments were performed. more than  <dig> genes showed alterations in mrna level greater than a factor of  <dig>  using cells in the exponential growth phase  cultivated in minimal medium with glucose as carbon source .

the expression of the gene cg <dig>  which encodes a myo-inositol phosphate synthase , and of the operon , which encodes an uncharacterized abc transporter, was reduced by more than a factor of ten in the mutant strain . other downregulated genes included a flavin-containing monooxygenase , a hypothetical endoglucanase , and two further transporters  . among the strongly upregulated genes was a cluster encoding enzymes for inositol catabolism , an operon encoding both mene and a putative integral membrane protein , and a putative dinucleotide-binding enzyme . many of the affected genes are components of the dtxr stimulon, which plays a central role in iron homeostasis in c. glutamicum <cit> . we speculate that these changes are the result of an impaired iron uptake of the mutant strain due to the defects in the cell wall. in combination with the observed growth phenotype of the mutant strain, the alterations in gene expression indicate that ipsa is a major regulator of inositol-derived cell wall components.

mrna ratios  of ipsa target genes in microarray experiments are shown. presented are all genes where binding of ipsa could be shown in electrophoretic mobility shift assays  as well as ipsa itself, confirming the deletion.

identification of direct ipsa target promoters
the microarray experiments revealed several putative target genes of ipsa. to determine whether these genes are directly regulated by ipsa, the promoter regions of the respective genes were tested in electrophoretic mobility shift assays  for the formation of complexes with purified ipsa protein. we analyzed the promoters of all genes that were more than fourfold regulated but excluded ribosomal proteins and genes belonging to the dtxr/ripa regulon. dna fragments  covering the promoter regions of putative target genes, were incubated with increasing ipsa-his concentrations. ipsa-his bound with high affinity to the promoter regions of cg <dig> and ino <dig>  and with lower affinity to the promoter regions of cg <dig> , cg <dig> , cg <dig> , cg <dig> , and cg <dig>  .

determination of the ipsa dna binding site
using emsas, two separate binding sites were identified in the promoter of ino <dig> and one in the promoter of cg <dig> . analysis of these sites using the motif-based sequence analysis tool meme  <cit>  revealed a conserved palindromic motif, which was subsequently verified by mutational analysis . in particular, the central six base pairs appear to be crucial for ipsa binding. the preliminary motif was used to search for further binding sites in putative target genes and across the genome of c. glutamicum. binding sites were identified by emsas using oligonucleotides in the promoters of cg <dig>  cg <dig>  cg <dig> and cg <dig> . the identified motifs were used to define the ipsa consensus motif shown in figure 3c.

myo-inositol is an effector molecule of ipsa
the enzyme encoded by the main ipsa target gene is ino <dig>  a myo-inositol phosphate synthase that catalyzes the formation of 1d-myo-inositol-3-phosphate from glucose-6-phosphate  <cit> . we tested several metabolites involved in the relevant pathway for their influence on the formation of the ipsa-dna complex. a clear backshift was observed for myo-inositol but not for 1d-myo-inositol-1-phosphate, 1d-myo-inositol-3-phosphate or glucose-6-phosphate . the effect of myo-inositol could be observed at concentrations down to  <dig>  mm . this effect is specific for ipsa dna binding, as the addition of up to 50 mm myo-inositol did not have any effect on the formation of an unrelated protein-dna complex .

ipsa is required for inositol-dependent regulation of ino1
the major function of ipsa revealed thus far is the activation of ino <dig> in the absence of external inositol. consistent with this, the growth and cell morphology of the Δipsa strain is complemented by the constitutive expression of ino <dig> under standard conditions . to study the influence of ipsa and myo-inositol on the expression of ino <dig> in vivo, we fused the ino <dig> promoter to eyfp  and monitored the fluorescence output of the wild-type and the Δipsa strain during growth on glucose and myo-inositol . strong promoter activity was observed in the wild-type during growth on glucose. expression of eyfp was significantly decreased in the ipsa deletion strain and was lower still when either strain was cultivated with myo-inositol as the carbon source.

ipsa function is conserved in c. diphtheriae and m. tuberculosis
the conservation of ipsa in the corynebacteriales suggests that it may play a similar role in pathogenic relatives. to assess this possibility, we tested in vivo complementation of c. glutamicum Δipsa with the ipsa homologs of m. tuberculosis  and c. diphtheriae . partial complementation of growth and morphology was achieved . growth was still slightly retarded but the final od was significantly increased in comparison with the Δipsa strain. likewise, the morphological phenotype of the complemented strains fell in between the wild-type and the Δipsa strain, with a slightly better complementation by dip <dig> compared to rv <dig>  most cells displayed the wild-type morphology and, while some chain-like cell clusters were observed , these were shorter than clusters of the Δipsa strain .

we also tested the binding of ipsa to the promoter regions of c. diphtheriae and m. tuberculosis homologs of cg <dig> and cg <dig> using emsas . c. glutamicum ipsa bound strongly to the c. diphtheriae promoters dip <dig> and dip <dig> and the binding sites were determined . in m. tuberculosis, rv0046c is organized in an operon with rv0047c. a binding site was identified within the open reading frame  of rv0047c, suggesting the occurrence of a second promoter upstream of ino <dig> .

mycothiol synthesis is abolished in c. glutamicum ∆ipsa
besides being a precursor of pi and derived lipids, myo-inositol is one of the building blocks of mycothiol, the major antioxidant of corynebacteria and mycobacteria. therefore, we measured mycothiol in a set of our strains  using a method previously published for c. glutamicum <cit> . the mycothiol peak was identified by comparison of wild-type chromatograms with those of a mutant depleted in mycothiol synthesis . to proof that the corresponding peak, lacking in Δmshc, represents mycothiol, thiols were blocked with nmm  prior to derivatization with bromobimane. in this sample, the largest peak of the wild-type at  <dig>  minutes was indeed absent the two control samples. in fact, this mycothiol peak was absent in the Δipsa strain but could fully be restored by plasmid-based expression of ipsa . interestingly, the mycothiol measurements showed a partial complementation with the ipsa homologs from c. diphtheriae and m. tuberculosis, which is in line with our previous findings regarding growth and morphology of cross-complemented strains .

pi-based glycolipid synthesis is lost in c. glutamicum ∆ipsa
to study the effect of ipsa on the formation of pi-based phosphoglycolipids, -labeled polar lipids were extracted from wild-type and ∆ipsa c. glutamicum. the glycolipid profiles were examined using two-dimensional thin-layer chromatography  . the wild-type strain showed presence of acpim <dig>  pi, gl-a  and gl-x  in lipid extracts as compared to known standards and previous studies  <cit> , isolated from the cells grown with either myo-inositol or glucose. under normal conditions, c. glutamicum produces both pi and gl-x, which is an alternative glycolipid anchor to pi for synthesis of cg-lm. the glycolipid gl-x is derived from gl-a, its precursor product. although both pi and gl-x can be visualized on tlc analysis, the formation of gl-x is distinguished only in the case of mutants lacking pi, as both gl-x and pi do not separate out as distinct spots  <cit> . however, gl-a appears as a distinct spot on the tlc results in both wild-type and mutant strains. for convenience, the tlc results for polar lipid extracts from the ipsa mutant defective in pi synthesis have been marked to depict gl-x at the same position at which pi is depicted in the wild-type and complemented strains. the labeling for gl-a remained unchanged. interestingly, the complete absence of acpim <dig> was observed in lipid extracts isolated from c. glutamicum ∆ipsa when cultured in minimal media supplemented with glucose indicating the loss of pi-based glycolipid synthesis in the mutant . the lipid profiles of complemented strains c. glutamicum Δipsa::pk18-ipsa and c. glutamicum Δipsa harboring cg <dig> and dip <dig> in plasmid pan <dig>  were identical to the wild-type when grown on glucose, demonstrating successful complementation of the loss of gene function in these strains . however, the lipid extracts from c. glutamicum Δipsa harboring rv <dig> in plasmid pan <dig> cultured under the same conditions displayed no complementation as none of the components was stained with phosphate stain . the lipid extracts isolated from the mutant and complemented strains cultured in minimal media supplemented with myo-inositol were similar to wild-type, with distinct acpim <dig> and pi production .

analysis of lipoglycan extracts
since the lipoglycans lm and lam are built on pims which are mannosylated products of pi, the effect of ipsa was also studied on these lipoglycans extracted from the wild-type, c. glutamicum ∆ipsa and the complemented strains . lam and cg-lm-a/b were clearly present in extracts from the wild-type cultured in glucose or myo-inositol. however, the lipoglycan extracts from the mutant c. glutamicum ∆ipsa grown on glucose revealed no lam while a band corresponding to cg-lm-b could be observed. on glucose the complemented strains c. glutamicum Δipsa::pk18-ipsa and c. glutamicum Δipsa containing plasmid encoded cg <dig> and dip <dig> exhibited lipoglycan profiles identical to the wild-type as distinct bands corresponding to both lam and cg-lm-a/b. however, no band corresponding to lam was observed in lipoglycan extracts of c. glutamicum Δipsa complemented with rv3575c in pan <dig> plasmid grown in minimal media supplemented with glucose. instead, a band corresponding to cg-lm-b was evident. the lipoglycan extracts isolated from the mutant and complemented strains cultured in minimal media supplemented with myo-inositol were similar to wild-type with distinct lm and lam .

discussion
the metabolic pathways for biogenesis of the cell wall in mycobacteria and corynebacteria are well characterized, with few gaps remaining to be filled. in contrast, the regulation of these processes remains largely undiscovered. here, we describe the novel transcriptional regulator ipsa, which functions as an activator of ino <dig> and other target genes most likely involved in the synthesis of inositol-derived cell wall components and mycothiol  in corynebacteria and mycobacteria . myo-inositol was shown to act as effector of ipsa and our studies are consistent with a conserved function for this regulator throughout the corynebacteriales.

the polyol myo-inositol has an important function in mycobacteria and corynebacteria: it serves as the key building block for a large class of cell wall phospholipids, as well as for the antioxidant msh  <cit> . several studies have illustrated the potential of the underlying biosynthetic pathways as putative drug targets  <cit> . for example, an ino <dig> mutant of m. tuberculosis can only grow in the presence of high concentrations of myo-inositol  <cit>  and a m. tuberculosis mutant defective in msh biosynthesis requires catalase for growth on plates  <cit> . our studies have shown that the deletion of ipsa leads to a complete loss of mycothiol biosynthesis, demonstrating the importance of ipsa also for this metabolic pathway.

myo-inositol and its phosphate derivatives are common substances in eukaryotes and are therefore present in significant quantities in the natural habitats of m. tuberculosis, c. diphtheriae  and c. glutamicum   <cit> . it has been shown that myo-inositol can be used by c. glutamicum as a carbon and energy source, and several transporters, enzymes and regulators of the catabolic pathway have been identified  <cit> . in the present study, microarray analysis revealed that the two main target genes of ipsa, ino <dig> and cg <dig>  are strongly downregulated during growth on inositol compared to growth on glucose, which is in line with ipsa being an inositol-dependent activator of both genes/operons  <cit> .

bioinformatic analysis of ipsa and its homologs in other corynebacteria and mycobacteria revealed conservation of the gene among these species . in many genomes of the corynebacteriales, ipsa is located next to znuacb, which encodes a putative zinc transport system regulated by zur  <cit> . furthermore, genes involved in the biosynthesis of trehalose , which is also an important component of the cell wall of the corynebacteriales, are frequently located downstream of ipsa, but their orientations are divergent  <cit> . the product of the main target gene of ipsa, ino <dig>  contains a zinc ion in its catalytic center and needs nad+ for its reaction  <cit> .

the transcriptional organization of ino <dig> differs between corynebacteria and mycobacteria. while ino <dig> is the only gene in the transcriptional unit in corynebacteria, it is cotranscribed with a preceded, uncharacterized padr-like transcriptional regulator in mycobacteria <cit>  . given the genomic organization, we suspect that this regulator is an additional player in the control of ino <dig> expression.

that ino <dig> is the main target gene of ipsa is supported by the observation that the ipsa phenotype was complemented by overexpression of ino <dig>  one could assume that this is the only real target gene of ipsa, but it is not unlikely, that other target genes only appear to be important under different conditions, for example, another carbon source or certain stress conditions. based on dna microarrays and emsas we identified several other direct target genes of ipsa, all of which were previously uncharacterized. the operon cg <dig> to cg <dig> encodes an abc transporter of unknown function. it may be involved in the uptake of inositol carbohydrates required for cell wall biogenesis. the product of cg <dig> is annotated as a cell envelope-related transcriptional regulator of the lytr type. it has a transmembrane domain and is conserved in corynebacteria and mycobacteria. cg <dig> is a putative dinucleotide-binding enzyme that has some similarity with coenzyme f420-dependent nadp oxidoreductases. cg <dig> is annotated as a flavin-containing monooxygenase and has, like cg <dig>  a nad binding domain. as many msh-dependent detoxification reactions require nad or nadp as cofactors  <cit> , cg <dig> and cg <dig> may be involved in cofactor supply or regeneration for these processes. the operon cg <dig> to cg <dig> encodes a putative integral membrane protein of the ypha family and mene, an o-succinylbenzoic acid-coa ligase. although the functions of the target genes besides ino <dig> are largely unknown, there are some clear links to cell wall synthesis and regulation, and likely also to msh-associated reactions. thus, our analysis of the ipsa regulon has revealed several novel and interesting targets for further studies.

among the target genes of ipsa are not only activated but also repressed genes. the localization of the ipsa binding site in the particular promoter regions matches very well with the type of regulation . for the activated genes  ipsa binding sites are located upstream of the - <dig> region. in the promoters of the repressed genes  the ipsa binding sites overlap with the - <dig> and/or the - <dig> region. this is a further indication that the altered mrna level we see in the dna microarrays is a direct effect of the ipsa deletion.

the structure-function relationship of ipsa is comparable to other members of the laci family of transcriptional regulators. they all contain a dna-binding domain at the n-terminus of the protein, composed of three α-helices that form a helix-turn-helix motif that binds to the major groove of the operator. the tetramerization of laci takes place at the c-terminus, at residues  <dig> to  <dig>    <cit> . these residues are missing in ipsa, which is in agreement with our gel filtration analysis that indicated a dimeric conformation for ipsa. a computational analysis of many laci regulators and binding sites revealed a highly conserved hydrophobic amino acid at position  <dig> , which inserts into a conserved, central cg group in the operator. this group is present in both binding motifs of the ino <dig> promoter in c. glutamicum <cit> .

the formation of 1d-myo-inositol-3-phosphate from glucose-6-phosphate by ino <dig> represents the first step of pi synthesis; it provides the scaffold on which cell wall components such as pims, lm and lam are built. our chromatographic analysis of radiolabelled polar lipid extracts of the mutant c. glutamicum ∆ipsa grown in minimal media with glucose generated a characteristic phenotype, namely that the mutant strain was deficient in acpim <dig> and pi while gl-a and gl-x were unaffected. in addition, the mutant strain grown on minimal media supplemented with glucose failed to produce pi-based lam. instead, the gl-x-based lm, cg-lm-b was apparent on sodium dodecyl sulfate polyacrylamide gel electrophoresis  analysis of lipoglycans, which could explain why c. glutamicum ∆ipsa can grow over several cultivations without supplementation with myo-inositol  <cit> . this lm-b was not found in mycobacteria. the polar lipid and lipoglycan extracts from the complemented strain c. glutamicum ∆ipsa::pk18-ipsa grown on minimal media supplemented with glucose displayed normal levels of acpim <dig>  pi, lm and lam biosynthesis, with profiles identical to wild-type. these data are consistent with the view that ipsa affects an early stage of pi biosynthesis, namely the expression of ino <dig>  in fact, the polar lipid and lipoglycan extracts obtained from Δipsa complemented with plasmid-encoded ino <dig> also displayed lipid profiles identical to that of the wild-type, indicating involvement of ipsa in transcriptional activation of ino <dig> expression. the results imply that in absence of ipsa, pi-based pims, lm and lam are not synthesized as the mutant strain no longer produces the inositol monophosphate synthase required for synthesis of myo-inositol, a substrate for pi production. the polar lipid extracts of c. glutamicum ∆ipsa complemented with the homolog from c. diphtheriae exhibited a profile akin to wild-type. thus dip <dig> is a functional equivalent of ipsa and can be designated as transcriptional activator of ino <dig>  in this pathogenic species. for the homolog of rv <dig> the situation is not as clear as for dip <dig>  although we see a positive effect on growth and a partial complementation in terms of mycothiol biosynthesis and morphological phenotype, no pi derived lipids could be identified on the tlc results. one possible explanation for this is that most of the inositol formed is channeled towards mycothiol. consequently, a low amount of pi derived lipids might be formed, sufficient for partial complementation of the phenotype but still too low for detection by tlc. furthermore, the differences in m. tuberculosis ipsa structure, binding affinity and specificity can also be a reason for the only partial complementation. the fact that we did observe partial complementation with respect to most phenotypes tested hints at least to a very similar function in m. tuberculosis.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we have characterized the laci regulator ipsa as a first regulator of inositol anabolism in the corynebacteriales. the findings provide insights into the regulatory mechanisms involved in processes that have been identified as promising targets for drug development. ipsa itself could be such a target, if a myo-inositol analog could be developed that blocks activation of ino1; it is noteworthy that a trehalose analog with a bacteriostatic effect on mycobacterium aurum has been reported  <cit> . finally, the ipsa regulon delivers a promising starting point for the analysis of further, so far unstudied players in cell wall synthesis in this important class of bacteria.

