BACKGROUND
parasites exert strong selection on their hosts to evolve resistance mechanisms that avoid or reduce the negative fitness consequences of infection. host resistance includes any mechanism  that results in the avoidance, clearance, or tolerance of parasitic infections  <cit> . theory predicts that the evolution of these resistance mechanisms in the host is constrained by antagonistic pleiotropy, when one allele affects two or more traits with opposite effects on fitness  <cit> . such costs of evolving resistance have been demonstrated by measuring negative genetic correlations  between immunity and other life history traits in selection or quantitative genetic experiments  <cit> .

most of these studies measure several life history traits and report that some of these fitness components are negatively correlated with host resistance whereas others are not  <cit> . almost none of these studies have tried to combine multiple fitness components into a single measure of lifetime fitness. this is important because the evolution of immunity, like any other trait, ultimately depends on its correlation with lifetime fitness  <cit> .

in organisms with age or stage-structured life histories, one widely recognized measure of lifetime fitness is the geometric population growth rate, λ  <cit> . to estimate λ one uses matrix algebra to model the life cycle of the organism  <cit> . the parameter λ depends on the age-specific or stage-specific vital rates, which are difficult to measure for a single individual. hence, this approach works best when comparing groups of individuals . one advantage of combining multiple life history traits into a single measure of lifetime fitness such as λ is that it avoids the problem of multiple comparisons and type i error. another advantage is that all life history traits can be expressed in units of λ. this allows us to use parameter estimates  rather than p-values  to determine which life history traits caused the difference in lifetime fitness. the purpose of the present study is to demonstrate the utility of this approach using a previously published data set by hurd et al.  <cit>  on the fitness costs and benefits of malaria resistance in anopheles gambiae mosquitoes. a. gambiae is the most important vector of human malaria in africa and is the main target of attempts to engineer a malaria-resistant mosquito  <cit> . we review the host-parasite interactions between the mosquito host and the malaria parasite and the study of hurd et al.  <cit>  below.

malaria parasites  are transmitted between vertebrate hosts during blood feeding by female anopheles mosquitoes. following an infected blood meal the sexual stages of plasmodium release gametes into the mosquito mid-gut and fertilization occurs. the zygotes develop into ookinetes that cross the epithelial layer of the mosquito mid-gut within  <dig> hours of fertilization. the ookinetes transform into oocysts that grow for one to two weeks on the exterior of the mid-gut before releasing thousands of sporozoites into the mosquito hemocoel. the sporozoites migrate to the mosquito salivary glands where they are transmitted to the next vertebrate host during blood feeding.

from the perspective of the female mosquito, plasmodium is a parasite because it reduces both reproductive success  <cit>  and survival  <cit> . mosquitoes have evolved a number of defence mechanisms to protect themselves from plasmodium  <cit> . natural populations of mosquitoes have considerable genetic variation in plasmodium resistance  <cit> . several reviews have speculated that this variation is maintained by genetic trade-offs between plasmodium resistance and other life history traits  <cit> . hurd et al.  <cit>  tested this hypothesis in a. gambiae by comparing eight different life history traits between strains that they had selected for resistance or high susceptibility to the rodent malaria parasite, p. yoelii nigeriensis. they found no significant differences in the two life history traits they deemed most important, longevity and fertility and concluded there was no difference in fitness between the refractory and the highly susceptible genotypes.

we re-analyzed the data of hurd et al.  <cit>  using stage-classified matrix population models  <cit>  to combine all of the life history traits into an estimate of λ. we found that the malaria-resistant a. gambiae mosquitoes have a lower population growth rate than malaria-susceptible mosquitoes . our estimates of λ suggest that the population size of the malaria-resistant line will be half that of the susceptible line in just  <dig> days. this is the first study to show that there are high fitness costs for mosquitoes to evolve resistance to malaria, which has important implications for strategies that seek to reduce malaria transmission by releasing malaria-resistant mosquitoes.

RESULTS
differences in λ between malaria-refractory and -susceptible genotypes
we used matrix population models to estimate the geometric population growth rate  for genotypes of a. gambiae that were resistant or highly susceptible to the rodent malaria parasite p. yoelii nigeriensis, as well as an unselected control genotype . the mean λ  of the refractory genotype  was lower than that of the highly susceptible  and the unselected control genotype . for explaining the most variation in λ with the fewest possible parameters, the best model according to our model selection criteria  included the main effects of group, environment, genotype and the group:environment interaction . in this model, genotype  and the group:environment interaction  were statistically significant and accounted for  <dig> % and  <dig> % of the variation in λ, respectively . for model  <dig>  the first planned comparison found that the difference between the mean λ of the unselected control genotype and that of the selected genotypes  was not significant . this indicates that the selection regime did not affect λ . the second planned comparison found that the mean λ of the refractory genotype was significantly lower than that of the highly susceptible genotype . this indicates that the evolution of plasmodium resistance in the refractory genotype reduced λ. the population doubling times of the refractory, the highly susceptible, and the unselected control genotypes are  <dig>  days,  <dig>  days, and  <dig>  days, respectively. this means that after  <dig> days, a population of refractory genotypes will be half the size of a population of highly susceptible or unselected control genotypes .

λ was modeled as a linear function of  <dig> factors: group , environment , and genotype , and their interaction terms. for each of the  <dig> models, the model structure shows the factors and interaction terms included in the model. each model was assigned a unique identification number . also shown for each model are the number of parameters , residual standard error , the adjusted r <dig> value , the f-statistic of the model , the p-value of the model , and akaike's information criterion . for each model, the residual degrees of freedom are  <dig> minus the number of parameters. in the model structure column, group, environment, and genotype are abbreviated as d, e, and g, respectively.

the anova table is shown for model  <dig>  which was the best model in table  <dig> . for each term in the model, the degrees of freedom , the sum of squares , the mean square , the f-statistic  the p-value , and the partial r <dig> value  are shown.

the significant group:environment interaction  suggests that the effect of group is contingent on the environment . for example, for the three environments – uninfected blood, infected blood, infected blood and stressed – females from the red group have the highest, intermediate, and lowest population growth , respectively . alternatively, because each of the  <dig> combinations of group and environment were fed on a different mouse, random variation among mice may be causing the group:environment interaction. our best model  is therefore identical to one that would fit genotype and mouse as fixed factors with no genotype:mouse interaction.

differences in the life cycle parameters between genotypes
the refractory genotype was outperformed by the highly susceptible genotype on all the life cycle parameters except pupation success . the refractory genotype was also outperformed by the unselected control genotype on all the life cycle parameters except egg production . the unselected control genotype had higher pupation and egg laying success than the highly susceptible genotype . after correcting for multiple comparisons, α =  <dig> / <dig> =  <dig> , none of differences in table  <dig> are statistically significant.

the mean differences in the life cycle parameters are shown for the three pairs of genotypes: unselected control – highly susceptible, unselected control – refractory, and highly susceptible – refractory. each mean difference is based on the  <dig> combinations of group  and environment . a paired t-test was used to test whether the mean difference between the two genotypes was significantly different from zero and the p-value  is shown. the abbreviations of the life cycle parameters are defined in table  <dig>  after correcting for multiple comparisons,  <dig> / <dig> =  <dig> , none of differences are statistically significant.

from the pair wise differences in table  <dig> it is difficult to determine which life cycle parameters are driving the differences in λ because they are in different units. to determine which life cycle parameters contribute to differences in λ between pairs of genotypes we must use the matrix entries instead . in figure  <dig>  the pair wise differences in the matrix entries are all in the same units of λ after scaling them by the sensitivities . in figure  <dig> the emphasis is on the direction and magnitude of the difference in the scaled matrix entry between pairs of genotypes rather than statistical significance . the lower λ of the refractory genotype was primarily driven by lower egg hatching success  and the lower transition of mated to gravid females . the transition p <dig> includes both the proportion of females that took a blood meal  and the proportion of females that survived blood digestion . as we were primarily interested in the latter, we set p.blood equal to one, and recalculated λ and the stage-classified matrices for the  <dig> combinations. the results were the same indicating that reduced post blood-feeding survival caused the fitness cost of the refractory genotype.

the parameter abbreviations were taken from the life cycle in figure  <dig>  also shown are the  <dig> matrix entries  to which each of the  <dig> life cycle parameters contribute.

sensitivity and elasticity analyses of λ
in the previous paragraph, we used the sensitivities to scale the differences in matrix entries between pairs of genotypes to determine which life cycle parameters caused the differences in λ between genotypes. the sensitivity and elasticity analyses also indicate which life cycle parameters have the greatest influence on λ. such knowledge is valuable for understanding life history evolution in a. gambiae and for any strategy seeking to control mosquito population growth.

the sensitivity of λ to the matrix entry pij is ∂λ/∂pij, the derivative of λ with respect to pij. the sensitivities are analogous to the partial regression coefficients of a multiple regression where all the variables are measured in different units . for the average stage-classified matrix, the sensitivity of λ to the transition from larva to pupa was the highest , followed by sensitivity of λ to larval survival , gravid female survival , the transition from mated to gravid female , and the transition from egg to larva .

the elasticity of λ to the matrix entry pij is * and can be interpreted as the proportional contribution of pij to λ. the elasticities are analogous to the partial regression coefficients of a multiple regression where all the variables have been standardized to z-scores . the elasticity of λ to larval survival was the highest , followed by gravid female survival . hence both the sensitivity and the elasticity analysis suggest that larval survival to the pupa stage  and gravid female survival  have the greatest influence on the lifetime fitness of female a. gambiae mosquitoes.

discussion
this study shows the utility of using matrix population models to combine multiple life history traits into a single estimate of the population growth rate  when testing for genetic trade-offs between parasite resistance and lifetime fitness. the most important result of this study is that our estimates of λ suggest that a population of refractory mosquitoes will be half the size of a population of highly susceptible mosquitoes in just  <dig> days. hence, complete resistance to plasmodium can be costly for a. gambiae and may explain why natural populations of mosquitoes maintain genetic variation for malaria resistance. the strategy to combat malaria by replacing natural mosquito populations with transgenic, malaria-resistant mosquitoes will fail if the transgenics carry similar fitness costs.

the population growth rate of the refractory genotype was always lower than that of the highly susceptible genotype . this suggests that the immune mechanisms required for complete refractoriness to p. yoelii nigeriensis are costly for a. gambiae and would not evolve under the laboratory conditions used in this study. this conclusion is supported by hurd et al.'s  <cit>  laboratory evolution experiment where mosquitoes fed exclusively on infected mice over  <dig> generations did not evolve refractoriness. likewise, two recent population genetic studies estimated the strength of selection on  <dig> different anti-plasmodium defence genes in the a. gambiae species complex and concluded that there was no evidence for strong directional or balancing selection on these genes  <cit> . such non-significant patterns of selection are expected if the costs of evolving plasmodium-resistance genes are similar to the costs of plasmodium infection. more generally, our results are consistent with numerous studies on other host-parasite systems that have found that the evolution of anti-parasite defence mechanisms in the host comes at the expense of other life history traits  <cit> .

the conclusions of this study differ from hurd et al.  <cit>  because we combined all the life cycle parameters into a single measure of fitness, λ. numerous authors have pointed out the importance of combining the components of fitness  into a measure of lifetime fitness such as λ  <cit> . univariate analyses of multiple fitness components do not provide insight into lifetime fitness because they do not account for the conditional dependence of later expressed components of fitness  on those expressed earlier . furthermore, such analyses are likely to give conflicting results because negative correlations between fitness components are common  <cit> . the ambiguity of this approach is illustrated by the analysis of hurd et al.  <cit> , which found no clear pattern of differences in fitness components among the three genotypes. similarly, none of the pair wise t-tests of the  <dig> life cycle parameters were statistically significant after correcting for multiple comparisons . however, after combining the life cycle parameters into a single measure of fitness  we found significant differences among the three genotypes. this study shows that lifetime fitness is the product of many parts and that small, statistically insignificant but consistent differences in these parts can add up to large differences over the course of a life cycle.

our results are consistent with the only other study to test for genetic trade-offs between malaria resistance and other life history traits in a mosquito  <cit> . yan et al.  <cit>  found that their refractory strain of aedes aegypti was smaller, had lower survivorship and laid fewer eggs than the highly susceptible strain in both the presence and absence of the avian malaria parasite, p. gallinaceum. in contrast to yan et al.  <cit> , the major strengths of this study were that we  selected the refractory and highly susceptible strains from the same population,  included unselected control genotypes allowing us to rule out inbreeding effects, and  repeated the experiment three times . one limitation of this study is that there was no replication of mice within the  <dig> combinations of group and environment. it is therefore possible that the significant group:environment interaction on λ  was caused by random variation among mice. it is well known, for example, that the gametocyte density in the vertebrate host influences the infectivity of the blood meal and the subsequent oocyst load in the mosquito  <cit> . fortunately, because the three genotypes were blocked by the factor 'mouse', the limitations of the experimental design do not affect the conclusion that the population growth rate of the refractory genotype is lower than that of the other two genotypes.

the life cycle parameters that reduced λ the most for the refractory genotype were post blood-feeding survival and hatching success . the lower post blood-feeding survival suggests that the refractory mosquitoes evolved immune responses that harm both "self" and "non-self" . for example, following an infected blood meal, anopheles females upregulate expression of nitric oxide synthase producing levels of nitric oxide  <cit>  that limit ookinete development  <cit>  but may also be toxic for the mosquito  <cit> . similarly, the phenoloxidase cascade responsible for the melanization of oocysts in the midgut produces phenol by-products that may be cytotoxic for the mosquito  <cit> . the induction of the melanization response in gravid a. gambiae females also reduces the deposition of protein  in the eggs  <cit> . studies with plasmodium-infected anopheles females have shown reduced vitellin provisioning of eggs, which may result in lower hatch rates  <cit> . hence, a trade-off between vitellin egg provisioning and an upregulated immune system post-blood feeding in refractory females is one explanation for their lower egg hatch rates.

we found no evidence that plasmodium infection reduced the population growth rate of a. gambiae. the main effect of environment  was not statistically significant and explained only  <dig> % of the variation in λ . in contrast, the main effect of genotype accounted for  <dig> % of the variation in λ . although it has been repeatedly shown that plasmodium reduces egg production in anopheles mosquitoes  <cit>  including the keele population from which the refractory and highly susceptible genotypes were selected by hurd et al.  <cit> , our sensitivity and elasticity analyses  show that λ is minimally affected by changes in fertility. the effect of plasmodium on mosquito survival is more controversial  <cit> . environmental factors can also influence the virulence of the mosquito-plasmodium interaction. for example, lambrechts et al.  <cit>  showed that a. stephensi infected with p. yoelii yoelii suffer more than uninfected individuals when fed on low glucose levels. other studies have shown that plasmodium-induced mortality is influenced by humidity, temperature, diet, larval density, and bacterial infection . how this environmental variation structures the virulence of the mosquito-plasmodium interaction in the field is an open question. in this study, the stressed environment was supposed to mimic field conditions and included cold temperatures, reduced sugar, and cage shaking to induce flight. however, because the experiment did not include an uninfected and stressed treatment it was not possible to determine whether environmental stress increased or decreased the cost of infection.

CONCLUSIONS
in this laboratory population of a. gambiae, the population growth rate of the malaria-resistant mosquito genotype was significantly lower than that of the highly susceptible and unselected control genotypes regardless of whether the mosquitoes were fed on plasmodium-infected or uninfected blood. this cost of refractoriness was driven by lower post-blood feeding survival and egg hatching of refractory females. if the costs of plasmodium refractoriness in the field are higher than the costs of plasmodium infection, this may explain why natural populations of a. gambiae are not uniformly resistant to malaria parasites  <cit> . with respect to the transgenic strategy for eradicating malaria, this study has several important implications. our sensitivity and elasticity analyses show that the insertion of any anti-plasmodium defence genes into transgenic mosquitoes must avoid reducing larval survival to the pupa stage at all costs as this life history trait has the greatest influence on λ. anti-plasmodium genes  that increase the production of toxins  and incur autoimmunity costs may do more harm than good  <cit> . fortunately, there is at least one example of a transgenic strain of a. stephensi, which expresses the sm <dig> peptide in the midgut, that is resistant to the rodent malaria parasite p. berghei, that has a selective advantage over non-transgenic mosquitoes when fed on p. berghei-infected mice, and that does not appear to have a selective disadvantage when fed on uninfected mice  <cit> . if similar transgenic mosquito strains can be created for human plasmodium parasites there is room for optimism that the transgenic strategy may yet succeed. however, if transgenic mosquitoes carry similar costs of being refractory to those measured in the present study they would be unable to replace natural populations  <cit> .

