BACKGROUND
cerebral vascular diseases are a major cause of mortality and disability worldwide. in china, stroke is a leading cause of death and the most common cause of adult disability. at least  <dig> , <dig> patients are affected by cerebrovascular diseases annually, and approximately 30% of these patients become severely and permanently disabled. many other survivors are left with permanent functional impairments  <cit> . some interventions during the acute phase of stroke such as thrombolytic and neuroprotective agents have been recognized to improve patient outcomes including survival and residual disability. however, once cell damage from stroke has been established, little can be done to restore pre-stroke conditions. in this regard, hundreds of studies have described the therapeutic potential of either endogenous or transplanted stem cells in experimental models of stroke  <cit> . therefore, elucidation of potential mechanisms of action is vital to further develop stem cell therapies for translation to the bedside. various proposed mechanisms have been investigated in preclinical stroke models, including formation of new neuronal circuitry, reductions of apoptosis and inflammation, and promotion of angiogenesis, neurogenesis, and other endogenous repair processes  <cit> .

proton magnetic resonance spectroscopy  is a non-invasive method to detect various neuronal metabolites in real time, including n-acetylaspartate , creatine including phosphocreatine , choline-containing phospholipids , and lactate   <cit> . these advances have led to the emergence of novel approaches to pathophysiological studies of cerebral ischemia  <cit> . however, little has been reported about how transplanted stem cells might change neuronal metabolites in the infarct area. thus, we hypothesized that transplanted stem cells may ameliorate ischemic damage by influencing neuronal metabolites in the infarct area. to test this hypothesis, we used a rabbit ischemic model of middle cerebral artery occlusion  for transplantation of human umbilical cord blood mesenchymal stem cells . we then assessed neurological severity scores , infarct area volumes, neuronal density, and optical density  of microtubule-associated protein- <dig> -positive cells. naa, cr, cho, and lac in the infarct region were measured by 1h- mrs. we also obtained complete blood cell counts  and measured serum biochemical parameters.

RESULTS
phenotype of hucb-mscs
the cells picked from clones could be passaged successfully and the cells grew as a fusiform or fibroblast-like shape, whereas the subclones developed like a whirlpool .

isolated hucb-mscs were characterized by flow cytometric analysis of specific surface antigens. hucb-mscs expressed surface antigens cd <dig> and cd <dig>  but not cd <dig> and cd <dig>  which was consistent with the surface antigens of bone marrow-derived mscs .

hucb-msc transplantation affects nsss and the infarct volume in mcao rabbits
to evaluate the effect of hucb-mscs on neurological deficits after mcao, we measured nsss. the nsss in the hucb-msc group at  <dig> and 14 days after reperfusion were less than those in maco and saline groups  .

compared with mcao and saline groups at 2 weeks after mcao, infarct volumes in the hucb-msc group decreased remarkably  .

hucb-msc transplantation affects neuronal metabolites in mcao rabbits
to observe the effects of hucb-msc transplantation on neuronal metabolites in the infarct area, 1h-mrs was used to detect the ratios of naa/cr, cho/cr ,and lac/cr at 24 h and 2 weeks after mcao. significant neuronal metabolic changes in the infarct area were observed at 24 h and 2 weeks after mcao . 1h-mrs spectra showed significant elevation in the lac/cr ratio and a marked decrease in naa/cr and cho/cr ratios at 24 h after mcao in the mcao group . compared with saline and mcao groups at 24 h after mcao, naa/cr and cho/cr ratios were significantly increased and the lac/cr ratio was significantly decreased in the hucb-msc group  . interestingly, at 2 weeks after mcao, naa/cr and cho/cr ratios had increased substantially in the hucb-msc group, whereas the lac/cr ratio has decreased remarkably compared with those in saline and mcao groups  .

distribution and migration of hucb-mscs in the injured brain
to investigate whether transplanted hucb-mscs could migrate to the infarcted brain area, hucb-mscs labeled with 5-bromodeoxyuridine  were injected via the right femoral vein of rabbits in the hucb-msc group. brdu-positive cells migrated selectively to the infarction area, which were small with round or oval nuclei containing intensely stained brown chromatin .

hucb-msc transplantation affects neuronal density and od of map2-positive cells in the infarct area
mcao can cause a complete cerebral infarction as shown by magnetic resonance imaging  . cell morphology in the sham group was normal with only a few necrotic cells. more necrotic cells were observed in mcao and saline groups . map <dig> immunostaining products were localized within the cytodendrites of brain neurons in the sham group. map <dig> immunolabeling was markedly diminished in the infarct zone, and there was an abrupt transition between the infarct and adjacent normal tissue with occasional map2-positive cells in the transition zone . to investigate whether transplanted hucb-mscs could protect neurons, we examined neuronal density and od of map2-positive cells in the infarct area. neuronal density and od of map2-positive cells in the mcao group were significantly lower than those in the sham group . however, neuronal density and od of map2-positive cells in the hucb-msc group was higher than those in mcao and saline groups  . these data suggest that extensive neuronal damage occurs after mcao and hucb-msc transplantation can prevent ischemic damage.

effects of hucb-msc transplantation on cbcs and serum biochemical parameters in mcao rabbits
to investigate the safety of hucb-msc transplantation in rabbits, cbcs and serum biochemical parameters were measured at 24 h and 2 weeks after mcao. we found no influence on cbcs, liver function, renal function, serum glucose, or serum lipids in mcao rabbits at 24 h and 2 weeks after transplantation .

note: white blood cells ; red blood cells ; hemoglobin ; platelet count .

note: aspartatenine aminotransferase ; aspartate aminotransferase .

note: white blood cells ; red blood cells ; hemoglobin ; platelet count .

note: aspartatenine aminotransferase ; aspartate aminotransferase .

discussion
stem cell-based strategies are of particular interest in the study of neurological diseases because mature brains have a limited capacity for self-repair. mscs have great potential to serve as therapeutic agents for stroke treatment, because they are easily obtained and can be expanded rapidly ex vivo for transplantation  <cit> . transplanted mscs in an ischemic region of the rat brain can differentiate into neural cells and promote functional improvement  <cit> . furthermore, mscs can improve neurological deficits in stroke patients  <cit> . hucb-mscs have proven to be more advantageous than bone marrow-derived mscs in terms of cell procurement, storage, and transplantation  <cit> . moreover, the number and differentiation ability of bone marrow-derived mscs significantly decrease with age  <cit> . thus, hucb-mscs are a better candidate for clinical applications of stem cell-based therapies.

in this study, we confirmed that intravenous infusion of hucb-mscs after transient mcao in rabbits reduced the infarction volume, prevented ischemic neuronal damage, and improved neurological deficits. these results are consistent with previous studies in which beneficial effects were observed in cerebral ischemic models infused with mscs  <cit> .

1h-mrs enables serial, non-invasive monitoring of neuronal metabolite disturbances in the diseased brain in vivo, such as cho, cr, naa, and lac  <cit> . naa is located primarily in neuroaxonal tissues. its presence can be used to determine neuron numbers and activity. therefore, decreased naa indicates impaired neuronal and/or axonal function  <cit> . cho is a marker of cell reversal and reflects the stability of cell membranes. its peak level is usually related to cell membrane synthesis and catabolism, which depends on the concentrations of cho in membrane phospholipids. cho peaks can reflect the amount of cho-containing compounds in the myelin membrane, such as phosphocholine and glycerophosphocholine. abnormal cho peaks can be observed in pathological conditions such as demyelination, degenerative changes, and ischemic states  <cit> . lac is a redox partner of pyruvate and metabolic intermediate between glycolysis and kreb’s or the tricarboxylic acid  cycle. when oxygen availability is low because of perfusion deficiency or other metabolic stress, the rate of the tca cycle decreases and pyruvate produced by glycolysis accumulates and is converted to lac. thus, lac can serve as a marker of anaerobic metabolism in stroke. lac detection by 1h-mrs in vivo may allow identification of regions of metabolic stress in the brain and other human tissues, which can potentially identify regional ischemia in stroke  <cit> . therefore, serial decreases in naa/cr and cho/cr ratios and elevations in the lac/cr ratio essentially indicate brain damage. in our current study, we observed an elevated lac/cr ratio and a marked decrease in naa/cr and cho/cr ratios at 24 h after mcao in the mcao group , which was consistent with previous studies  <cit> . however, after intravenous delivery of hucb-mscs, 1h-mrs analysis at 24 h and 2 weeks indicated a significant decrease in the lac/cr ratio and a marked elevation in naa/cr and cho/cr ratios compared with those in mcao and saline groups. these findings suggest neuroprotection induced by the transplantation procedure.

mscs produce an impressive array of neuroprotective compounds. in a meta-analysis of  <dig> preclinical studies of intravenously delivered stem cells, janowski and colleagues reported that good patient outcomes were correlated with inhibition of apoptosis  <cit> . neuroprotection by the transplantation procedure may be direct via secretion of neuroprotective compounds or indirect via immunomodulation, angiogenesis, or amplification of the endogenous neural stem cell response  <cit> . in our present study, hucb-msc transplantation restored the 1h-mrs data to near normal at 2 weeks after mcao. moreover, hucb-msc transplantation protected neurons in the infarct area. thus, our data may offer additional supportive evidence for neuroprotection by stem cells.

the safety of stem cell transplantation for treating ischemia is important. short-term concerns include acute infusional toxicities to important organs, such as hepatotoxicity and renal toxicity. long-term concerns include the risk of tumor formation  <cit> . in our present study, no influence was found on cbcs, liver function, renal function, serum glucose, or serum lipids in mcao rabbits at 24 h and 2 weeks after transplantation.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, our data show that transplanted hucb-mscs might ameliorate ischemic damage by influencing neuronal metabolites in the infarct area, which might offer additional supportive evidence for neuroprotection by stem cells. no significant changes were observed in cbcs or serum biochemical parameters, suggesting that intravenous infusion of hucb-mscs is safe for rabbits in the short-term.

