BACKGROUND
bacteria are one of the most common causes of community acquired pneumonia. the gram-negative bacterium chlamydia pneumoniae  is a prominent human pathogen responsible for respiratory infections like pneumoniae and bronchitis
 <cit> . moreover, the involvement of cpn in other human diseases such as atherosclerosis
 <cit> , reactive arthritis
 <cit> , and myocarditis
 <cit> , or the association between cpn infection and lung cancer
 <cit> , makes this pathogen an important risk factor in human disease. furthermore, the bacterium’s obligate intracellular lifecycle can facilitate establishment of chronic persistent infections and/or reinfections following primary infection, thus posing a risk for chronic inflammatory disease
 <cit> .

about half of the  <dig> open reading frames  of cpn encode proteins without any known function
 <cit> . a flexible gene collection that contains all cpn genes is a precondition to identify new or additional protein functions, e.g. through the discovery of possible interaction partners or the production of recombinant proteins for enzymatic assays or to test their influence on gene expression.

in recent years, numerous comprehensive gene collections termed orfeomes have been constructed for organisms ranging from bacteria
 <cit>  to human
 <cit> . the use of recombinational cloning, or gateway® cloning
 <cit> , as a cloning strategy lends itself to diverse applications, from whole-genome sequencing to downstream ‘omics’ approaches. cloning methods using traditional restriction endonucleases are too cumbersome and inefficient when hundreds of genes have to be cloned and analyzed further. recombinational cloning enables high-throughput and large-scale ‘omics’ applications
 <cit>  with a wide choice of vectors, including yeast two-hybrid  vectors
 <cit> , mammalian two-hybrid vectors
 <cit> , and orf expression vectors. the availability of an orfeome should accelerate systematic and organism-wide molecular research, improving our understanding of complex molecular networks governing virulence factors and pathogenesis.

here we report the construction of a comprehensive gene collection covering  <dig> % of the  <dig> predicted and verified orfs of cpn  in gateway® ‘entry’ vectors. this platform is highly flexible because the genes can easily be shuttled into any type of ‘destination’ vector to create an expression library for genome-wide studies such as y2h mapping of novel cpn protein–protein interactions . also, new target genes involved in host interactions can be identified. array-based methods are already established to screen hundreds of orfs for possible cpn–human ppis
 <cit> . we verified the quality of the created platform by pcr amplification and dna sequencing of entry clones. to demonstrate its functionality we performed a genome-wide y2h analysis with three different cpn genes: the euo gene is a transcriptional regulator, and the flha and flif genes encode orthologs of flagellar proteins and are probable members of the type-iii secretion apparatus. furthermore, to establish the suitability of the orfeome for protein or proteome research, we demonstrated expression of panels of gst-tagged cpn fusion proteins in e. coli. this newly generated, adaptable platform offers numerous advantages for high-throughput genomic and proteomic investigations into the molecular mechanisms and pathways involved in cpn infection.

RESULTS
the overall strategy we employed for construction and characterization of the orfeome of c. pneumoniae is summarized in figure
 <dig> 

the orfeome of c. pneumoniae represents  <dig> % of the predicted orfs
for construction and characterization of the cpn orfeome, we employed the same strategy as we used in developing the first staphylococcus aureus orfeome
 <cit> . for amplification of each cpn orf, the primers were designed to generate full-length attb <dig> and attb <dig> sites. to allow for the production of c-terminal fusion proteins, which can be expressed in appropriate destination vectors, the stop codons of each orf were omitted in the reverse primers. shine-dalgarno  and kozak  consensus sequences were incorporated into the forward primers such that the atg in the kozak sequence is in frame with the attb <dig> site, thus allowing n-terminal fusion proteins to be produced from destination vectors that contain n-terminal tags. after preparation of all cpn pcr products for gateway® cloning, a set of  <dig> arbitrarily chosen samples were analyzed by gel electrophoresis. all samples, apart from two exceptions, showed a dna band of the expected size.

the pcr products were inserted into the gateway®-compatible vector pdonr™/zeo  by bp-cloning. the products resulting from site-specific recombination were transformed into e. coli. a portion of the cells was plated on solid medium containing zeocin™, and the remainder was used to inoculate liquid medium containing zeocin™ to generate bacterial stocks of pooled entry clones for long-term freezer storage. up to five single colonies from each plate were tested in a colony-pcr with pdonr™/zeo-specific primers. the resulting pcr products were detected by gel electrophoresis. transformants which had an insert of the expected size were picked and grown in liquid medium containing zeocin™ to generate bacterial glycerol stocks for long-term freezer storage. by this approach we obtained  <dig> transformants carrying the correct insert, which represents 83% of the  <dig> predicted orfs. using both the positive single-colony glycerol stocks to inoculate liquid medium containing zeocin™ and the liquid glycerol stocks for those orfs for which no positive single-colony isolate was obtained, cultures were grown in 96-well plates and plasmid dnas were prepared and used for pcr. for an additional  <dig> samples, an insert of the size expected for the orf was observed. in total, we found  <dig> single entry clones and  <dig> ‘pooled’ entry clones, giving a resource of  <dig>  entry clones . the remaining  <dig> % yielded a pcr product of ~ <dig> bp, derived from empty pdonr™/zeo vector. as reported by brandner et al.
 <cit> , we expect there to be additional positive single clones in the liquid glycerol stocks of the pooled entry clones. the single-colony glycerol stocks, the glycerol stocks of the pooled transformants, and the purified plasmid clones together constitute the orfeome of chlamydia pneumoniae.

the identity of all single entry clones was validated by dna sequencing
to verify that the inserted orfs are in the correct reading frame and indeed correspond to the assigned identity, we took all plasmid preparations of the positive single colonies and subjected them to sequencing with a pdonr™/zeo-specific forward primer. ninety percent of the positive single clones were found to be correctly inserted, and a blast search of each sequence against the cpn cwl <dig> genome  confirmed the identity of each orf. almost all of the remaining 10% of positive single clones were found to have mutations in the binding region of the gene-specific forward primer, resulting in frameshift or missense mutations. despite the presence of these mutations in the primer regions, the identity of these clones was confirmed by blast searches.

proteome-wide recombinant gene expression is possible by using the cpn orfeome
in order to examine all orfs at the protein level we decided to shuttle randomly choosen single clones into the pdest™ <dig> vector  designed to make a fusion protein with a gst-tag. the resulting products were transformed into the bl <dig> protein expression strain of e. coli. successful recombination of the choosen single clones was shown by pcr of single colonies obtained following transformation. for proteome-wide studies, the availability of recombinant proteins is the main bottleneck; therefore, we produced a panel of recombinant proteins directly from an arbitrarily chosen test set of  <dig> clones taken from the orfeome cloned in pdest™ <dig> vector . the clones were used to transform the bl <dig> protein expression strain of e. coli, and after induction of protein expression with iptg, the cells were lysed and  <dig>  μg total protein from the crude lysates were separated and analyzed on a protein gel with coomassie staining. as seen from the coomassie and western blot analysis in figure
 <dig>  all  <dig> of the orfs were highly expressed and a range of protein sizes from small to large was produced. in summary, robust expression of all  <dig> gst-tagged proteins demonstrates the functionality of the orfeome.

a proteome-wide yeast two-hybrid screen identifies several new interacting proteins for promising bait molecules
proteins are the workhorses of the cellular machinery. they often function in huge protein complexes where the action of single proteins is mediated through their binding to other proteins in the complex. moreover, there often exists cross-talk, mediated by interactions, between different protein complexes. indeed, in all signal transduction pathways, the signal would become lost without functional ppis
 <cit> . therefore, to understand a biological system, such as the relatively uncharacterized cpn organism, it is essential to investigate novel protein interactions.

for that purpose and to demonstrate the new capabilities of the cpn orfeome, we performed three individual orfeome-wide y2h screens. as bait proteins, the cpn genes flha , flif , and euo  were cloned in the y2h pbd-gate2
 <cit>  vector. for all three bait molecules no autoactivation of reporter genes could be observed. a prey library was created by pooling all plasmid preparations of entry clones and transferring them by lr reaction into pad-gate2
 <cit> . randomly chosen clones were selected for colony-pcr with pad-gate2-specific forward and reverse primers. the  <dig> clones showed different-sized pcr bands, from  <dig> bp up to  <dig> kbp.

in all three screens, at least  <dig>  x  <dig> primary colonies, representing the same number of examined ppis, were observed. on interaction-selective plates, we detected  two new interaction partners each for flha and flif. for the hypothetical protein euo, four interactors were detected. these newly identified interaction partners are summarized in table
 <dig> 

discussion
in this work we described the construction of a comprehensive and flexible gene collection of chlamydia pneumoniae. this orfeome consists of  <dig> orfs maintained as homogeneous plasmid dnas purified from single colonies plus  <dig> orfs purified from separate ‘pools’ of entry clones. this coverage of  <dig> % of all predicted cpn orfs is similar to the coverage reported for other bacterial orfeomes
 <cit> . such orfeomes offer a flexible resource with which to undertake functional genomic studies, including high-throughput screens
 <cit> . in our own laboratory we have successfully produced protein arrays/chips
 <cit>  whereon thousands of proteins can be tested against other proteins or peptides. the described cpn orfeome is the basis for functional high-throughput analysis of this organism, providing a flexible tool for quick and efficient genome-wide examination and discovery.

we assessed the quality of the orfeome by pcr and agarose gel-electrophoresis of all the entry clones obtained. sequencing all positive single clones confirmed the identity of the entry clones. to minimize the occurrence of pcr-induced mutations, we optimized the pcr conditions, used a proofreading-capable dna polymerase, and kept the number of amplification cycles low. functional validation was done by recombinant protein production and ppi analysis using the y2h system. according to our previous work
 <cit> , we did not purify the first pcr products, because it does not minimize the possibility of primer dimers created by the secondary attachment primers. these primer dimers are the putative reason for the existence of samples for which no positive single clone could be found. in the present study we spot-tested  <dig> arbitrarily chosen first pcr products. almost all products delivered a pcr band of the expected size. in addition, we examined pcr samples of negative candidates  where the first-generated pcr product delivered, like the other samples examined, a strong pcr band. in most cases we could isolate positive candidates by investigating up to  <dig> clones of one reaction, affording a way to clone single genes but not hundreds of genes. we failed to produce pcr products for  <dig> orfs. this could be due to possible errors in annotation of the cwl <dig> genome or, more likely, because of nucleotide differences between our cpn isolate and the sequenced cwl <dig> genome or for technical reasons related to primer design and effectiveness specific to each missing orf. the single entry clones are of higher quality than the pools of entry clones because they are homogeneous, and lr reactions performed subsequently with the pure clones will be more efficient. however, for reasons of economy and because of time constraints, it was not possible to screen every colony to obtain a pure isolate of the appropriate orf-containing entry clone. however, we expect that additional positive single transformants are present in the liquid glycerol stocks. in future work, this version of the cpn orfeome may be extended by isolating more positive single clones.

ninety-seven positive single clones  failed validation by dna sequencing. almost all of the affected genes harbor a mutation in the binding region of the primary forward primer, resulting in frameshift mutations. however, this type of problem could be solved by using primers of higher quality than the used mass spectrometry checked primers in this work. another solution could be to re-order the 10% defective primers and re-clone the defective clones or to correct the mutations by using mutagenesis kits. although these genes are not in frame with the commonly used gateway® destination vectors, there is the possibility of transferring them to other vectors having the appropriate reading frame. alternatively, there already exist reading-frame independent vectors suitable for gateway® cloning
 <cit> . the use of such vectors would increase the overall coverage of positive single clones.

the present work provides the first nearly complete orfeome of cpn. production of recombinant proteins in the present system can be achieved with the well-known gst fusion tag. this tag could be used for further protein purification or affinity studies such as gst pull-down for validation of protein–protein interactions. we successfully produced fusion proteins of ten randomly chosen clones. orfeome-wide protein chips already exist
 <cit>  and could be applied to our cpn collection for analyzing not only protein–protein interactions, but also the ability of proteins to bind to small molecules as well as other proteins. a special field in the case of cpn would be the use of proteome chips in drug and drug target discovery, because such chips can provide a variety of systems for detecting drug–protein interactions among all proteins. the technique for proteome chips already exists in our working group, and was verified by finding a small epitope to a known antigen, another type of protein–peptide interaction
 <cit> .

as a validation of our interaction screen, first we used flha, a type-iii secretion apparatus member. the y2h screen identified the type-iii secretion chaperone syce as an interaction partner. syce is related to the class-i chaperones involved in binding of effector proteins during the secretion process. since flha is located in the inner membrane and is involved in flagellar protein secretion, it is possible that syce interacts with flha during the export of flagellar or other proteins. supporting this finding, it was previously reported that another chaperon, flij, is also an interaction partner of flha
 <cit> . we also identified the methyltransferase ada, which in e. coli is known to be involved in the repair of dna damage induced by methylating agents. the link between ada and the type-iii secretion apparatus is unknown, but it is worth mentioning that chlamydia transports other methyltransferases to influence host gene expression via type-iii secretion
 <cit> .

the second tested bait protein, flif, is a member of the ms ring of the type-iii injectisome
 <cit> . flif is a previously described binding partner of flha
 <cit> , but we could not detect this interaction. although, the y2h system is a powerful system to detect ppis, nevertheless not all interactions can be detected within a single screen and further reasons could be loss of interaction due to the fusion with the yeast gal <dig> protein domain, or the requirement that the interaction between bait and prey are obliged to happen in the nucleus of yeast cells. there are a couple of reasons leading to false-negatives in the y2h system, a drawback actually existing in all ppi-methods. on the other hand, we identified flin, a putative c-ring member
 <cit> , as an interaction partner of flif.

our third bait protein was euo, a chlamydial protein expressed early in the developmental cycle. euo is able to bind to at-rich sequences
 <cit>  and also has been shown to have a histone h1-specific protease activity
 <cit> . while the potential interaction partners of euo are not known, we identified euo itself, two hypothetical proteins, and the metabolic enzyme phosphocarrier protein ptsh as interacting partners. the exact roles of these interactions remain to be identified.

these screens were performed in a low-scale manner with a test cpn protein set, but generation of an cpn intrapathogen ‘interactome’ is conceivable through orfeome-wide ppi screening by automated procedures. likewise, a system-wide screen for host–pathogen ppis could be conducted by screening against other available orfeomes, e.g. the human orfeome
 <cit> , which would produce a detailed description of the host–pathogen interface at the molecular level, leading to improved understanding of cpn pathogenesis in humans.

CONCLUSIONS
we achieved nearly complete cloning of the first version of the cpn orfeome, and furthermore demonstrated the feasibility of a respective expression orfeome in the form of recombinant protein-producing vectors and pooled y2h prey vectors. we showed that these collections are functional by recombinant protein production in e. coli and by a protein interaction assay. the availability of the cpn orfeome with appropriate gateway®-compatible destination vectors offers many possibilities for proteome-wide studies, including systematic y2h ppi screenings, and fabrication of protein chips or microarrays, which could enable antigen-profiling for vaccination strategies and so on. this first version of the cpn orfeome can be extended in future work by addition of the missing orfs or inclusion of strain-specific variations.

