BACKGROUND
parasitic weeds such as cuscuta reflexa are obligate holoparasites with low host specificity. the plants are found in areas with relatively mild climates around the world. in farming regions, these parasites cause substantial damage to many commercially important crops such as sugar beet, alfalfa, pepper, cucumber, tomato potato or allium  <cit> . currently, an effective control of cuscuta outbreaks is based on preventive strategies including control of seed contamination and application of herbicides prior to seed emergence. the use of herbicides on infected plants with an established host parasite interaction only appears to be successful and not harmful to the host plant if the host is herbicide resistant  <cit> . due to difficulties with conventional breeding techniques, molecular biology genomic research on parasites is needed to develop new control strategies  <cit> . research on host reactions to parasitic plant infection in model plants such as arabidopsis thaliana, medicago truncatula and crops like tomato or tobacco have already generated promising results  <cit> .

in cuscuta spp. photosynthesis is reduced or absent  <cit> . consequently, the plant depends on carbohydrates withdrawn from the host plant  <cit> . a connection  at the contact site is established through the secretion of enzymes and sticky substances consisting mainly of de-esterified pectins  <cit> . at early stages of cuscuta invasion, host plants react with specific gene expression to regulate processes including calcium release, cell elongation and cell wall modification  was found to be up-regulated in tomato at an early stage of infection and it has a significant function for c. reflexa attachment to the host plant . after attachment, the host is invaded by hyphae and chimeric cell walls of host and cuscuta cells are formed  <cit> . phloem and xylem connections transfer water, nitrogen-compounds, assimilates and even rna, proteins or plant viruses from the host to the parasitic plant  <cit> .

the current knowledge about gene expression in the parasite cuscuta at early stages of infection is limited. besides host responses, parasitic plant reactions need to be determined for a complete elucidation of the infection process. this knowledge will likely be one of the prerequisites for the improvement of strategies to prevent or control cuscuta-infection. for a first overview of parasite responses, we have constructed a cuscuta cdna-library corresponding to mrnas specific for early stages of haustoria development. here, we describe one of the identified genes, which encodes a cuscuta reflexa haustoria specific cysteine protease that we named cuscutain. its expression, biochemical characteristics and significance during the infection process opens the possibility to develop a cuscutain-based strategy against cuscuta infection.

RESULTS
cuscutain
mrna from cuscuta tissue containing haustoria was employed to construct a cdna library with  <dig> primary transformants. putative haustorium specific expression of the corresponding genes was identified by differential cdna hybridization  to all obtained cdna clones assigned on a macroarray.  <dig> different clones were preselected by this procedure showing a more intense signal on a macroarray chip when hybridized with a cdna probe from rna of haustoria containing tissue. one of the signals with a remarkable differential intensity corresponded to a cdna clone derived from a cysteine proteinase encoding mrna . because cysteine proteinases were known to participate in some interspecies interactions, we were interested to study the role of this cuscuta reflexa enzyme. for verification of spatial expression, cuscuta-rna from the two tissue types was further characterized by northern blot with a probe derived from the above said cdna clone. just a faint signal was obtained in rna from cuscuta shoots lacking haustorial structures and a strong one was obtained in rna from shoot material with haustoria, which was harvested at three days post attachment . sequence analysis of the deduced mrna revealed that translational start and stop codons including poly a tail were cloned as cdna indicating a full length cdna-insertion. sequence comparison obtained from blast-n at ncbi revealed a high sequence identity to cysteine proteinases like ipomoea batatas papain-like cysteine proteinase isoform ii , phaseolus vulgaris moldavian encoding cysteine proteinase  or arachis hypogaea cysteine protease-like protein . an equally high identity to numerous cysteine proteinases was observed when the translated sequence was subjected to a comparison with entries from expasy proteomics server at swiss institute of bioinformatics . according to sequence alignment and protein domain identification tools, specific functional sites could be identified . hence, the predicted protein consists of a prepeptide, thought to be responsible for its extracellular localization . the corresponding cleavage site between prepeptide and the subsequent propeptide is represented by a sssdd sequence . next to the prepeptide from n- to c-terminus the propeptide harbors a so called erfin-motif  <cit> , which is a stabilizing component of intramolecular interaction. this protein region was described to form an inhibitor of the proteinase activity  <cit> . furthermore the propeptide acts as an intramolecular chaperone  <cit> . the actual cysteine proteinase region contains characteristic active sites as indicated by motiv search  and comprises a protein with a calculated molecular weight of  <dig>  kda. that of the prepeptide is  <dig>  kda.

biochemical characterization of cuscutain and the inhibitory propeptide
the coding sequence for the propeptide inhibitor region and that for the enzymatic activity were separately cloned into an e. coli expression vector. after induction, both proteins were expressed in e. coli and could be identified in crude extracts of soluble proteins by sds gel electrophoresis and coomassie staining. nickel-column-chromatography was employed to purify the c-terminal 6xhis tagged proteins and provided a protein solution without significant impurities in the case of the propeptide as demonstrated by sds gel electrophoresis and coomassie staining . for the enzymatic protein portion a further purification step after gel-electrophoresis was applied as outlined. eventually, also the enzymatic protein part was processed to purity as indicated by the staining of the corresponding gel . the purified enzymatic protein component was subjected to enzymatic characterization and the putative inhibitor component was tested for inhibitor efficiency. the results are summarized in figure  <dig> and revealed for the cuscuta cysteine proteinase a km =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mm or a turnover number of  <dig>  aniline bonds/s , an optimum at ph  <dig> -  <dig>   and a temperature optimum at 40°c . these figures are in a comparable range to other cysteine proteinases . in accordance to the naming of the papaya cysteine proteinase papain, the cuscuta enzyme was denominated cuscutain. for the predicted inhibitory propeptide a ki of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nm was determined on cuscutain activity . the inhibitory effect on other cysteine proteinases like papain or cruzipain was found to be  <dig> times lower indicating a cuscutain-specific inhibitory function. the data support the sequence predictions concerning the biochemical function for both the enzyme and the inhibitor component.

biochemical characteristics of cuscutain, cruzipain  <cit>  and papain  <cit> .

biological function of cuscutain
since cuscutain-mrna was abundant in haustoria, a function of the encoded proteinase for the infection process was assumed. if cuscutain activity is essential for a successful infection, inhibition of the enzyme could be one way of reducing the effectiveness or preventing cuscuta infestation. to test this assumption,  <dig> tobacco plants were prepared for infection by curling  <dig> cm cuscuta shoot segments around the host shoot. one half of the assay was sprayed with  <dig> μg/ml buffered inhibitor propeptide solution  <dig> times a day for one week. as a mock control the other  <dig> plants were treated with buffer solution only. the propeptide solution had no visual effect on host tobacco plants e.g. with regard to development. on a daily basis, the plants were monitored for prehaustoria, haustoria and attached haustoria. parasites on inhibitor propeptide solution treated cuscuta - host plants appeared to be thinner and less vital as compared to controls . for a quantitative assessment, the number of prehaustoria and haustoria attached or not attached to the host, were counted and related to cuscuta shoot length. untreated plants developed on average  <dig>  haustoria per  <dig> cm,  <dig>  of these produced a successful connection via hyphae. inhibitor treated plants had  <dig>   haustoria per  <dig> cm with  <dig>   successful penetrations and connections to the host vascular tissue. on average treatment with the inhibitory propeptide solution reduced haustoria formation roughly by 40% and decreased successful parasite infestation from 65% down to 15%. in most cases , cuscuta on treated plants dried out after about two weeks without further spraying , which suggests that a minimum number of successful connections to host xylem and phloem per parasite shoot length is required for vitality and propagation of c. reflexa. it also indicates that an active cuscutain cysteine proteinase is a component of a successful cuscuta infestation.

discussion
a role of cuscutain during the infection process is suggested by the presented data. accordingly, the sequence of related molecular events could be envisaged as follows: the cuscutain gene is activated concomitant to haustoria formation. the gene encodes a so called pre-pro-protein, with each of the protein subunits having a separate function. the prepeptide targets the cuscutain primary protein to the extracellular space. here the unprocessed translation product is cleaved and deleted from the pre- and propeptide. deletion of the inhibitor-propeptide converts cuscutain from an inactive form to an active enzyme with a cysteine proteinase function. outside the parasite, the enzyme fulfills a role in the successful infection process, possibly by weakening host structures through protein degradation. therefore, addition of water inhibitor solution by spraying most likely restricts this enzymatic activity outside the haustorial cells. it is yet unclear how a host-specific cuscutain activity is achieved, since the enzyme is most likely localized in the vicinity of host and cuscuta tissue. if a concentration gradient of effective inhibitor components from parasite to host is created from primary cuscutain processing, the enzyme would show higher activity close to the host. protective structures, e.g. the high degree of pectins on haustoria surfaces, could be another factor favoring the degradation of host cells in comparison to parasite tissue.

it is assumed that degrading enzymes, which are either parasite- or host-encoded support the penetration of parasitic hyphae  <cit> . in this regard the role of cuscutain resembles that of orobanche encoded enzymes which were located in the cytoplasm and cell walls of intrusive cells and in the adjacent host apoplast during haustorium penetration  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
papain-like cysteine proteases have been identified at the surface of various interaction surfaces between plants and pathogens like bacteria, fungi, oomycetes, nematodes insects or herbivores  <cit> . some of these are a component of a defense mechanism while others are implicated in the parasitic pathogenic attack  <cit> . the identification of the cysteine proteinase cuscutain as a component that may be important for successful infestation of the parasitic plant c. reflexa could open the possibility for a new approach for development of parasitic plant blocking agents. during the parasite - host interactions both plant species act and react in order to invade, prevent, or tolerate invasion. among others, these responses are visible as differential gene expression  <cit> . the identification of the corresponding proteins increases our knowledge about the molecular events of plant parasite infection. as demonstrated, the encoded proteins could also be significant for the host parasite interaction. there is a chance that a reduction of parasite-derived proteins weakens the parasite's infection efficiency and thereby strengthens host defense. however, prior to an application of a cuscutain propeptide solution in farming to protect crops some uncertainties must be ruled out. the inhibitor studies showed that its action spectrum is quite specific for cuscutain. it is unknown how similar cysteine proteases from other cuscuta species or other parasitic plants are affected or if the inhibitor is effective on related proteases. it is possible that only one inhibitor is effective per species. on the other hand, the activity of cysteine proteinases could play a role in other parasitic plant interactions such as those with orobanche or striga. although the latter parasitic weeds are root- and not shoot-parasites, the possibility of consistencies at the molecular level exists. inhibition of cysteine proteases could thus be of wider importance for antagonizing parasitic plants from different genera.

