BACKGROUND
hexamerins essentially participate in the dynamics of amino acid storage and exploitation that occurs during insect development. these six-subunit proteins are primarily synthesized by the larval fat body and are massively stored in hemolymph as an amino acid source for development toward the adult stage  <cit> . they also may function as jh-binding proteins  <cit> , and in addition, there is circumstantial evidence supporting the hypothesis that larval hexamerins are targeted for egg production  <cit> .

while hexamerins have been the focus of numerous studies in solitary insects  <cit> , the characterization of these proteins in social insects has received much less attention, in spite of the potential for discovering unique physiological functions linked to aspects of the social way of life. workers of an ant species may use hexamerins as an amino acid source for brood nourishment, and there is circumstantial evidence that, by acting as a jh-binding protein, hexamerins regulate jh titer and caste differentiation in a termite species  <cit> .

the highly eusocial honey bee hatches as a larva after a  <dig> h embryonic stage, and develops through a series of molts that define the five larval instars. this is a period of feeding, and the larva gains weight while it is continuously fed by worker bees. during the larval stage, queens, workers and drones have distinct nutritional requirements. depending on the quality and quantity of nutrition, a diploid female larva develops as a queen or as a worker. a queen-destined larva is fed with secretions produced by worker hypopharyngeal and mandibular glands, the royal jelly, in a much higher proportion than a worker-destined larva. as a supplement to its nutritional regime, the worker larva also receives pollen, nectar and honey. drone larval nourishment is composed of these same nutrients, but they are fed on a larger quantity of food, and their diet also differs in quality when compared to that given to workers  <cit> . female and male larvae grow enormously because of these nutrients, and accumulate proteins, lipids and glycogen for use as structural materials and energy during the subsequent non-feeding pupal and pharate-adult stages. duration of development from egg to adult eclosion differs considerably among queens, workers and drones, spanning  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> days, respectively  <cit>  with some differences among a. mellifera subspecies.

the single adult queen in the hive is adapted to egg production. when fertilized, the eggs will give rise to workers and occasionally to a new queen, while non-fertilized eggs become drones. the functionally sterile workers perform a series of flexible but age-correlated tasks, a phenomenon known as age polyethism. the younger worker bees usually stay inside the hive and are engaged in brood rearing, queen tending, nest building, nest cleaning, and food processing. older workers take over the duties of foraging for pollen and nectar that are used to provision and maintain the hive. drones do not have any known function other than mating with the queen  <cit> .

our goal was to determine whether these morphotypes , which are so divergent in their developmental rate, size, morphology and other essential characteristics, and which perform very distinct functions as adults in the hive, also show hexamerin gene expression profiles that are correlated with their unique developmental trajectories. the current study was undertaken to deepen our knowledge of the four hexamerin genes found in the honey bee genome  <cit>  by exploring their structures, expression patterns, and putative functions using a comparative approach. to this end we determined  the features of the full-length cdna coding sequences and their conceptual translation products;  the potential regulatory sequences present in the respective 5' ucrs;  the expression patterns in the fat body and gonads of developing and adult queens, workers and drones;  the effect of jh on the expression in larval fat body;  the relative quantities of hexamerin transcripts in females and drones during the metamorphic molt and adult stage, and  the evolutionary relationships among the honey bee hexamerins and related members of the hemocyanin superfamily in other insect species. consistent with the hypothesis that hexamerins have multiple functions in the honey bee, our findings disclosed striking structural differences among the hexamerin gene sequences and tissue-, caste- and sex-specific expression patterns. additionally, the recognition of potential jh-target sites in 5' ucr of all hexamerin genes together with the observed jh-effect on the levels of hexamerin transcripts indicate regulation by this hormone.

RESULTS
structural characteristics of the hexamerin cdss and respective translation products
the entire cdss of hex 70b and hex 70a, as well as a portion of their respective 5' and 3' untranslated regions , were previously sequenced by our research group  <cit> . part of the hex  <dig> cds  also was previously cloned and sequenced in our laboratory  <cit> . in the current work, the sequencing of hex  <dig> was extended to the entire cds and part of the 5' and 3' utrs. in addition, we cloned and sequenced the hex 70c cds as well as segments of its utrs. sequence analyses using the artemis platform  <cit>  allowed comparisons of the structural characteristics of hex cdss . each of these sequences is present as a single copy in the honeybee genome assembly  as confirmed by blast searches. the hex 70a, hex 70b and hex 70c sequences are tandemly arrayed in groupun. <dig>  whereas hex  <dig> is separately positioned in group  <dig> .

the translation products contain the n-terminal sequences determined by danty et al  <cit>  using automated edman degradation. the conserved n, m and c hemocyanin domains  were identified in all hexamerin subunits , but as previously observed  <cit> , the hemocyanin c domain of hex  <dig> is interrupted by a  <dig> amino acid insertion. this insertion is very rich in glutamine and glutamic acid  and contributes significantly to the total glx content  of hex  <dig> 

some features of the honey bee hexamerin genes and of the respective deduced subunits are compiled in table  <dig>  the four hexamerin subunits are also characterized by the presence of glycosylation sites, a conserved histidine and motifs typically found in other insect hexamerins . we used the software http://phobius.sbc.su.se for prediction of signal peptides and transmembrane topology from the amino acid sequences of each of the hexamerin subunits in the honey bee, hex <dig>  hex70a, hex 70b and hex 70c. hydropathy profiles were produced for each of them and included in the additional file  <dig>  the subunits are predicted to contain each a signal peptide  that directs transport of the protein through the secretory pathway. as expected, none of the subunits contain transmembrane helices. with respect to amino acid composition, hex 70a and hex 70c contain a relatively high quantity of phenylalanine, tryptophan and tyrosine , and thus belong to the class of aromatic amino acid-rich hexamerins   <cit> . with their relatively high methionine content, hex 70b  and hex 70c  can be included in the class of methionine-rich hexamerins, which are composed of  <dig> to 11% methionine  <cit> .

molecular mass and pi calculated using http://expasy.org/cgi-bin/protparam and http://phobius.sbc.su.se/

the overall amino acid identity shared among the deduced honey bee hexamerins varies from 30% to 42%. a multiple alignment using clustalw  <dig>   revealed that hex 70a, hex 70b and hex 70c are more similar to each other  than they are to hex  <dig> .

overrepresented motifs in upstream control regions 
motif analyses of the ucrs were carried out with two goals in mind: to search for potential jh response elements, and to search for hexamerin-specific conserved regions. table  <dig> shows six dna motifs, here named site <dig> to site <dig>  that are overrepresented in the ucrs of the four hexamerin genes. all of the six motifs were mapped on an extension of the ucr corresponding to  <dig>  kb from the translation start codon . site <dig> is 80% identical to the d. melanogaster ultraspiracle  binding site, also known as chorion factor- <dig>   <cit> , and is located very close to the 5' end . two site <dig> motifs enrich the hex  <dig> ucr, whereas only one was found in each of the ucrs of the three hex  <dig> genes. none of the other five motifs  are similar to any binding site described to date in the transfac database, and may be specific to hexamerin gene ucrs. the hex 70b ucr showed the greatest complexity because it is the only one containing all six motifs. few of these motifs were found in the hex 70a ucr, possibly because it is still a gapped dna region .

site  <dig> motif is 80% similar to the usp binding site of d. melanogaster. the other motifs  do not have similarity to any binding site sequences in transfac database, and may be specific of hexamerin genes.

based on figure 2a, we graphically represented the types  and quantities  of the potential regulatory sites shared by the four honey bee hexamerin ucrs. site <dig> is shared by all four hexamerin genes; site <dig> is shared by hex 70a and hex 70b; site <dig> is present in hex 70b, hex 70c and hex 110; site <dig> is specific to the hex  <dig> genes ; and site <dig> and site <dig> were both detected in hex 70b, hex 70c and hex  <dig> . therefore, the hex 70b and hex 70c ucrs share a maximum of five of these motifs whereas the hex 70a and hex  <dig> ucrs share only one motif . this relationship suggests that at least some of the hexamerin genes are co-regulated.

effect of jh on the expression of hexamerin genes
jh-treatment was performed at the feeding phase of the 5th larval instar. during this developmental phase, larvae have a high titer of jh in hemolymph  <cit> . the treatment with exogenous hormone aimed to maintain jh titer at a high level for a prolonged period of time, thus circumventing the normal decay that normally occurs at the transition from the feeding to the spinning phase  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows that expression of the genes hex 70b and hex 70c is higher in jh-treated larvae than in the controls, although the jh-effect on the expression of hex 70a and hex  <dig> is more discrete. together, these results support a function of jh in inducing the expression of hexamerin genes in honey bee larvae.

evolutionary relationship among the honey bee hexamerins and related proteins
we investigated the evolutionary relationships among  <dig> hexamerin amino acid sequences from six insect orders , and hemocyanins from  <dig> insect species and from a crustacean. the tree structure mainly reflects the molecular relationship at the level of insect order . within the hymenopteran cluster, the honey bee hex  <dig>  grouped with two hexamerins from nasonia vitripennis wasps, nvihex <dig> and nvihex <dig>  like the honey bee hex  <dig> , these wasp hexamerins have a molecular mass higher than that typically exhibited by hexamerins  and are composed of a high or very high proportion of glx . explicitly, nvihex <dig> and nvihex <dig> are composed of  <dig> % and  <dig> % glx, respectively. the other hymenopteran hexamerins , which are in the range of 70- <dig> kda, generally display an intermediary glx content . exceptions in this group are nvihex <dig> and nvihex <dig>  which have higher amounts of glx .

most of the hymenopteran hexamerins  contain more than 15% aromatic amino acids, and are therefore considered arylphorins. five of twelve meet the criterion for inclusion in the methionine-rich class. a wasp hexamerin  and two of the honey bee hexamerins  contain more than 10% leucine and are here defined as leucine-rich.

hexamerins from the coleopterans tribolium castaneum and tenebrio molitor form a well-defined group . without exception, they are all arylphorins. aside from tcahex <dig>  they all have a high glx content .

among lepidopterans , the arylphorin bmosp <dig> is positioned separately from the methionine-rich hexamerins hcehex <dig>  hzehex, tnijhsp <dig>  cfudap <dig>  bmosp <dig> and hcehex <dig>  which are organized in two branches, one of them also including hvihex. as only part of the hvihex sequence is available in data bank, we could not classify it as an arylphorin or a methionine-rich hexamerin. all lepidopteran hexamerins contain intermediary or low glx  content, and only three of them  are rich in leucine. interestingly, these leucine-rich hexamerins were grouped in a single branch.

a branch of dipteran hexamerins  included the very high glx /high molecular mass dmefbp <dig> and two other hexamerins from d. melanogaster, dme <dig> and dme <dig>  both containing a high glx content , but a typical molecular mass ~ <dig> kda. all hexamerins in this branch are rich in leucine. the other three main branches consist of hexamerins in the range of 82- <dig> kda. one of them clustered the dmelsp <dig> isoforms . the other two branches grouped some anopheles gambiae hexamerins with oathex  <dig>  from the mosquito ochlerotatus atropalpus, and some a. gambiae hexamerins with dmelsp <dig>  except for some incomplete sequences  for which we could not determine the exact amino acid composition, all the hexamerins forming these three branches are arylphorins, and oathex <dig> , dmelsp1α and dmelsp1β are also rich in methionine. several of them have a high glx content. none is rich in leucine.

the only orthopteran hexamerin used in tree construction, lmijhbs , is distinguished by a high proportion of leucine. the basal position of this hexamerin is evident. two isopteran hexamerins, rflhex <dig> and rflhex <dig> clustered in a single branch. both are arylphorins, but rflhex <dig> is also rich in methionine. rflhex <dig>  but not rflhex <dig>  has a high glx content .

as expected, the insect hemocyanins clustered separately from the hexamerins , and formed a well-supported monophyletic clade , with scuhc <dig> at the most basal position.

expression of hexamerin genes in the fat body of developing and adult workers, queens and drones
in the fat body of workers, hex  <dig> transcripts were abundant from the 5th larval instar throughout the pupal stage, with a decrease in the amount of transcripts nearby the time of adult eclosion. but expression increased again in adult workers. in contrast, in the fat body of drones and queens, hex  <dig> expression was found basically in the 5th larval instar, extending up to the early pupal stage in queens. the expression of hex 70a differs from hex  <dig> mainly in adults, which showed sex- and caste-specific patterns of hex 70a transcription. workers and drones showed high levels of hex 70a transcripts up to the ages of  <dig> and  <dig> days, respectively. in 3- to 7-day-old virgin queens, hex 70a expression was reduced in comparison to the newly emerged ones, but increased again in older, egg-laying queens. comparatively, the expression of hex 70a is lower in adult queens than in adult workers. the expression of the other two hexamerin genes, hex 70b and hex 70c, was detectable only in the 5th larval instar of females and males.

together, the data summarized in figure  <dig> highlight that:  all the honey bee hexamerin genes are highly expressed in the larval fat body of workers, queens and drones, and  hex  <dig> and hex 70a were transcribed in a caste- and sex-specific fashion in pupal and adult fat body. these expression patterns suggest that in addition to their primary role as storage proteins that supply amino acids during non-feeding pupal development, hexamerins have different functions in the adult stage.

using real-time rt-pcr we quantified the levels of the four hexamerin transcripts in the fat body at two periods of the honey bee life cycle: during larval-pupal transition and in adults. figure 6a shows that the transcriptional profiles are similarly modulated, with an abrupt increase in the quantity of transcripts in the 5th larval instar, followed by a marked decrease in newly ecdysed pupae. however, at definite points of this developmental period, we found interesting differences among the honey bee morphotypes. in workers and drones, the four hexamerin transcripts reached maximal levels during the feeding phase of the 5th larval instar . in queens, maximal transcript levels were detected at the subsequent spinning phase  . moreover, the maximal expression in workers and drones was significantly higher than the maximal expression in queens . figure 6a also shows that in workers and drones at the l5f phase, when expression of the four hexamerin genes reached a maximum, the levels of hex 110/hex 70b transcripts were much higher than the levels of hex 70a/hex 70c transcripts.

pearson's correlation coefficient  was used to evaluate the relationship among these expression profiles. figure 6b graphically represents the hexamerin genes  linked by bars. the greater the thickness of the bar, the greater the r value. in queens, the expression profiles of hex  <dig> and hex 70c were the only positively correlated. in drones, by contrast, the expression profiles of all the hexamerin genes except hex 70b/hex  <dig> were positively correlated. similarly, in workers the expression profiles of all but hex 70b/hex  <dig> and hex 70b/hex 70c were positively correlated. therefore, workers and drones share similar transcriptional profiles during the larval-pupal transition that are distinct from those exhibited by queens. in other words, workers and drones differ from queens in the patterns of co-expression of the four hexamerin genes.

fat body from adult females was also used to quantitatively compare the levels of hex 70a and hex  <dig> transcripts . we compared age-matched workers and queens , but to investigate the effect of mating in transcript levels, we also included egg-laying queens in this analysis. figure  <dig> shows that 3-day old workers have a significantly higher quantity of both transcripts than queens, independent of their reproductive status.

expression of hexamerin genes in the gonads of developing and adult workers, queens and drones
the expression of hexamerin genes was also investigated in developing and adult female and male gonads using rt-pcr . the only hexamerin gene apparently inactive in ovaries and testes is hex 70c, as presumed from the complete absence of its transcript in these organs. the levels of hex 70b transcripts were abundant, but only in the larval gonads of queens and drones. a high level of hex  <dig> mrna was found in the larval gonads of workers, queens, and drones. expression then decreases during the pupal stage to be resumed exclusively in the ovaries of egg-laying queens. similarly, a relatively high level of hex 70a transcripts was found in the gonads of workers and drones at the larval/pupal stages, and in the ovaries of queens at the pupal/early adult stages. this is followed by transcript depletion in the gonads of workers and drones, but not in the ovaries of virgin and egg-laying queens where hex 70a expression is maintained, although at a low level, throughout the adult stage.

in summary, the presence of hexamerin transcripts in larval and pupal gonads of workers, drones and queens suggests roles in ovary and testis development, and in spermatogenesis, which occurs during the pupal stage. the higher expression of hex  <dig> in the ovaries of egg-laying than virgin queens is remarkable, and suggests a function in reproduction.

discussion
hexamerin genes and deduced proteins revealed striking structural differences
the tandem organization of the hex 70a, 70b and 70c genes in the honey bee genome supports the hypothesis of origin by gene duplication, a common phenomenon among insect hexamerins  <cit> . the separately located hex  <dig> gene exhibits unusual features throughout its sequence. it encodes a subunit that is longer than those usually found, and which carries a very high proportion of glx . because these features are also displayed by hexamerins found in some species of ants  <cit>  and wasps  <cit> , it had been previously thought that they were restricted to hymenopterans. in fact, two hexamerins in the n. vitripennis wasp  exhibit such characteristics . however, a receptor in drosophila, dmfbp <dig>   <cit> , is also composed by a very high glx content  and has a high molecular mass . we also identified hexamerins containing slightly lower glx percentages  among the dipterans, coleopterans and in the isopteran included in the tree . the physiological significance of such a high proportion of glutamine and glutamic acid in hexamerins remains to be elucidated.

a conserved histidine residue was identified in each of the four amino acid sequences. in the ancestral hemocyanins, six copper-liganding histidines confer the ability to bind and transport oxygen. the insect hexamerins lost most or all of the histidine residues and, thus, the oxygen-binding function  <cit> .

the ~ <dig> kda hexamerins in the honey bee were classified as arylphorins and/or methionine-rich, according to their particular amino acid composition. due to the importance of aromatic amino acids in sclerotization, the hex 70a and hex 70c arylphorins may contribute to exoskeleton hardening and differentiation during pharate adult development. hex 70c is also rich in methionine, and like hex 70b  it may act as a sulfur reserve for development toward the adult stage.

the search for cis-acting elements in the ucr of each hexamerin gene using bioinformatic analyses revealed a total of six overrepresented dna motifs. it was very interesting to find out that all four hexamerin genes exhibit potential binding sites for the protein usp, thus suggesting regulation by jh and/or ecdysteroids. usp has been primarily studied as part of the 20-hydroxyecdysone -binding nuclear receptor complex  <cit> . however it was recently also identified as a potential target for compounds based on a methyl farnesoid structure, like jh  <cit> . the potential usp binding motif is located near the start codon of each hexamerin gene , a conserved pattern that increases the likelihood of its functionality. using a hormone manipulation experiment, we recently demonstrated that hex 70b is induced by jh and repressed by 20e  <cit> . in the current study we expanded this experiment to investigate the action of jh on the expression of the other honey bee hexamerin genes. to make this approach comparative, we re-tested the expression of hex 70b in the same fat body samples used for the analysis of the other genes. the results showed a strong and positive jh-influence on the expression of hex 70b and hex 70c, and a weaker effect on the expression of hex 70a and hex  <dig>  the observed differential effect of jh on expression levels suggests that the jh titer that induces a hexamerin gene for maximal expression may differ from the jh-threshold needed for maximal expression of their homologous. further studies using a series of jh doses for treating aged-synchronized honey bee larvae may confirm  this hypothesis. these results are in accord with the proposed functionality of the usp regulatory element in ucrs.

in addition to the potential usp binding motif, five additional motifs  were overrepresented in the ucrs of all four hexamerin genes, suggesting co-regulation. in the context of metamorphosis, or larval-pupal transition, this would assure the massive and synchronized production of hexamerins in late larvae for using during pupal and pharate-adult development. in fact, all four hexamerin genes reached their highest expression level during the very same stage, the 5th larval instar . lending support to the idea of co-regulation, we found that the transcriptional profiles of the hexamerin genes in each caste and sex during the larval-pupal transition are in general positively correlated. regulatory factors could interact with the common sequence motifs, thus influencing the correlated expression. however, the transcriptional profiles of hex 70b/hex  <dig> in workers and drones, and of hex 70b/hex 70c in workers, did not show a positive correlation . furthermore, in metamorphosing queens, only the hex 70c and hex  <dig> transcriptional profiles showed a significant pearson's correlation coefficient. such differences might be due to structural features in the architecture of each hexamerin gene ucr, such as the type, number and spatial distribution of the overrepresented motifs, which raises the possibility of nuanced differences in the co-regulatory mechanism.

diversification of hexamerins associated with independent radiation within insect orders
based on amino acid sequence similarities and hexameric structure, it has been proposed that arthropod hemocyanins gave rise to the insect hexamerins  <cit> , which lost the ability to bind cu2+ ions. therefore, in contrast to the ancestral molecule, hexamerins do not bind and deliver hemolymph oxygen, but mainly have a role as storage proteins. the molecular phylogeny shown in figure  <dig> shows a complex pattern of hexamerin evolution, with independent radiation in each of the selected insect orders. in general, our analysis resulted in a similar tree topology as those published before  <cit> , with the hemimetabola  hexamerins in a basal position, followed by hymenopteran and coleopteran hexamerins, which are basal to the lepidopteran and dipteran ones. as previously noticed, these evolutionary relationships are in good agreement with phylogeny of insect orders  <cit> .

most of the information on hexamerin evolution derives from studies on dipteran and lepidopteran species, with a few studies on other holometabolous and hemimetabolous orders, although data from an evolutionarily less-derived order  have been recently published  <cit> . the main contribution of the current phylogenetic analysis was to explore the evolutionary relationship among the honey bee hexamerins and their homologue sequences in other insect orders. it is evident in our phylogenetic tree that the high molecular mass amehex <dig> is located at the most basal position among the holometabola hexamerins. amehex <dig> shares this position with two probable orthologues, nvihex <dig> and nvihex <dig>  similarly, the gene encoding amehex70a apparently has an orthologue, nvihex <dig>  in the genome of n. vitripennis. other potential orthology relationship was exhibited by the honey bee amehex70c, and the ant cfehex <dig> 

the molecular phylogeny also revealed a potential orthology relationship outside the hymenopteran clade, between the hexamerins from t. molitor, tmohex <dig>  and t. castaneum, tcahex <dig>  but a definitive conclusion would only be possible if t. molitor had its genome sequenced. for the lepidopteran hexamerin sequences it is more complicated to infer orthology relationships, at least until they were available in public databases. orthology may be a reflection of functional equivalence, although it is important to consider that in view of gene loss and other events in evolution of a group of organisms, genes from different species sharing high sequence similarity may be not orthologues at all  <cit> . functional studies are therefore decisive to elucidate this complex relationship among hexamerin genes.

a relevant observation taken from our molecular phylogeny is the well-supported split between dipteran hexamerins and the group formed by the hexamerin receptor dmefbp <dig> and dme <dig> plus dme <dig> . it has already been suggested that dipteran hexamerin receptors, which also belong to the hemocyanin-hexamerin superfamily, form a separate group in phylogenetic trees  <cit> . whether these other two dmefbp <dig> paralogs have a similar function is still unknown.

it is also obvious that most of the lepidopteran hexamerins used in tree reconstruction are methionine-rich proteins, thus suggesting that they derived from an ancestral molecule containing a high proportion of this amino acid. we also observed that, except for amehex <dig> every basal hexamerin in each insect order is an arylphorin, thus suggesting that insect hexamerins have evolved from an ancestral arylphorin. our phylogenetic analysis also supports the hypothesis of gene duplication events taking place mainly after the split of insect orders.

expression of hexamerin genes in larval fat body: the well-known role in metamorphosis and a putative role in binding jh and regulating caste differentiation
the four hexamerin genes were highly transcribed in the larval fat body of workers, queens and drones, and are probably involved in hexamerin synthesis for amino acid storage to support metamorphosis and development toward the adult stage. however, these genes were differentially co-expressed in the honey bee morphotypes, as revealed by transcript quantification during the critical period of larval-pupal transition. the most evident difference occurred during the feeding phase of the 5th larval instar , where we observed a higher level of hex  <dig>  hex 70a and hex 70b transcripts in workers and drones than in queens. this is a very interesting finding if contrasted to the caste and sex-specific jh titer at this stage, which is higher in queens than in workers and drones  <cit> . it is known that jh plays a central role in phenotypic caste differentiation in a. mellifera. this hormone triggers specific physiological responses in the bipotent female larvae, a high titer inducing development of a queen and a low titer specifying the worker phenotype  <cit> . the inverse relationship between levels of hexamerin transcripts and jh titers leads us to speculate that, as was proposed for the termite reticulitermis flavipes  <cit> , the honey bee hexamerins may function as jh-binding proteins. by binding and controlling jh levels, hexamerins were implicated in the process of jh-dependent caste differentiation in this termite. by applying this model to the honey bee, we may hypothesize that if jh titer exceeded the binding capacity of hexamerins, it would interact with target receptors and therefore cause the bipotent female larva to develop as a queen. if not, the larva would develop as a worker. interestingly, all the four hexamerin genes showed a significantly higher expression in drone feeding larvae  than in queens at the same stage , thus reinforcing our hypothesis on a role for the honey bee hexamerins in binding and controlling jh action. but this needs further validation.

to our knowledge, hexameric jh-binding proteins have been characterized only in orthopterans  <cit> . the cdna and predicted amino acid sequences of the high affinity jh-binding hexamerin from l. migratoria  show peculiar structural features. it is clear that lmijhbs is not closely related to any other hexamerin, including the potential jh-binding hexamerin from r. flavipes  and the honey bee hexamerins . the lack of homology clearly indicates that these hexamerins have evolved independently, and it is unlikely that comparisons among their primary sequences will bring to light amino acid regions or domains that could be involved in jh binding. such regions or domains could not be identified in the lmjhbs sequence  <cit> . thus, functional binding assays and determination of dissociation constants are required to assess the potential role of hexamerins in binding jh and, by extension, to verify the role of the honey bee hexamerins in caste determination.

an interesting finding is that insect hexamerins may not directly bind jh but may be part of a multiprotein complex engaged in jh sequestration and transport. the first demonstration of a physical interaction among jh-binding proteins , two hexamerins , and an apolipophorin was recently provided  <cit> . this interaction implies an important participation of hexamerins in regulating jh levels, and action, even if they do not directly bind to jh.

re-induction of hexamerin gene expression in the adult fat body: differential roles in workers and queens
in agreement with previous reports on hemolymph proteins in the honey bee  <cit> , lower levels of hexamerin gene expression were found in adult workers in comparison to larvae. of the four hexamerin genes, hex 70a and hex  <dig> were the only ones with detectable expression in the adult fat body. their transcriptional profiles differed conspicuously among adult queens, drones and workers. levels of hex 70a transcripts were very low in queens and abundant in drones and workers. however, in drones, the abundance is limited to the five first post-emergence days, whereas, in workers, it is extended up to the 30th day of adult life. these transcriptional profiles in workers and drones match the respective hex 70a profiles in hemolymph  <cit> , and are closely connected with adult life duration. workers live longer than drones  <cit> , and their respective patterns of hex 70a expression reflects fat body metabolic activity and lifespan. but the higher expression of hex 70a in the fat body of adult workers in comparison to queens  suggests an important role in worker physiology. this is discussed below.

the expression of hex  <dig> is somewhat different when compared to that of hex 70a. like hex 70a, the hex  <dig> gene is considerably active in the fat body of adult workers, but it is practically silent in queens  and drones . yet, in spite of the evident presence of hex  <dig> transcripts in adult workers, a negligible amount of hex  <dig> subunits were detected in hemolymph  <cit> , indicating that this hexamerin does not function as a storage protein at this stage. but a potential function in the fat body of adult workers cannot be ruled out, given its specific and abundant expression in this tissue.

our results are consistent with re-induction of hex 70a and hex  <dig> expression in adult bees, although only the product of hex 70a accumulates in hemolymph at this stage. the presence of hexamerins in adult insects may occur either because they were carried over from the larval stage, or due to a specific induction in adults. as examples, some lepidopterans that do not feed on protein as adults may use the larval store of hexamerins for egg production  <cit> ; mrnas for an adult-specific hexamerin appears in musca domestica females only after induction by a rich protein meal  <cit> . differently, the presence of hex 70a in the adult honey bee results from gene re-induction after a drastic reduction in transcript levels during adult ecdysis .

the honey bee queen continuously receives, via trophallaxis, a proteinaceous glandular secretion, the royal jelly, which is produced by nurse workers  <cit> . she may not need to allocate amino acids from larval hexamerins for egg production, since such compounds are continuously derived from her protein-enriched diet. the structural nutrients and energy contained in royal jelly administered to queens are not used for the synthesis and storage of hexamerins  but must be mainly directed to vitellogenesis and egg production. in contrast to the queen, workers normally do not produce eggs, although they also have access to a rich source of dietary proteins. they actively consume pollen when they are younger, i.e., during the first two weeks of adult life  <cit> . pollen consumption increases the expression of hex 70a and hex  <dig> in the fat body, and increases the abundance of hex 70a in hemolymph  <cit> . this is consistent with dietary protein consumption causing reinduction of both hexamerin genes in adult workers, and thereby enabling the storage of hex 70a. whether hex  <dig> mrnas are translated and, if so, why their subunits do not accumulate in hemolymph are questions that remain unanswered.

pollen consumption also causes the accumulation of vitellogenin, the yolk protein precursor, in the hemolymph of young workers  <cit> . vitellogenin is continuously produced and stored in hemolymph during the first two weeks of adulthood to be subsequently depleted as worker bees get older and become foragers  <cit> . hex 70a follows a similar pattern.

since workers normally do not reproduce and in general have a short life, the question that remains unanswered is: why do they store proteins? we suggest that the consumption of pollen by young workers exceeds demand, and the excess is hoarded in the form of storage proteins to be consumed later, when they become foragers. foragers rather eat nectar  <cit> , which is composed primarily by carbohydrates  <cit> . by this means, stored proteins could provide amino acids for sustaining worker basal metabolism during foraging. the well documented observations that hex 70a  <cit> , vitellogenin  <cit> , and total hemolymph protein titers  <cit>  decrease gradually in foragers is consistent with this hypothesis.

the destination of proteins stored in worker hemolymph would not be fixed, but dependent on the social context. in case there is queen loss, workers may activate their ovaries for drone production. their protein reserves would then be directed to meet reproduction demands. interestingly, workers accumulate storage proteins when they are younger and more prone to activate their ovaries if separated from the queen. also in the ant camponotus festinatus, hexamerins are possibly involved in important facets of sociality. it was demonstrated that in the presence of larvae, adult workers do not store, but apparently make use of hexamerins to nourish larvae. conversely, hexamerins accumulate in hemolymph of workers with no larvae to feed. it was also observed that hexamerins exist in great amounts in virgin queens and are depleted when they seal themselves in a chamber to lay eggs to found a new colony, thus indicating utilization for egg production and rearing the first brood  <cit> . the high levels of hexamerins stored by certain species of termites were also found to be related to colony founding and to the production of initial broods  <cit> .

in adult honey bee workers, vitellogenin and hex 70a may be part of the above mentioned multiprotein complex engaged in jh binding and sequestration  <cit> , since the presence of both in hemolymph coincides with a low jh titer , and their depletion occurs in synergy with jh titer increase . if so, as proposed for vitellogenin  <cit> , hex 70a also may be a player in the physiological process of jh-regulated transition to forager.

yet, hex 70a may have developed another role in adult workers. a protein fragment found in the honey bee venom  <cit>  matched hex 70a n-terminal sequence. its function in the venom, and whether it is synthesized by the venom gland or sequestered from hemolymph, was not yet determined.

hexamerin gene expression in gonads: a proposed role in ovary and testis development and activity
among solitary insects there is circumstantial evidence supporting the hypothesis that hexamerins are also used for reproduction. in lepidopteran species, for example, it was established a correlation between egg production and depletion of the larval reserve of hexamerins  <cit> . autogenous mosquitoes that produce their first batch of eggs without a feeding may use larval storage proteins, mainly hexamerins, as amino acid source for this purpose  <cit> . it has also been suggested that amino acids held in storage proteins are used for provisioning eggs of schistocerca americana  <cit> .

to shed light on whether the "adult" honey bee hexamerins are important or not for reproduction, we checked for the presence of transcripts in the gonads. except for hex 70c, hexamerin transcripts were abundant in the gonads of larvae and pupae, suggesting roles in ovary differentiation, and also in spermatogenesis, which in drones occurs during pupal stage and is finalized before adult emergence. two of the hexamerin genes, hex 70a and hex  <dig>  were also expressed in adult gonads, and this was exclusively in queen ovaries. interestingly, the expression of hex  <dig> is higher in the ovaries of mated, egg-laying queens than in the young, virgin ones.

it is known that mating triggers changes in gene expression in drosophila females  <cit> . mating also elicits physiological and behavioral changes in honey bee queens, and although the molecular mechanisms underlying such responses are largely unknown, it was verified that they involve differential gene expression into the ovaries. based on gene ontology annotation, a function in oogenesis and reproduction was attributed to these differentially expressed genes  <cit> . the high expression of hex  <dig> in the ovaries of egg-laying queens suggests a role linked to ovary activity and reproduction.

ovaries of egg-laying queens have a lower level of hex 70a transcripts than ovaries of newly emerged ones. but hex 70a subunits exist in equivalent amounts in the ovaries of both, newly emerged and egg-laying queens, as confirmed by western blots using a specific antibody  <cit> . therefore, ovarian hex 70a molecules seem to have a dual origin. it is produced by the fat body of egg-laying queens  and secreted in hemolymph  <cit> , implying that it could be incorporated into the ovaries in addition to being synthesized by them. the function of hex 70a in the ovaries of virgin and egg-laying queens is to be determined.

CONCLUSIONS
our study revealed dramatic differences in structure, organization and expression of the four hexamerin genes of the honey bee, where these differences might have arisen concurrently with their functional diversification. the amino acid composition, motifs and conserved regions were identified in the deduced protein subunits, which were also used in a phylogenetic analysis to explore their evolutionary relationship with homologue sequences of other insect species. analyses of the ucr of each hexamerin gene revealed a total of six overrepresented dna motifs, indicating co-regulation. one of these motifs is a potential binding site for the protein usp, and suggested gene regulation by jh. this hypothesis was reinforced by manipulating jh-levels in experiments in vivo, which resulted in jh-induction of the expression of hexamerin genes in larval fat body. apparently under a high dietary protein input as occurring during larval stage, jh induces hexamerins for a high expression.

the detailed expression studies using fat body, ovaries and testes revealed that:  the four hexamerin genes are highly transcribed in the larval fat body, and are likely involved in hexamerin synthesis for amino acid storage and use during pupal stage;  in young adult workers, the expression of hex 70a in the fat body is in accordance with the idea of amino acid storage for a later support of foraging;  the expression of hexamerin genes in larval and pupal gonads suggests a role in ovaries and testes differentiation, and in spermatogenesis;  the expression of hex  <dig> in the ovaries of egg-laying queens, was associated with ovary activity for egg production;  at definite points of the honey bee development, the inverse relationship between the fat body levels of hexamerin transcripts and jh titer suggests that hexamerins regulate jh availability and, consequently, may be involved in the processes of caste-differentiation and worker transition to foraging.

together, the findings of the present study are significant in that they highlighted the potential participation of hexamerins in important aspects of the life cycle of a social insect, in addition to their primordial role in metamorphosis.

