BACKGROUND
type iv secretion system  is a membrane-associated multi-component transporter complex, which plays important roles both in horizontal dna transfer between different bacteria and in bacterial pathogenesis by translocating pathogenic substrates  into host plant, animal or human cells  <cit> . a large number of t4sss have been identified in a variety of bacterial species  <cit> . in many cases t4sss have been implicated in protein delivery during the infection process, such as helicobacter cag-t4ss in human gastric ulcer and cancer, legionella dot/lcm-t4ss in legionnaires’ disease, and bartonella virb/vird <dig> in cat scratch disease  <cit> . recently, a large-scale screening study performed in over  <dig> prokaryotic genomes disclosed a total of  <dig> t4sss, among which  <dig> lacked relaxases and were considered as putative protein-exporting t4sss, since the t4sss involving horizontal dna transfer require the activity of relaxases while known protein-exporting t4sss do not need relaxes  <cit> .

the proteins specifically secreted through t4ss conduit are called type iv secreted  effectors, which exert important functions in cytoplasm of infected eukaryotic cells  <cit> . a large number of t4s effectors have been characterized experimentally with assays involving genetic complementation, reporter protein fusion, secretion apparatus or chaperone interaction, etc.  <cit> . however, it is difficult and time-consuming to find new effectors purely based on experimental methods. additionally, in a given bacterial strain, most effectors are scattered throughout the genome rather than clustered in a narrow genomic region. moreover, the validated effectors in different species are significantly diverse in sequence. therefore, the bioinformatic methods so far used, based essentially on sequence comparison, can hardly reveal new effectors.

recently, two groups of investigators performed large-scale screening of t4s effectors by bioinformatic analysis  <cit> . integrating multiple features including gene g + c content, sequence conservation, within-genome gene organization, regulatory elements, signal sequence composition, etc., burstein et al., for the first time, set up a machine learning method to predict and experimentally identify new t4s effectors from legionella pneumophila <cit> . the prediction accuracy was considerably high, but the method developed is merely suitable for t4s protein prediction in legionella or closely-related species, since the training sequences are all from legionella and the features about sequence conservation, gene organization and regulatory elements are specific for legionella. in addition, a similar training pipeline is infeasible to develop t4s effector predictors for a broader range of bacteria, because the numbers of validated t4s effectors in most other bacterial genera, not like in legionella , are so small  that the training data cannot provide reliable feature information. in another study, based on the weak sequence similarity with legionella effectors, chen et al. identified a group of effectors in coxiella burnetii <cit> . most effectors, especially those in the distantly-related species, however, are of no or very low sequence similarity. therefore, new effectors without sequence similarity cannot be captured through sequence alignment.

we have focused on helicobacter pylori to predict t4s effectors for insights into the pathogenesis of the distinct infections caused by these bacteria. h. pylori may elicit human gastritis and gastric ulcer, and this pathogen is also associated with gastric cancer  <cit> . in the pathogenesis, cag-t4ss plays key roles as an important virulence factor in the bacterial interaction with human stomach cells  <cit> . to date, only one effector, caga, has been identified, although several lines of evidence have indicated that there should be other effectors that participate in bacterial infection and pathogenesis  <cit> . no experimental, sequence alignment or comparative genomic methods are available for identifying new effectors. the only caga protein could not provide any statistic information about its sequence features as a t4s effector either.

numerous reports have indicated that, in many different bacteria, the c-terminal peptide sequences of t4s effectors are necessary for their secretion  <cit> . do these amino acid sequences share any common composition or structural features among different effectors in different bacterial species? could such features, if any, be used to develop an inter-species t4s effector predictor? such a generally-suitable prediction tool would be especially useful for identification of new effectors in species like h. pylori, which is supposed to have multiple effectors that are not experimentally validated yet and lacks a sufficient number of within-species validated effectors for species-specific effector feature extraction. recently, many inter-species prediction tools have been developed to predict type iii secreted  effectors  <cit> , but no similar software tool has been developed for t4s effector prediction. in this research, we collected a full set of t4s effectors and made systematical comparisons of their c-terminal sequence-based and position-specific amino acid compositions, motifs, secondary structures and solvent accessibility properties. based on these features, we developed a series of machine learning methods to classify t4s effectors and non-effectors. to our knowledge, this is the first inter-species t4s protein prediction tool, which can be applied to different bacteria and is especially useful for bacteria that have limited effector information for species-specific bioinformatic analysis.

RESULTS
sequence-based amino acid composition  differences between c-termini of t4s and non-t4s proteins
the t4s proteins were annotated from literature, while the non-t4s proteins were randomly selected from the genome-encoding proteins removed of known t4s proteins and their homologs . the size of non-t4s proteins was twice of t4s proteins. the gc content of the nucleotide sequences encoding the t4s proteins was roughly equal to that of non-t4s encoding nucleotide sequences .

comparisons were performed on sequence-based aac of c-terminal  <dig> positions  between t4s and non-t4s sequences. most amino acid species were not equally distributed in the two types of sequences, with glutamic acid, serine, lysine, threonine, asparagine and proline enriched and isoleucine, glycine, valine, tyrosine, tryptophan, methionine, leucine, phenylalanine and alanine depleted in t4s sequences . the relative enrichment ratio of aac was calculated for each amino acid species which showed statistical difference between t4s and non-t4s sequences. glutamic acid and serine had the largest enrichment in t4s sequences, whereas isoleucine, tyrosine and glycine were enriched in non-t4s sequences  . the relative enrichment ratios of biased amino acids between t4s and non-t4s sequences were not apparently enlarged when the length of observed signal sequence was shortened .

bi-residue composition  was also compared between t4s and non-t4s c <dig> sequences. among the  <dig> combinations of bi-residues,  <dig> were significantly enriched and  <dig> were depleted in t4s sequences . most significantly enriched bi-residues included ‘e’, ‘s’, ‘e’, ‘s’, ‘ff’, ‘tp’ and ‘pt’, while ‘i’, ‘l’, ‘g’ and ‘i’ were most significantly depleted in t4s sequences . the composition was further compared for discontinuous bi-residues . twenty two bi-residues interrupted by one amino acid were enriched and  <dig> were depleted in t4s sequences, among which ‘xe’, ‘xs’, ‘ex’ and ‘sx’ were most significantly enriched while ‘xi’, ‘xv’, ‘axy’, ‘lxa’ and ‘xl’ were most significantly depleted . among the bi-residues interrupted by two amino acids, ‘xxe’, ‘sxx’, ‘exx’, ‘nxxt’ and ‘dxxs’ were most significantly enriched, and ‘xxi’, ‘ixx’, ‘gxx’, ‘vxx’ and ‘lxxg’ were most significantly depleted in t4s sequences . among these continuous and interrupted bi-residues, ‘kxxe’, ‘sxxs’ and ‘exxe’ existed in  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  t4s sequences, respectively, representing the patterns most enriched in t4s signal peptides. nearly 90%  of the t4s sequences contained at least one of the three motifs. however, the percentages of non-t4s sequences containing such motifs were much lower .

tri-residue  and quart-residue  compositions were further compared, so as to refine the conserved motifs buried in t4s signal sequences. taking into account of the bi-residue composition preference property described above, an consensus method disclosed three degenerate motifs, ‘ke’, ‘ee’, and ‘ss’, which were significantly enriched in t4s sequences . in total, more than 50%  of the t4s sequences contained at least one of these three motifs, whereas only 12%  of the non-t4s sequences contained one or more of them . the motifs existed in effectors of different bacteria with iva or ivb t4ss .

the patterns with more than four residues were quite degenerate, and represented by very few t4s sequences .

distinct position-specific aac profiles in c-termini of t4s effectors
besides sequence-based aac preference in t4s signal peptides, the position-specific aac profiles were also compared between t4s and non-t4s sequences. as shown in additional file 4: figure s <dig> and figure  <dig>  t4s sequences showed apparently different amino acid composition profiles from non-t4s sequences. these differences were most striking for c-terminal 1– <dig>  positions . more positions in t4s effectors exhibited specific amino acid preference, while in non-t4s sequences, different species of amino acids appeared more evenly distributed at each position . consistent with the sequence-based observations, glutamic acid, serine and lysine were also frequently preferred in t4s sequences . leucine was enriched in both t4s and non-t4s sequences .

to further evaluate whether the observed amino acid preference  is statistically significant, we set up a binomial distribution model for each amino acid at each position of t4s and non-t4s c-terminal  <dig> positions. at positions of t4s c-termini, the  <dig> amino acid species did not show equal preference. some amino acids were enriched while some others depleted significantly . tryptophan and cysteine were most generally depleted in t4s c-termini. additionally, leucine , methionine , serine , glutamic acid  and histidine  were also frequently biased in the composition . the total number of amino acids with significant position-specific composition difference between t4s and non-t4s proteins was much smaller than that of theoretically biased amino acids in t4s proteins, demonstrating that there are many common amino acid composition biases between the two types of proteins . however, the difference between t4s and non-t4s proteins was even more pronounced at the c-terminal  <dig> positions . the most profound composition difference between t4s and non-t4s in most positions was the frequency bias of glutamic acid , followed by those of serine , aspartic acid , proline , threonine  and phenylalanine  . it should be noted that, leucine was also frequently biased  in t4s sequences compared with its composition in non-t4s sequences, indicating the larger enrichment in the latter . other amino acids, e.g., cysteine, tryptophan, methionine and histidine, did not contribute much to the composition bias, as they are depleted in both t4s and non-t4s proteins . notably, glutamic acid, though enriched in most c-terminal positions of t4s proteins when compared with non-t4s proteins, showed significant depletion in c-terminal 1– <dig> positions of t4s proteins and was significantly enriched at positions  <dig> to  <dig> continuously . some of the amino acids enriched or depleted in t4s sequences  could be related with the secondary structure and hydrophilicity, two possibly important secondary features related with signal recognition  <cit> . the biological relevance of the biases of the amino acids remains to be clarified.

structural flexibility of the c-termini of t4s effectors
the primary peptide sequence determines its secondary structure  and solvent accessibility , which may be associated with the specificity of signal recognition. therefore, we compared the sse and acc composition in each c-terminal position of t4s effectors with those of the non-t4s proteins. as expected, t4s effectors showed a position-specific sse preference pattern apparently different from that of the non-t4s proteins in the c-terminal region, especially at the c-terminal  <dig> positions . in contrast to helices in the non-t4s sequences, coils are more common in most regions of the t4s sequences, indicating that they are more flexible . besides, β-strands were less frequently adopted by t4s sequences . t4s and non-t4s sequences also showed different position-specific acc profiles, with more positions being exposed in the c-termini of t4s sequences . the distinct sse and acc profiles adopted by the c-terminal region of t4s effectors were similar to those of n-terminal region of type iii secreted  proteins, indicating possibly similar signal recognition mechanisms between the type iv and type iii secretion systems  <cit> .

when twenty t4s c-terminal peptides were randomly selected for 3d structure prediction, six peptides were predicted with high accuracy. the c-terminal ends of all the six peptides form helices or coiled coils, always exposed outside . a structure alignment showed that these six peptides could form a cluster with quite similar structures . most interestingly, though without similarity at the sequence level, legionella vipe  and yp_ <dig>  had an extremely similar 3d structure, with a mirror symmetry for the c-terminal end parts . legionella yp_ <dig>  and coxiella yp_ <dig>  also showed 74% similarity, and these four proteins, vipe, yp_ <dig> , yp_ <dig>  and coxiella yp_ <dig> , had 52% structure similarity . the 3d structure similarity suggested that the high-order structure could exert important function in specific t4s signal recognition.

inter-species prediction of t4s effectors based on aac and structural features
it is interesting to determine whether the distinct aac , motifs, sse and acc profiles can be used for distinguishing t4s proteins. support vector machine  based machine learning models were therefore trained with different features and/or their combination, and comparison was performed on their classification power. svm was adopted since it often generates high classification accuracy and especially high specificity  <cit> . additional file 9: table s <dig> showed the parameters optimized for different models.

as shown in table  <dig>  the decision model based only on motifs detected above had the worst distinguishing power, with an average accuracy of  <dig> %. the distinguishing power was similar among the models based on sequential aac, bi_residue composition , their combination and the combination of significantly biased aac and bi_aac between t4s and non-t4s peptides, in terms of sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, auc and mcc values . the svm model based on position-specific, single-profile bayesian  features only performed a little better than the sequence-based models . the bi-profile bayesian  model, however, considerably outperformed both the spb model and the sequence-based models . interestingly, the combination of spb aac features and sequential aac features could greatly improve the classifying performance, which was comparable to that of bpb aac model .

sn 
 vs. 
sp 
a 
auc
mcc
note: the rbf kernel function was used for all the models except ‘motif’. the performance was evaluated according to 5-fold cross validation results.

inclusion of secondary structure and solvent accessibility improved the distinguishing power of both sequence-based models and position-specific bayesian models. the model based on sequential joint features of aac, sse and acc outperformed any other pure sequential features-based model . most strikingly, the position-specific model based on the joint features outperformed all other models in terms of any evaluation parameter . the five-fold cross-validation sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, auc and mcc of this model could achieve  <dig> %,  <dig> %,  <dig> %,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively .

we also tested the influence of different signal sequence length on model performance. among the models based on c-terminal 25aa, 30aa, 40aa, 50aa and 100aa , c <dig> models apparently outperformed the others . since the models based on combined spb aac and sequential aac features , bpb aac features  and position-specific joint features of aac, sse and acc  showed the best performance on classification of t4s and non-t4s sequences, the rest parts of the research will only use these three models based on c-terminal 100aa signals. to further confirm the classification performance of these three models, we changed the size of negative dataset , and assessed the performance with 5-fold and 10-fold cross validation. as shown in additional file 11: table s <dig> and additional file 12: table s <dig>  the prediction performance was improved slightly when the negative dataset with larger size  was used and quite stable when 5-fold  or 10-fold  cross validation was adopted.

it is also important to observe the inter-species effector discriminating power of the models. a leave-one genus-out strategy was proposed previously and adopted here. as shown in figure  <dig>  t4sepre_joint exhibited the best inter-species prediction performance, while t4sepre_psaac performed worst among the three software tools. for most genera, t4sepre_joint could recall all or nearly all known effectors without any prior knowledge about the targeted genus  and at very high prediction specificity . the specificity of t4sepre_joint for brucella appeared lower because the total number of negative control proteins was only  <dig>  and in fact, merely one of them was misclassified . it is worth pointing out that only  <dig> training effectors remained after all the  <dig> legionella effectors were excluded, and the t4sepre_joint model with such limited training data  could still correctly recognize most of the known legionella effectors . one genus, ochrobactrum, was an apparent exception: the models based on the effectors of other genera could at best recall 2/ <dig> of the known effectors .

there are two types of t4sss, type a and type b. it is interesting to observe the inter-category discretion power of these models. the effectors were therefore assigned to two subsets, type a t4ss substrates and type b t4ss substrates. the negative controls were divided into two parts accordingly. models were trained with either one type of sequences and were further used to classify the other type of sequences. as shown in figure  <dig>  whereas t4sepre_bpbaac and t4sepre_psaac also showed some performance, t4sepre_joint showed the best classification power. the relatively low recall rates of type b effectors  with the model based on type a effectors were due to the extremely limited number of type a effectors  . again, the specificity of different models on either type was very high, further demonstrating the reliability of inter-species prediction with all these three software tools .

taking together, the results demonstrated that the features purely extracted from c-terminal sequences could well distinguish t4s effectors and non-effectors. the models, especially t4sepre_joint, showed an excellent inter-species prediction performance.

new t4s effector candidates in h. pylori and salmonella typhiumium
h. pylori is reported to encode multiple t4s effectors  <cit> , among which only one, caga, has been experimentally validated. as a result, direct statistic feature analysis for h. pylori effectors is impossible. it has been a big challenge to look for new effectors in h. pylori. we therefore used t4sepre , the inter-species t4s effector prediction software containing  <dig> highly-efficient models , to screen the h. pylori genome  for possible t4s effectors.

t4sepre_joint, t4sepre_bpbaac and t4sepre_spaac identified  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> t4s effectors respectively . in total,  <dig> candidates were predicted by t4sepre_joint and at least one other model, which composed the most potentially true effectors . the genes encoding these effector candidates were widely scattered throughout the genome. among these candidates, caga was a known effector and the rest  <dig> were new. motif screening showed that more than half of the candidates contained ‘ke’, ‘ee’, or ‘ss’ . it should be noted that ~70% of the t4s candidates were hypothetical proteins with unknown function . previous studies have demonstrated that many proteins with unknown function were likely to function as pathogenic effectors  <cit> . therefore, these proteins deserve further experimental validation analysis.
h. pylori


note: ‘joint’, ‘bpbaac’ and ‘psaac’ represent ‘t4sepre_joint’, ‘t4sepre_bpbaac’ and ‘t4sepre_psaac’ model, respectively. the genes with one or more of the three motifs identified in this study were in italic.

as a control, we also made a whole-genome t4s effector prediction from salmonella typhimurium lt <dig>  a strain which has never been reported with a functional protein-transporting t4ss. as shown in additional file 15: table s <dig>  t4sepre_joint, t4sepre_bpbaac and t4sepre_spaac identified  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> t4s effectors respectively. dividing by the total number of genome-encoding proteins , the percentages of positive t4s proteins predicted in s. tyhimurium  were lower than in h. pylori . furthermore, the prediction results of the three software tools were combined to increase prediction specificity, as performed in h. pylori. we found only  <dig> proteins were predicted by both t4sepre_joint and at least one other software tool . this positive ratio  was also much lower than that in h,pylori . similar to the distribution of t3s signals among different bacteria, it is not surprising to find t4s signal containing proteins in strains without protein-transporting t4sss such as s. typhimurium lt <dig>  though the number of positive proteins could be much smaller  <cit> . three proteins in lt <dig> predicted to be positive t4s effectors by all the three tools meanwhile . among them, stm <dig> is particularly interesting. it was predicted by all the three models with the highest scores and hence most likely represents a true t4s effector . in a previous report, stm <dig> was also found to contain a t3s signal  <cit> . the function of stm <dig> remains to be clarified. stm <dig> is annotated as a histidinol phosphatase and stm <dig> encodes a cytochrome c-type subunit. these two proteins are more likely to represent false positives predicted by the software tools, but the possibility could not be excluded either that, they contain the t4s signal sequences and could be translocated through the t4ss conduit to host cells if there was a functional t4ss in salmonella.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
bacteria encode diverse protein secretion or translocation systems to effectively interact with host cells. type iii and type iv secretion systems play especially important roles in gram-negative bacteria  <cit> . through comparative genomic analysis, guglielmini et al. found more bacteria than expected could encode potential protein-exporting t4sss  <cit> . this is an interesting finding, indicating that these bacteria potentially interact with host cells by injecting effector proteins through t4sss. it is much easier to detect whether these t4sss are assembled and functional than to analyze how they could function. identifying possible effectors is the determinant step to solve the latter problem. currently, the most effective way to identify new t4s effectors is to validate candidates predicted according to the common features of known effectors encoded by the same or closely-related bacteria  <cit> . however, for most species that have t4sss, only a small number of effectors have been identified to date. due to the small sample pool of known t4s effectors, no reliable features could be generalized from them. the species-specific methods described above therefore could not be adopted directly either. the number of newly discovered effectors is increasing for a limited number of representative species, e.g., l. pneumophila, but very few new effectors are being identified for other important species, e.g., h. pylori. these factors prompted us to develop an inter-species t4s effector prediction method.

in this study, we focused on sequence and structure-derived features. through sequence-based single-, bi-, tri-residue aac and motif analysis, we found distinct composition preference in c-terminal sequences of t4s effectors relative to control proteins. glutamic acid and serine were most strikingly preferred by t4s effector sequences . position-specific aac comparison demonstrated significant biases in the composition of glutamic acid and serine in a number of positions. unlike serine, which always showed preference in t4s sequences, glutamic acid was preferred in most positions but depleted in c-terminal positions 1– <dig> . in the c-terminal sequences of more than 50% effectors, three possible motifs were identified, which always contained one  glutamic acid or serine as the consensus residue . it is interesting to examine whether and how these two amino acids or the motifs play roles in the specificity of type iv secretion recognition. the biological meaning of other aac preference also remains to be clarified.

we also tried to observe the different secondary structure and solvent accessibility determined by the different aac features between t4s and control proteins. the t4s effectors had much more flexible and exposed c-terminal regions than the control proteins . we had similar observation for the n-terminal sequences of type iii secreted effectors reported previously  <cit> . it is not clear whether this is a common property of protein secretion signal sequences. interestingly, 3d structure modeling revealed similar tertiary structure of the t4s c-terminal sequences . due to the relatively low accuracy and heavy computation cost of de novo structure prediction, it is not feasible to predict the structure of all t4s effectors with high precision. however, it is still interesting to observe the structure basis of specific type iv secretion recognition.

a variety of computational models were trained based on the different types or combinations of features. three of them, t4sepre_joint trained on joint features of position-specific aac, sse and acc, t4sepre_bpbaac trained on bi-profile bayesian aac, and t4sepre_psaac trained on both position-specific  and sequence-based aac features, considerably outperformed the others in terms of sensitivity, specificity, accuracy, auc and mcc . additionally, t4sepre_joint also exhibited an ideal inter-species prediction power. due to the lack of known effectors in most bacterial species, legionella effectors represented the overwhelming majority of the training data . remarkably, the t4sepre_joint model trained on the sequences of the other species  could still correctly recall ~ 81% of the known legionella effectors . even with the fewer training data , t4sepre_joint could correctly recognize ~ 68% of the relatively independent type b effectors . though with lower distinguishing performance than t4sepre_joint, t4sepre_bpbaac and t4sepre_psaac revealed different features of t4s effectors. these three tools, therefore, may be combined in practice for t4s effector prediction.

prediction of sse and acc is relatively time-consuming for all bacterial proteins. we therefore only used t4sepre_bpbaac and t4sepre_psaac to screen t4s signals in all the bacteria with possible protein-delivery t4sss  <cit> . we found all the bacterial chromosomes containing protein-exporting t4sss encode possible t4s effectors. on average, up to 5% genes encode t4s effectors . we further focused on h. pylori, for which all the three t4sepre models were adopted to predict possible new effectors other than caga. a total of  <dig> genes were predicted by both t4sepre_joint and at least one other model. notably, nearly 70% of the predicted genes encoded hypothetical proteins with unknown functions . besides, many genes, especially those with higher prediction scores, contained at least one of the three types of t4s motifs. these genes and others with high prediction values provide a valuable list of effector candidates for pathogenic study of h. pylori.

an ideal computational model could predict all the true positive effectors  without any false positive effector . however, it is infeasible to develop such a perfect model. in practice, we have to make a balance between sensitivity and specificity to cope with different situations. for example, in bacteria with many known effectors such as legionella, the prediction specificity has to be sacrificed to increase the sensitivity, so as to find more new effectors. however, to identify effectors from bacteria with few known effectors such as h. pylori, it is recommended to increase prediction specificity at a cost of sensitivity. the higher specificity will ensure the fewer false positives and the lower experimental cost. the three software tools proposed here all exhibited quite high prediction specificity . it should be pointed out that, even with the highest cross-validation specificity 97%, ~ <dig> false positives would be predicted from a genome encoding  <dig> non-effector proteins. the sensitivity of t4sepre_joint is 89% at the specificity of 97%, so about  <dig> effectors can be correctly predicted assuming there are  <dig> effector proteins in the same genome. therefore, in a genome encoding  <dig> total proteins and  <dig>  t4s effectors, t4sepre_joint will predict  <dig> candidates, 61%  among which are true positives. in order to further increase the specificity, we suggested the following two strategies as we adopted in h. pylori effector prediction:  combining all the three tools and looking for the effectors predicted by both t4sepre_joint and at least one other software tool, and  increasing the prediction threshold value to  <dig>  or higher. from our observations, the true positives are more often predicted by combining multiple models, and with higher prediction scores. therefore, both the strategies should decrease the ratio of false positives in the prediction results.

the t4s proteins were also predicted from bacteria without known protein-transporting t4sss . it is not unexpected that some proteins also contain t4s signals in such bacteria. löwer and schneider  <cit>  and arnold et al.  <cit>  independently found there were t3s signals in proteins of bacteria without known type iii secretion systems . in a previous study, we also demonstrated that t3s signals could exist in proteins of gram-negative bacteria without t3sss, gram-positive bacteria and even yeasts  <cit> . being similar with t3s signals, it makes sense that some proteins in bacteria without protein-delivery t4sss may happen to have t4s signal sequences. strictly, a protein containing a t4s signal sequence does not necessarily represent a t4s effector. a t4s effector must have the signal sequence, be encoded in a host strain bearing a functional protein-transporting t4ss, and can be co-expressed with t4ss apparatus genes  <cit> . a tentative hypothesis is, however, as in s. typhimurium lt <dig>  the number of total proteins with t4s signals in bacteria without protein-transporting t4sss should be much smaller than strains with functional protein-transporting t4sss.

