BACKGROUND
stem cell systems operate by demand control  in which the needs of the organism determine in large part the behavior of the stem cells. indeed, both cancer and ageing may be understood as failures of this feedback control, albeit in different ways. the highly regenerative planarian flatworms , particularly dugesia and phagocata species, have been key models in the study of regeneration and wound healing for more than  <dig> years . their simplicity and the ease with which regeneration experiments can be performed make them an attractive system for understanding the fundamental mechanisms of regeneration. recent advances in molecular techniques have allowed deeper understanding of these apparently simple organisms; it is now possible to study the stem cell system and its descendants from the level of the single gene to the entire organism. the planarian life history provides the unique opportunity to take a systems approach to understanding stem cell dynamics in a whole organism.

in planaria, stem cells are called neoblasts and are defined collectively as the only dividing cells in the animal. among these cells it has long been assumed that at least some cells are bona-fide pluripotent stem cells , capable of indefinite self-renewal and of producing all differentiated cell types in the adult animal; this was recently experimentally verified in the model species schmidtea mediterranea  <cit> . a growing body of co-expression data shows that sub-populations of cycling neoblasts express lineage specifc mrna markers  <cit> . some of these co-expressed markers are functionally required for production of both the neoblast sub-population and the differentiated cell lineage in question; reviewed in  <cit> . this provides evidence for the existence of committed proliferating cells amongst the neoblast population but still awaits definitive experimental proof.

fully differentiated cells in planarians have been divided into about  <dig> different classes, or  <dig> to  <dig> super-classes , with the actual number of functional cell types likely to be much higher  <cit> . unlike other stem cell systems such as the bone marrow stem cell system, in planaria there is still no conclusive evidence for mitotically active progenitor cells with strictly limited potency . there are however populations of transient post-mitotic stem cell progeny, and these cells either differentiate to a target lineage or potentially may apoptose rather than complete differentiation. we assume that the proportion of the various types of differentiated cells is regulated towards a homeostatic target  <cit>  but in this paper do not model how that target is set .

the requirement for a given mix of differentiated cells and the simplicity of the system make planarians an ideal system for studying homeostasis and regeneration, including scaling, reproductive fission, and responses to wounding and amputation  <cit> . a minimum remaining tissue size is needed for such recovery after artificial amputation  <cit> , but from that minimum size the entire organism can be regenerated through proliferation of stem cells to produce new tissue de-novo and remodeling of the remaining tissue  <cit> .

we take a dynamical view of planarian stem cell system  <cit>  and thus formulate our models as nonlinear dynamical systems in which the nonlinearity arises through feedback control. although intraspecific variation and even intra-organism variation  <cit>  exist, we ignore it for now.

we develop two models based on current knowledge of planarian stem cell biology. the first has neoblasts, non-mitotic progenitor cells, and three kinds of differentiated cells . in the second model, we assume only one kind of differentiated cell and that the progenitor to differentiated cell transition is essentially instantaneous. this allows simplification that makes presenting some results clearer without losing any general principles.

we next give verbal and pictorial descriptions of the models, which are fully formulated in the “methods” section. we then turn to section “results” beginning with steady state prediction of planarian size in relation to food in the environment and show that both the strength of feedback control in response to food in the environment and the constancy of the fraction of neoblasts are emergent properties of the model. we use the full model to explore growth, shrinkage, and regrowth under sufficient resources to maintain metabolism and to explore bursts of cell activity during remodeling following a fission or wounding. we use the simplified model to repeat the study of growth, shrinkage, and regrowth and then consider two in silico experiments. in the first experiment, we ‘wound’ the planarian by removing a large number of differentiated cells, while in the second experiment we simulate death of neoblasts as happens after γ irradiation  <cit> . following this, in the “discussion” section we focus on the comparison of our model to extant data and the potential for future experimental data. in the section “conclusions” we summarize the predictions of the model and look forward to future developments.

verbal and pictoral description of the modelsin the section “methods” we describe the models as a discrete time dynamical system . here we give both verbal and pictorial  descriptions of the model. in fig. 1a we show the cell types and their transitions, along with the resource pool q. we assume that neoblasts, n, are immortal and do not directly transition to differentiated cells, but rather go through a progeny p cell that is no longer mitotically active but which is not fully differentiated. such a progeny cell may complete differentiation to one of the kinds of fully differentiated cells  or may apoptose and thus return to the resource pool. thus, the transitions for neoblasts are n→n, n; n→n, p; and n→p, p. the transitions for progeny cells are p→q and p→d <dig> p→d <dig>  or p→d <dig> 
fig.  <dig> 
a pictorial description of the model involving neoblasts , non-mitotic progenitor cells , three classes of differentiated cells , and a resource pool. the maximum rates of asymmetric renewal , symmetric differentiation , and asymmetric differentiation  are p
 <dig> p
 <dig>  and p
 <dig> respectively. as explained in the section “methods”, a steady state exists only if p
1<p
 <dig>  progenitor cells either complete differentiation or return to the resource pool. in the absence of external injury or death fully differentiated cells apoptose and return to the resource pool. these transitions have a maximum rate that is modified by feedback control. b positive feedback controls superimposed upon the transitions. neoblasts exert positive feedback f
n on the n→p, p transition in the sense that as the number of neoblasts increases, f
n increases, bounded by  <dig> and  <dig>  the resource pool q also has positive feedback on all transitions, in the sense that with larger resource pools the rate of transition is higher. however, we assume that the resource pool operates differentially on the different transitions, so use a
 <dig> a
 <dig> a
 <dig> where d is the vector  to indicate the feedback control of the resource pool on the transitions n→n,n,n→n, p, and n→p, p respectively. c differentiated cells exert negative feedback control on the transitions, in the sense that as the number of differentiated cells increases, the rates of transitions decline, sharing a common feedback control f
d. here we assume the that the differentiated cell in shortest supply sets the feedback control. absent an external source of mortality, the only transition for differentiated cells is d
i→q through cell death, which occurs for cell type i at rate m
i. in addition, progenitor cells may either fully differentiate or return to the resource pool through apoptosis. we assume that the rate of the former is determined by a function f
q that increases as the size of the resource pool increases



these transitions have a maximum rate that is modified by feedback control. in fig. 1b, we show the positive feedback control on these transitions. neoblasts exert positive feedback fn on the n→p, p transition in the sense that as the number of neoblasts increases fn increases; it ranges between  <dig> and  <dig>  the resource pool q also has positive feedback on all transitions, in the sense that with larger resource pools the rate of transition is higher. however, we assume that the resource pool operates differentially on the different transitions, so use a <dig> a <dig> a <dig> where d is the vector  to indicate the feedback control of the resource pool on n→n, n,n→n, p and n→p, p respectively. in fig. 1c, we show the negative feedback control that differentiated cells exert on the transitions, in the sense that as the number of differentiated cells increases, the rates of transitions decline, sharing a common feedback control fd. we assume the that the differentiated cell in shortest supply sets the level of feedback control .

in the absence of an external source of mortality, the only transition for differentiated cells is di→q through cell death, which occurs for cell type i at rate mi. in addition, progenitor cells may either fully differentiate or return to the resource pool through apoptosis. we assume that the rate of the former is determined by a function fq that increases as the size of the resource pool increases.

in fig.  <dig>  we show examples of the feedback functions and the resource dependent rate of apoptosis. the feedback function fd  from differentiated cells on the transitions of neoblasts  falls from  <dig>  as the number of differentiated cells increases. this function has a parameter α that controls the rate of decline, in the sense that larger values of α mean smaller values of fd for the same level of differentiated cells. the feedback control from neoblasts to asymmetric differentiation  is a sigmoidal function that increases towards  <dig>  as the number of neoblasts  increases. it is characterized by two parameters: the value of neoblasts at which fn= <dig>  and the spread around that value. for a model with three kinds of differentiated cells, the feedback functions ai and the resource dependent rate of mortality of differentiated cells depend on five variables. in fig. 2c, we show a cross-section of those functions by holding the number of neoblasts and differentiated cells constant and only varying the resource level. the values shown here are illustrative of the shape and relationship of the three feedback functions. the x-axis intentionally has no units since these images are intended to be schematic rather than accurate representations. in fig. 2d we show the resource dependent rate of natural mortality, again in cross-section. full details are in the section “methods”.
fig.  <dig> 
a the feedback function f
d from differentiated cells on the transitions of neoblasts  falls from  <dig>  as the number of differentiated cells  increases. b the feedback control from neoblasts to asymmetric differentiation  increases towards  <dig>  as the number of neoblasts  increases. c the feedback functions a
i depend, for a model with three kinds of differentiated cells, on five variables. here we show a cross-section of those functions by holding the number of neoblasts and differentiated cells constant and only varying the resource level. d similarly, the resource dependent rate of mortality of differentiated cells depends on the number of neoblasts and differentiated cells through their metabolic requirements; here we show a cross-section holding those cell numbers constant and varying resource levels. the x-axis intentionally has no units since these images are intended to be schematic rather than accurate representations. full details are in the section “methods”



to capture the transition from progenitor to fully differentiated cell, we make the relative need assumption that progenitors transition to differentiated cells according to how far they deviate from the homeostatic level, which is determined by both the number of differentiated cells and their relative proportion. the rate of apoptosis of differentiated cells is also determined by the number of differentiated cells and how far they deviate from the homeostatic proportion, and the resource pool. in particular, the rate of mortality increases for numbers of, and/or proportions of, differentiated cells above their homeostatic level and also increases as the resource pool declines.

in the simplified model, we compress all of the differentiated cells into a single type and assume that the progenitor transitions are so rapid that they can be ignored. this allows clearer analytical and pictorial representation of the feedback controls. details are given in section “methods”.

RESULTS
overview
we begin with steady state results, using the full model, showing the relationship between food in the environment and planarian size, and how the strength of feedback control from differentiated cells to neoblast activity emerges in response to food in the environment. we also demonstrate that in the steady state the fraction of neoblasts is independent of size . we then use the full model to study growth, shrinkage, and regrowth with sufficient resources. when resources are ample, feedback control is independent of resources and only depends on the number of differentiated cells = <dig> and fq=1). we then turn to remodeling of a planarian following fission. to do, this we assume that the initial cell numbers are a small fraction of their steady state values and that neoblasts and differentiated cells differ from their homeostatic levels. thus we anticipate that as the planarian regenerates it will need to change the number of neoblasts and mixture of differentiated cells  so that there will be a burst of mortality following fission, increasing the resource pool which is then used to regrow towards the steady state. we use the simplified model to study cell activities during growth, shrinkage, regrowth, and regeneration, and in the in-silico experiments in which a fraction of the differentiated cells are removed, as would happen with wounding or amputation, or a fraction of the neoblasts are removed, as would happen with a relatively precise x-ray treatment at the center of the planarian.

steady states
in fig.  <dig> we show the steady state size of the planarian for the full model; this is determined by the steady state number of cells of all types and an allometric relationship between size and total cell number . the curvilinear nature of this relationship is due to not all cells being able to acquire resources from the external environment .
fig.  <dig> the steady state planarian size for the full model as a function of food in the environment 



as described in detail in the methods, the strength feedback control emerges from the cell dynamics, depending upon the level of food in the environment and the maximum rates of asymmetric renewal and differentiation . the strength of feedback control from differentiated cells to neoblast activity declines as food in the environment increases because the increasing food supports more cells overall. thus, we predict that the strength of the signaling system between differentiated cells and neoblast activity will respond to the level of external food.
fig.  <dig> the strength of feedback control  from differentiated cells to neoblasts emerges as food-dependent from eq.  <dig>  the feedback functions α
 <dig> and α
 <dig> sit on top of each other in the upper curve and α
 <dig> is the lower curve



in eqs. 13– <dig>  we show that the fraction of neoblasts in the steady state is constant, independent of the size of the planarian. this proportion is determined by the transition rates of neoblasts and rates of death of differentiated cells .

dynamics with sufficient food resources 
in fig.  <dig>  we show the temporal pattern of size, total mortality of differentiated cells, total mortality of differentiated cells, and fraction of neoblasts under growth, shrinkage, and regrowth for a situation in which the planarian starts at  <dig> % of its steady state size in an environment with food availability ye= <dig>  shrinkage can occur with sufficient resources due to apoptosis of differentiated cells that return to the resource pool. at scaled time  <dig>  food is dropped to ye= <dig> and then at scaled time  <dig> increased to ye= <dig>  even in the absence of a resource constraint, the cell population dynamics show a dependence upon the level of food in the environment. this is due to the feedback control on neoblast activity from differentiated cells and feedback control of neoblasts on themselves in asymmetric division.
fig.  <dig> the temporal pattern of size, total mortality of differentiated cells, total mortality of differentiated cells, and fraction of neoblasts under growth, degrowth, and regrowth for a situation in which the planarian starts in an environment with y
e= <dig> at  <dig> % of its steady state size. for simplicity of presentation, we scale time and divide all times in the model by  <dig>  for presentation in figures. at scaled time t=  <dig> food is dropped to y
e= <dig> and then at scaled time t= <dig> increased to y
e= <dig>  even in the absence of a resource constraint, the cell population dynamics show a dependence upon the level of food in the environment. this is due to the feedback control on the activity of neoblasts



remodeling following a fission 
most organ systems in planarians are broadly distributed throughout the body  <cit>  but not uniformly so. thus, after a natural fission, the neoblast proportion is probably slightly higher than the normal steady state, but many differentiated cell types will be much lower than steady state and others will be higher. for example, in tail fragments neurons will be lower than the homeostatic level and gut cells higher. in fig.  <dig>  we show cell dynamics during remodeling following a fission. we assume that the initial cell numbers are  <dig> % of the steady state number of neoblasts, and  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % of the steady state values of the three kinds of differentiated cells respectively . starting from relatively small size, the planarian grows to a steady state , has a burst of mortality as the differentiated cells apoptose in order to achieve their target values .
fig.  <dig> cell dynamics during remodeling following a division. we assume that the initial cell numbers are  <dig> % of the steady state number of neoblasts, and  <dig> %,  <dig> %, and  <dig> % of the steady state values of the three kinds of differentiated cells respectively . starting from relatively small size, the planarian grows to a steady state, since food is constant) , experiences a burst of mortality initially  as the differentiated cells apoptose in order to achieve their target values , and a complicated trajectory for the fraction of neoblasts as the animal readjusts its composition



in-silico experiments 
we first repeat growth, shrinkage, and regrowth using the simplified model  to verify the same qualitative patterns. we started the planarian at  <dig> % of the steady state size associated with food level ye=  <dig> and then varied food over time as shown in fig. 7a. the planarian grows towards its new steady state until food is decreased at scaled time t= <dig> and then again at scaled time t= <dig> and in response the planarian size decreases . during this entire process, however, the fraction of neoblasts is nearly constant . the feedback controls fd  and fn  respond to the food pattern in complex ways, in part because α in the feedback control fd=11+αd is a function of external food level  and because of additional mortality when resources are insufficient.
fig.  <dig> pattern of growth and shrinkage using the simplified model. a the temporal pattern of food. b predicted size of the planarian as a function time. c the fraction of neoblasts as a function of time. d the feedback control from differentiated cells to neoblast activity. e the feedback control from neoblasts to themselves on the n→p, p transitions



in fig.  <dig>  we show the results of the in silico excision experiment in which we allow the planarian to grow to its steady state size for the given food environment and then at scaled time t= <dig> remove differentiated cells via excision or wounding. this leads to an increase in the fraction of neoblasts , an increase in the feedback control function fd  and a slight drop in fn . also note the different time scales in the recovery of size and the two feedback functions. size is recovered by about scaled time t= <dig>  and although the feedback function fd returns to its previous value at approximately the same time, the feedback function fn takes much longer to return to its steady state. .
fig.  <dig> the in silico excision experiment. a after the planarian has reached its steady state size at scaled time t= <dig> differentiated cells are removed by excision, leading to a drop in size. b this leads to an increase in the fraction of neoblasts c, an increase in the feedback control function f
dd and a slight drop in f
n , note the vertical scale



in fig.  <dig> we show the results of a similar x-ray experiment: after the planarian has reached its steady state size at scaled time t= <dig> neoblasts are removed. since we assume that size is determined by differentiated cells only there is no change in size , but an increase in the feedback control function fd , and a significant drop but then recovery of fn. notice the very different patterns of the feedback control functions in figs.  <dig> and  <dig>  suggesting that different patterns of cell-signalling emerge from different in silico experiments and that these can be predicted.
fig.  <dig> the in silico x-ray experiment. after the planarian has reached its steady state size at scaled time t= <dig> neoblasts are removed. this leads to a decrease in the fraction of neoblasts , an increase in the feedback control function f
d , and a significant drop but then recovery of f
n 



discussion
comparison of the model to extant data and and the potential for future experimental data
our eventual goal is to use experimental data to both test and expand the current model. indeed one significant advantage of using the planarian experiments is that it is now quantitatively possible to assess stem cell self-renewal and differentiation events in vivo in different scenarios. to date, most experimental studies are qualitative or semi-quantitative; we can use them to see if the current model can satisfactorily explain them or requires further innovation. while the current model has been developed with many biological observations in mind, such as the steady degrowth observed during starvation of planarian worms  <cit> , the existence of large populations of post-mitotic progeny and that cell divisions n→n,p or n→p,p appear to increase during starvation  <cit> , we ignored some other extant observations. some of these, such as the consistency of the proportion of neoblasts irrespective of body size  <cit> , are nonetheless predictions of the current model. others are only partially represented or are currently absent and highlight areas for future refinement. for example,  <dig> h after amputation there is a large increase in apoptosis  close to the site of amputation  <cit> . a smaller and spatially broader pulse of cell death is then observed at  <dig> h after wounding/amputation  <cit> . both these events are thought to remove differentiated cells that are now inappropriately placed with respect to the missing tissue that needs to regenerate and remodel. our model’s behaviour allows for a similar adjustment of differentiated cells after fission  and, in the absence of a spatial dimension in our model, reflects the same requirement to remove differentiated cells that are now over-represented. furthermore, it is well established that neoblasts increase their proliferation rate high above basal levels in response to wounding forming two temporally distinct proliferative peaks  <cit> . the first is spread spatially through the whole body between 6– <dig> h after wounding and the second is localised at the wound site at  <dig> h. this is an example of an observation that is currently not captured in the model, but can be incorporated into future iterations that expand on the details of the precise relative timing of stem cell behaviours and incorporate quantitative cell level data collected with this purpose in mind.

genome wide studies of gene expression in planarian cells are now de rigueur ; most recently this has included study of single cells  <cit>  and comparisons between wildtype animals and rnai loss of function phenotypes . many loss of function phenotypes provoke key changes in stem cell behaviour that can be monitored and subsequently correlated with gene expression changes. our cell level model can be expanded to include the results of these experiments, particularly those that appear to impact transition states and feedback functions of in our model, or suggest the need to add additional dynamics. thus our model will help experimental groups interpret the cell level phenotypes in the context of the stem cell behaviours. eventually it should be possible to assign gene expression profiles to cell types and describe the genetic control of transitions and feedback controls in terms of quantitative gene expression profiles.

it is also possible to test the assumptions used in the model, which are described in detail below. these include i) determining the power of the hill coefficient in the resource-dependent feedback control; ii) determining how the rate of apoptosis of fully differentiated cells depends upon their numbers and proportions; iii) determining how the rate of apoptosis of progeny that are not fully differentiated depends upon resources; iv) measuring the strength of feedback control from differentiated cells to neoblast activity; and v) determining the prioritization of resource use for cell divisions. the wound signal in planaria is currently unknown  <cit> ; our model provides a conceptual framework  relating the number of differentiated cells and the strength of that signal.

thus, our current model predicts some extant experimental observations and more importantly provides a systems level framework within which to incorporate precise quantitative measurements spanning from the whole organism, through organs, tissues, cell types and eventually gene expression and function.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our models lead to testable predictions about the dynamics of size, the rates of mortality, and the signaling systems in planaria. these include: 
a curvilinear relationship between external food and planarian steady state size;

the strength of feedback control from differentiated cells to neoblasts  and from neoblasts on themselves depends upon the level of food in the environment;

the fraction of neoblasts in the steady state is constant regardless of planarian size;

planarians adjust size when food shifts first due to apoptosis and then through a reduction in neoblast activity;

a burst of mortality during regeneration as the number of differentiated cells are adjusted towards their homeostatic level;

following wounding or excision of differentiated cells, different time scales characterize the recovery of size and the two feedback functions;

the temporal pattern of feedback controls differs noticeably during recovery from a removal of neoblasts or a removal of differentiated cells; and

the signalling for apoptosis of differentiated cells depends upon both the absolute and relative deviations of differentiated cells from their homeostatic level.

a whole-organism prioritization of resource use for cell maintenance, neoblast division, and progeny differentiation.



much remains to be done, including comparing models to data explicitly, evolutionary origins of the steady state fraction  <cit> , spatial dynamics of cells  <cit> , and extension to stochastic models  <cit> . for example, the equations that we have developed here can be used in the formulation of a probabilistic model of homeostasis and regeneration  <cit> , in which the deterministic framework emerges as the conditioned average of the stochastic system .

a model such as the one developed here is the first step towards a full conceptual framework for planarian cellular dynamics and will complement the outstanding questions raised in  <cit> , such as what is the wound signal stimulating neoblast differentiation, how do neoblasts sense the state of the organism, and what cellular machinery signals to the neoblasts.

