BACKGROUND
dna microarray technologies are powerful tools that can be used to quantify differences in the amount of specific dna or rna sequences between samples. recently, application of this technology has extended to the measurement of changes in the abundance of micrornas . mirnas are a class of small non-coding rnas  that bind to mrnas to regulate protein expression either by blocking translation or by promoting degradation of the mrna transcript  <cit> . these molecules are implicated in a large number of biological processes and human diseases . as such, hundreds of papers in the past five years have been published using microarray technologies to explore changes in mirna abundance.

despite its widespread application, only three papers have systematically investigated the reproducibility of results produced between different mirna detection technologies  <cit> , with only one specifically comparing microarray platforms  <cit> . early studies examining the reproducibility and correlation among microarray technologies for the detection of mrna gene expression revealed very poor correlations, in part related to sub-optimal protocols, incomplete or incorrect annotation of early platforms, incorrect probe-matching between technologies, differences in data normalization, inadequate pre-filtering of probes that had low signal intensities, and lab-lab variation in technical abilities . later large-scale studies on more accurately annotated platforms applied appropriate probe-matching techniques, mathematical modeling and filtering techniques to reveal a very high correlation among mrna microarray detection technologies both within and across laboratories . it is expected that the lessons learned from these early mrna platforms will result in fewer problems associated with reproducibility among novel array-based nucleic acid technologies in the future. nevertheless, as mirna technologies are new and significant differences exist in the probe design and experimental protocols associated with the various commercially-available platforms, it is essential to investigate the correlation and reproducibility among these technologies. various sources of technical and analytical variability are associated with mirna profiling and it has been suggested that much more work is required to identify and minimize these technical variables and increase reliability and credibility of mirna profiles .

in the present study we investigate intra- and inter-platform correlation among  <dig> mirna microarray technologies  using commercially-available reference materials. we also investigate the rank correlation of mirna expression on microarray platforms and mirna expression using taqman qpcr-arrays.

RESULTS
we created two reference samples using commercially-available mouse reference rna. the two references were selected to ensure differences in mirna abundance between the samples , similar to the methods described by irizarry et al.  <cit> . reference  <dig> was created by pooling rna derived from mouse testicle, ovary and from embryos, while liver, heart and lung were pooled to create reference  <dig>  aliquots from these four references were hybridized to four genome-wide microarray technologies . the results from these arrays were compared to each other, and were then compared to the taqman mirna pcr arrays produced from the same samples. the agilent and lc sciences arrays were carried out in  <dig> color, with  <dig> replicates per reference pool. the exiqon and invitrogen ncode arrays were analyzed in two colors. for the two-color arrays, reference  <dig> was labelled with cy <dig>  or alexa fluor  <dig> , with reference  <dig> labelled with cy <dig> or alexa fluor  <dig>  and then a dye swap was carried out. this was done twice for a total of  <dig> microarrays per platform. all microarray analyses presented herein were based on a sample size of  <dig> . to ensure that the different platforms were maximally comparable, each of the two-color platforms were also analysed in one-color format. the exiqon platform was thus analysed for the cy <dig> channel only, with the ncode platform analysed for the alexa fluor  <dig> channel only. in general, inter-platform correlations were highest for both platforms when data were analyzed in two-colors, though this reduced intra-platform reliability specifically for the ncode platform.

one process that can introduce discrepancies between the results produced by different platforms is the selection of the appropriate normalization algorithm. various methods have been proposed for mirna arrays. in the present study, microarray data from each of the technologies were normalized using a cyclic lowess approach for 1-color analyses, and a dye swap with lowess normalization for 2-colors. initial analysis revealed that the platform correlations were slightly higher using this approach than using a quantile normalization . cyclic lowess normalization assumes an equal proportion of up-regulated and down-regulated probes, and this assumption was not violated in the current dataset .

mirna sequences are extremely short, and thus the problems associated with probe matching that complicated the comparison of gene expression profiles across technologies are less relevant. however, the various platforms' probes were developed using different mirbase databases and thus should not be matched by name alone. thus, to compare across platforms probes were matched by sequence. technical replicates of probes were spotted on all of the array technologies; the medians of these technical replicates were used for the subsequent analyses. using this approach there were  <dig> probes in common across the  <dig> microarray technologies. among these probes,  <dig> yielded signal intensities that were significantly above background  on all platforms and were also included on the taqman arrays. venn diagrams for present probes are found in additional files  <dig> and  <dig> . in general the detection of probes between pairwise comparisons was quite similar, with no single platform greatly influencing the overall number of probes in common. when comparing both within and between platforms, correlation analyses were performed on two different probe sets. first, to ensure calculations were based on maximum numbers of mirnas, correlations were determined for all mirnas that were 'present' on both platforms being compared. second, in order to ensure a fair comparison across all platforms, correlation analyses were performed on the subset of  <dig> mirnas present on all platforms.

we examined within-platform quality metrics and reproducibility to get a general sense of the performance of each platform. the numbers of mirnas detected within the platforms were very similar . a rank correlation analysis was carried out to evaluate the precision of the platforms . spearman correlation analysis revealed a very high level of reproducibility within platforms for all four of the mirna microarray platforms . the poorest reproducibility was observed for the invitrogen ncode platform, particularly when two-color data were analyzed. closer inspection revealed that signal quality was relatively low for the alexa fluor  <dig> channel which led to greater differences in comparisons between the dyes. exclusion of data from this channel through single-color data analysis greatly improved reproducibility to  <dig> . reliability of this platform may have also been compromised by printing arrays in-house, and indeed, correlations of the other commercial platforms were higher . we note that a very high level of within-platform correlation was obtained for lc sciences, despite using sub-optimal hybridization conditions .

spearman correlations and the 95% confidence intervals are presented for the mirnas that were present within a platform from the sequence-matched list, as well as the  <dig> mirnas that gave detectable signals on all four platforms.

a rank correlation analysis was applied to compare across the technologies, where the two reference samples were used to derive log ratios . log ratios were generated using all combinations of references pairs. a spearman correlation was then used to examine the relationship across technologies . for the two-color platforms, these comparisons were based on both one- and two-color analyses, each of which are presented in table  <dig>  however, discussion of the data comparing exiqon and invitrogen ncode platforms to other arrays will be restricted to the two-color analyses, given that these platforms were designed as two-color platforms and were run in two color form, and therefore there is potential for cross-talk or competitive hybridization between the channels. a high level of correlation was observed between all array platforms. correlation coefficients ranged from  <dig> - <dig>  in analyses based on mirnas present on the two platforms being compared, or  <dig> - <dig>  based on the  <dig> mirnas present across all platforms. analysis of the  <dig> mirnas in common revealed a higher correlation coefficient for agilent vs exiqon compared to the other platform contrasts. however, there was a high degree of overlap of the confidence intervals across the correlation analyses. scatterplots were generated for present and absent mirnas . although the present probes revealed higher r <dig> values , probes within the background were also positively linearly associated .

spearman correlations and the 95% confidence intervals are presented for mirna present in individual pairwise-contrasts  or using the  <dig> sequence-matched mirnas with detectable signals on all four mirna platforms. numbers in brackets indicate the number of mirna probes used in deriving the analysis.

because qrt-pcr is used to validate the results of microarray experiments, we used taqman mirna arrays to explore the correlation of arrays with qrt-pcr. this analysis is aimed at evaluating the potential accuracy of the microarrays, as described in  <cit> . the differences on the log <dig> scale were multiplied by - <dig> in order to derive a positive correlation coefficient, since low ct values are associated with high expression . all mirnas that were present on the mirna arrays yielded ct values equal to, or less than  <dig>  thus, these mirnas exhibited cts that were well within the range of detection of this method  <cit> . spearman correlation analysis revealed a high level of agreement between the taqman and mirna arrays . the average correlation coefficients were  <dig>   and  <dig>  . irrespective of the analysis employed , correlations ranged from  <dig> - <dig> . the only exception was in correlations between lc science arrays and rt-pcr using the restricted set of  <dig> mirnas, which gave a correlation of  <dig> . this correlation was significantly lower than those observed with some of the other platforms, though significance was marginal and is lost after family-wise error rate correction . concordance correlation coefficients  were calculated for the  <dig> mirnas in common and present, as well as for the mirnas that were present on an individual microarray platform. these data are summarized in table  <dig>  in contrast to the rank correlation analysis, lc sciences exhibited the highest ccc in this analysis, with ncode  <dig> colour demonstrating the lowest. however, analysis of the  <dig> mirna in common among all platforms revealed a high overlap among the 95% confidence intervals, and thus did not reveal any significant differences between the platforms.

spearman correlations and the 95% confidence intervals are presented for all the mirnas that were present on a platform, or using the  <dig> sequence-matched mirnas that were detected by all four microarray technologies.

concordance correlation coefficients and the 95% confidence intervals are presented for all the mirnas that were present on a platform, or using the  <dig> sequence-matched mirnas that were detected by all four microarray technologies.

discussion
new technologies for the analysis of changes in mirna expression are widely used but have not been adequately validated. we examined within and between platform correlation of four dna array technologies for mirna analysis as well as taqman pcr arrays. within-platform correlations provide an estimate of the array reproducibility, while comparison to rt-pcr provides insight into the accuracy of the platforms as described in irizarry et al.  <cit> . two distinct pools of commercially-available reference materials were selected in order to maximize differences in mirna content. all analyses were based on the log ratios of these two distinct samples as recommended in prior cross-platform microarray publications  <cit> . aliquots from the same reference samples were used for all technologies to ensure comparability. because lc sciences was the last technology that we explored, mirna concentration was limiting for this platform. as such, the protocol used was not according to the supplier's recommendation. thus, we expect the results of this platform would improve if more total rna was used. probes across microarray technologies were matched by sequence to avoid errors in annotation resulting from the development of probes from different versions of mirbase. filters were applied to remove mirnas that gave signal intensities within the background, and the same normalization protocol was applied across the technologies. all analyses were carried out on a subset of genes that passed all these quality metrics. moreover, two color platforms were also examined using a one-color approach to minimize differences across technologies.

using this stringent data handling protocol we calculated the within-platform variability to determine the precision of the platforms  <cit> . this analysis revealed a high level of reproducibility within a given technology . the invitrogen ncode array exhibited the lowest within-platform correlation. this may be expected as these arrays were printed in-house, and both quality and reproducibility of a commercial product should be much higher. moreover, we obtained poor signal quality on one of the channels, and a one-color analysis of this platform greatly improved reliability. indeed, with the exception of the two-color ncode analysis, within-platform analyses revealed very high spearman correlation for all pairwise contrasts, ranging from  <dig> - <dig> . these within platform correlation coefficients are within the same range as those of previous cross-platform and cross-institute exercises on mrna microarray platforms  and microrna technologies  <cit> . for example, sato et al. obtained correlation coefficients for mirna arrays that ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> , depending on the tissue origin of the mirna samples  <cit> . these data indicate that the four microarray platforms generated highly reproducible data that are in-line with previous cross-platform papers.

further analyses also revealed a high level of reproducibility across technologies. spearman correlation coefficients were generated for each possible pairwise contrast for each of the microarray technologies using mirnas that were present across all platforms  or in common between specific pairwise contrasts . scatterplots were produced for both present and absent mirnas . spearman analysis compares the log ratio ranks  to determine whether the distribution of fold changes is similar. focusing on the two-color analyses for invitrogen ncode and exiqon , the average cross-platform correlation coefficient for all platform comparisons was  <dig>   using the  <dig> mirnas present across all platforms, with a large amount of overlap in the confidence intervals. scatterplots for all pair-wise comparisons  yielded very similar findings. the cross-platform correlations are consistent with previous work on mrna expression arrays  <cit>  and with the single previous study examining mirna array platforms  <cit> . for example, spearman rank correlation coefficients for cross-platform analyses ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  in the maqc consortium  <cit> . rank correlation analysis of mirna arrays revealed a median rank correlation of  <dig>  ; the highest correlation found was  <dig>   <cit> . thus, the results of the present study reveal correlation coefficients that overlap with the high end of these previous cross-platform analyses. as such, we conclude that results generated by these different technologies are highly concordant.

the highest correlation was found between agilent and exiqon . results for this comparison were significantly higher than most of the other comparisons. we routinely use the agilent platform for all of our gene expression studies, and thus expected within-and between-platform correlations for agilent to be high. moreover, the agilent and exiqon platforms were the first experiments to be run, and were run inside our laboratory, while lc sciences and ncode were done in other laboratories . as lc sciences was the last platform analyzed, the amount of rna available was well below the company's recommended protocol. thus, we caution that the finding that one platform is better than the others, or that exiqon and agilent produce more correlated data, may not generally extend beyond the present experiment. indeed, our primary interpretation of the data is that the platforms show a high level of similarity to each other despite being hybridized in different labs, at different times, with different protocols and amounts of expertise.

we examined the correlation of the log ratios between the array platforms and mirna expression measured using taqman arrays, as qrt-pcr is often considered to be the 'gold standard' for validation. all mirna that were 'present' on the array technologies yielded ct values that were equal to, or less than,  <dig>  the correlation coefficients from this analysis ranged from  <dig> - <dig> . this is much higher than a previous publication examining the correlation between taqman pcr arrays and mirna arrays, which yielded a correlation coefficient of  <dig> , suggesting considerable variability between the approaches  <cit> . however, these numbers are in-line with the previous study on mirna arrays that compared several platforms to taqman arrays, and found a range of correlation coefficients from  <dig>  to  <dig>    <cit> . this analysis is aimed at estimating the potential accuracies of the platforms. using the  <dig> mirnas that were present among all platforms, lc sciences exhibited the lowest rank correlation coefficient with taqman, however, this may be due to small sample size. indeed, the correlation coefficient for the  <dig> mirnas present on that platform was  <dig> , in-line with the other platforms. moreover, analysis of cccs for this platform  revealed the highest coefficients. ccc incorporates measures of both accuracy and precision in one index and is proposed to be a universal measure of study quality  <cit> . the precision is not based on ranks, and thus will give slightly different result than the above spearman rank correlation analysis. the ranges of cccs were in-line with data produced for affymetrix gene expression data against rt-pcr  <cit> . in the present analysis, lc sciences exhibited the highest ccc, however, comparisons among the  <dig> sequence-matched mirnas that were present on all platforms revealed overlap among the confidence intervals . these combined data indicate that there were minimal differences in correlation with taqman among the technologies, and all platforms perform well relative to mrna expression arrays.

the present study is complementary to a recent elegant paper by sah et al.  <cit> , which employed a very different experimental design to evaluate performance of multiple mirna microarray platforms. in our study, we compare different biological samples to evaluate reliability of arrays within and between platforms, as well as between technologies . in contrast, sah et al., used dilution series of spike-in positive controls on four microarray platforms to evaluate the platforms. specifically, they determined accuracy/sensitivity  and specificity/precision . as with our study, while differences were detected between the platforms, all four arrays performed well in each measure of array quality.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the knowledge acquired from early work on the technical issues related the protocols and data processing methods applied to gene expression microarrays have greatly facilitated the rapid implementation of highly-reproducible data using mirna arrays. the four platforms examined in the present study show high levels of both within- and between-platform reproducibility. the platforms also correlate well with taqman arrays. we would recommend any of the methodologies listed in this paper for the study of changes in mirna expression.

