BACKGROUND
genomic islands  are clusters of genes in a chromosome that are horizontally transferred from other organisms. depending on the genetic elements of these genes, gis can be sub-categorized into  pathogenicity islands , where genes encode for virulence factors  <cit> ;  metabolic islands   <cit> ;  antibiotic islands ; or  secretion islands   <cit> . since different kinds of gis have different genetic elements, and their sizes might range from 5- <dig> kilobase pairs, it is a challenging to accurately detect and characterize all gis in any genome.

with the explosive growth of fully sequenced genomes, the approach of using comparative genomics analysis to detect gis becomes possible. the comparative genomics approach assumes the availability of at least two or more genomes of related species and strains for any query genome, and it considers the regions with limited phylogenetic distribution in the query genome to be gis. to our best knowledge, mobilomefinder  <cit> , mosaic  <cit>  and islandpick  <cit>  use the comparative genomics approach to detect gis. the major limitation of this approach is that about half of the query genomes do not have minimum number of related species/strains for comparative genome analyses  <cit> . thus, detecting gis in such query genomes may not be applicable. in addition, such methods may also need manual selections of genomes.

an alternative approach of detecting gis is to use the structural features of gis. gis often contain mobile genes such as integrase and transposes. cheetham and katz  <cit>  discovered that one pai in the chromosome of dichelobacter nodosus carries an integrase, which was acquired from escherichia coli phage. gis are usually flanked by direct repeat  sequences, in which each dr is 16- <dig> long with nearly perfect sequence repetition, or inverted repeat sequence elements   <cit> . in addition, the mobile gene products usually play the roles in inserting and excising of the genomic regions by recombination between the flanking repeats  <cit> . another interesting property hacker and kaper found is that 75% of the insertion sites of gis are at the 3′-end of a transfer rnas   <cit> .

another interesting feature that can tells gis from non-gis is based on the sequence composition of the genome. typically, each genome generally has its own unique sequence composition signature, and thus the sequence compositions between gis, which are from an alien genome, and the rest of the host genome are different. for instance, the measurement of guanine and cytosine  contents in a chromosome showed that 20-30% genomic regions carried atypical g+c contents which were possibly gi-associated  <cit> . the combination of codon bias and codon adaption index  was used to detect alien genomic regions  <cit> . besides, karlin  <cit>  used dinucleotide frequency difference  to identify possible gis. in order to improve the discrimination power for detecting alien gene clusters, tsirigos and rigoutsos  <cit>  extended the  <dig> mers  to 8- <dig> mers. recently, vernikos and parkhill  <cit>  proposed a new model, interpolated variable order motifs, to detect horizontally acquired genes. this new method overcomes the low discrimination power problem using the lower-order motif models, and the extremely low frequency problem of observed motifs using the higher-order motif models.

in order to improve the detection power, the integration of multiple gi-associated features for detecting gis may be applied. islandpath  <cit>  is a web-server that displays the g+c contents of open reading frames , δ* difference , the location of mobile genes, and the location of trnas. islandpath leaves users to judge whether a genomic region are gis or not, based on provided multiple feature values. a recent study on islandpath has shown that using the feature of δ* difference only leads to the low specificity problem, while using the combined features of δ* difference and mobile gene leads to the low sensitivity problem  <cit> . garcia-vallve et al.  <cit>  used a simple rule-based algorithm to identify horizontally acquired gene cluster. the gene cluster is considered to be horizontally acquired if either the g+c content and codon usage deviate by more than  <dig>  standard deviations from the mean values, or the g+c content is extremely high or low. recently, vernikos and parkhill  <cit>  combined multiple gi-associated features such as sequence composition and mobile gene, and used relevance vector machine , a model similar to support vector machines  but exploiting fewer basis functions, to classify gis. while multiple features have been used in a few studies previously, comprehensive machine learning approaches and performance comparison have not been systematically studied, leaving room for improvement for predicting gis.

in this paper, we present our work about classifying several genomic island datasets using supervised machine learning algorithms, and show that decision tree method perform better than other machine learning models including naive bayesian, bayesian networks, neural networks, simple logistic and support vector machines  in general. we will show decision tree based ensemble algorithms can further improve classification accuracy by up to  <dig> %.

RESULTS
feature analysis
in this study, we used the datasets of gis and non-gis from three genera: salmonella, staphylococcus, and streptococcus. for each instance  of these datasets, eight feature values, i.e., interpolated variable order motif , insert point, size, density, repeats, integrase, phage and rna, were obtained. the description summary of the eight features is listed in table  <dig> .

in order to evaluate each of eight features, we define the signal to noise ratio  as the distance of the arithmetic means of the gi and non-gi classes divided by the sum of the corresponding standard deviations, i.e.,

       

where μgi and μnon_gi are the mean feature values from the gi dataset and non-gi dataset, respectively. σgi and σnon_gi are their standard deviations from the gi dataset and non-gi dataset.

we analyzed the feature analyses for the genera of salmonella, staphylococcus, streptococcus and their all mixed-up datasets. the evaluation of the eight features on these four datasets shows that integrase, phage and repeats are the most informative features. this can be easily to see in the datasets of streptococcus, where the g2n values of integrase, repeats and phages are  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively . the effectiveness of these features in both individual genera and their mixed-up datasets strongly suggests the existence of mobile elements and flanking repeats in all gi families .

the effectiveness of some features is genus-specific. for instance, the feature of insertion point in the cds is very informative in the genera of streptococcus and staphylococcus, but not in salmonella. the feature of rna is also genomic-specific. interestingly, unlike the feature of insertion point, rna is informative for the genus of salmonella, with small contribution for the genera of streptococcus and staphylococcus. the feature of density seems to be uninformative to the genus of salmonella, but is informative to the genus of staphylococcus.

out of eight features analyzed, the feature ‘size’ is the least informative. this can be explained by the random sampling process of non-gi datasets, whose genomic region size distribution was roughly the same as that of gis. however, in many cases, an uninformative single feature does not imply that that feature will not contribute to the whole model when multiple features are applied. previous studies have shown that the ‘size’ feature was indeed contributive in the rvm model  <cit> .

decision tree approaches outperform other machine learning algorithms
decision tree classification is one of most widely used machine learning methods. a decision tree classification model is represented by a tree-like structure, where each internal node represents a test of feature, with each branch representing one of the possible test results, and each leaf node represents the classification. due to the explosive growth of biological data in the past decade, the decision tree approach has many successful biological applications, including coding and noncoding dna classification  <cit> , protein secondary structure prediction  <cit> , and operon structure classification  <cit> . in this study, we used two decision tree methods, classification and regression tree  and j <dig> , for the gi classification. figure  <dig> demonstrates a j <dig> decision tree model built based on the dataset of the genus of streptococcus.

for performance comparision, we also used other five machine learning algorithms, including naive bayesian, bayesian networks, logistic regression, neural network, and svms. we used the weka machine learning package  <cit>  because all these algorithms have been implemented in the package. for the classification of each algorithm, default parameters provided in the package were used.

ensemble learning algorithms can improve classification accuracy
using the j <dig> decision tree approach as the baseline for classification, we applied four decision-tree-based ensembles, adaboost, bagging, multiboost, and random forest in classifying four datasets . again the weka package and default parameters were used. table  <dig> lists five performance evaluation metrics of each ensemble algorithm on the mixed-up dataset. we found that, in general, all ensemble algorithms could improve classification.

the ensemble classifiers include bagging, adaboost, multiboost, random forest.

for the visualization purpose, we also provide roc curves and their corresponding auc values of four ensemble algorithms, as well as the j <dig> algorithm, on each of four datasets . bagging has the highest auc values based on the evaluation of four datasets. compared to those of a single j <dig> algorithm, the auc values of the bagging algorithm are 5% , 6% , 4% , and 5%  higher in the models of salmonella, staphylococcus, streptococcus, and mixed-up three, respectively. it is interesting to see that adaboost performs the best among all algorithms in the dataset of salmonella, but no improvements in the datasets of staphylococcus and streptococcus.

since one genome may contain several or up to dozens of gis  <cit> , we may unavoidably face the problem of collecting small datasets for gi classification. the datasets used in our study were from thirty-seven strains of three different genera, with  <dig> gis and  <dig> non-gis. the relative small datasets for the genera of staphylococcus and streptococcus led to the unsmooth roc curves, as shown in figure  <dig>  as more genomes of the strains in these genera will be sequenced and the training datasets become bigger, the roc curves will be more accurately reflect our classification algorithms.

we further investigated the contribution of each single feature by using “leave-one-feature-out” model, where in each experiment one feature was removed from all feature model. figure  <dig> lists the roc curves and their corresponding auc values of the bagging algorithm on each of four datasets . by analyzing each feature using the “leave-one-feature-out” model, we found that the feature “size” is very informative in the dataset of salmonella , where we can see that the classification power dropped by  <dig> % of the auc value when the size feature was removed. the high contribution of the size feature in the model of salmonella suggests that other gi-associated features do correlate with the size feature. another observation from these classification results is that a single feature can be dropped from the multiple features in many cases, without affecting the classification performance dramatically. for instance, the auc values are  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the models without the feature of integrase, insertion point, phage, and repeat, while the auv value for all feature model is  <dig> . this analysis indicates the contributions of some feature values are redundant, even they are informative by applying the signal-to-noise feature analysis.

overall, when multiple features are considered together, the most informative features are the size and ivom features. this is in contrast with the signal-to-noise analysis, where the features of integrase, phage and repeats are most informative. these results bring us an attention that the feature selection should be taken cautiously when applying the single feature analysis.

comparison to other approaches
we compared the classification results of our j48-based bagging algorithm with a sequence composition based approach, alienhunter  <cit> . we found the overall accuracy of our approach on the genera of salmonella, staphylococcus and streptococcus are 14% , 8% , 8%  higher than that of alienhunter, respectively. the superior performance of our approach to alienhunter is that our approach uses multiple features, while alienhunter uses the information of sequence composition only.

we also compared the bagging with the classification results of the rvm method in a previous study  <cit> , and found that the auc values of the bagging algorithm are 9% , 7% , and 10%  higher in the models of salmonella, staphylococcus, and mixed-up three, respectively, and is same  in the model of streptococcus.

application of trained models for the whole-genome scale gi detection
the trained models based on j <dig> decision tree based ensemble algorithms can be used to detect the whole genome scale gis of prokaryotic genomes. we have developed an automated software package that contains the functionalities of downloading genome data, extracting gi associated feature values, and predicting gis based on our trained models from this study. the software package was written in c# and tested on windows, and it is available at http://www.esu.edu/cpsc/che_lab/software/gidetector/. the detailed description, as well as the usage, of our software package will be addressed elsewhere .

currently, the software contains models for the genera of salmonella, staphylococcus, streptococcus. thus, it is advisable to use the models of the same genus to detect any genome belonging to these three genera. for the gi detection of the other species, we provide a general model which was trained on three mixed datasets. the low decreasing of classification accuracy on the tests of all mixed datasets suggests that the models of different genera share a super gi structure model, which is fairly applicable to any other genomes. with more sequenced genomes available, we believe that more gis will be studied, confirmed and assembled. to this end, our software package also provides a platform for users to build gi models for their own needs.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper, we have presented a comparative study applying several machine learning algorithms for classifying the genomic island dataset. our experimental results have shown that the j <dig> decision tree approach performed very well based on multiple performance evaluation metrics. furthermore, decision tree based ensemble algorithms were shown to improve the performance over the single decision tree algorithm. these results suggest that such decision tree based ensembles can be applied for genomic island classification.

the analyses of the contribution of single features by using signal-to-noise analysis and leave-one-feature-out analysis, suggests that feature interaction is quite complicated in this domain. while the single feature analysis sheds new lights on the utility of each feature, it does not tell us that it will be informative or redundant when multiple feature models are integrated.

