BACKGROUND
overconsumption of food that are rich in saturated fats leads to excessive energy intake and is strongly linked to metabolic disorders such as obesity, diabetes, cardiovascular diseases and some forms of cancer . the intestine and the liver contribute significantly to control whole body and plasma lipid metabolism, being involved in lipid absorption and synthesis  <cit> . as the primary source of dietary fat uptake, the small intestine plays a key role in governing nutritional health . the intestinal absorptive capacity is enhanced by numerous finger-like projections of the mucosal membrane called villi, and there exist regionalized anatomic and physiological differences from proximal duodenum to distal ileum. food breakdown starts in the mouth and the stomach, but continues in the small intestine. in the proximal section of small intestine, food breakdown occurs with the help of enzymes released from multiple organs , and the absorption of phospholipids takes place  <cit> . the middle section has longer villi in comparison with the proximal and distal sections. it covers nearly half of the intestinal length and is characterized by the highest absorptive capacity. the distal section contains shorter villi and shows less absorptive capacity. fat-soluble vitamins are preferentially absorbed in different sections of the intestine: vitamin a is mostly absorbed in the proximal intestine, while vitamin d absorption is maximum in the median intestine, and the absorption of vitamin e and k mainly occurs in the distal intestine  <cit> . intestinal cholesterol uptake depends on the competing activities of npc1l <dig>  abcg <dig> and abcg <dig> present in the apical membrane  <cit> . cd <dig> , an integral membrane protein, participates in the uptake of long chain fatty acids  by intestinal enterocytes and contributes to optimal chylomicron formation in proximal section  <cit> , while cd36-independent absorption processes take place in the distal section  <cit> . cd <dig> disappears from the luminal side of intestinal villi early during the postprandial period and operates as a lipid sensor responsible for the dietary activation of intestinal erk1/ <dig>  <cit> . the cd36/lipid-dependent modulation of erk1/ <dig> associates with an increase of two key chylomicron synthesis proteins . during lipid absorption, intestinal enterocytes synthesize apoa-iv that, by increasing the number of triglyceride  rich lipoproteins, enhances tg transport in proximal intestine  <cit> .

the small intestine acts as a gatekeeper between the diet and the body and can directly metabolize or block nutrient uptake. recent studies have demonstrated a strong intestinal transcriptomic response to dietary fat intake. kondo et al. found high fat-induced up-regulation of lipid metabolism-related genes  in the small intestine of c57bl/6j mice, with negligible effects observed in the liver, muscle and white adipose tissue  <cit> . fat intake triggers the down-regulation of abc half-transporters  in liver and intestine thus leading to increased levels of sterols in diabetic rats  <cit> . biological processes like inflammatory response and cell cycle were found to be highly up-regulated in the small intestine of c57bl/6j mice during dietary fat-induced development of obesity and insulin resistance  <cit> . the absorption capacity of intestine displays adaptability in response to dietary fat composition such as enhanced intestinal cell proliferation, synchronization of fatty acid uptake and lipoprotein secretion, and altered transport processes  <cit> . section-wise studies have focused on gene-specific responses:  simon et al. found increased distal gut hormone response to a high fat diet in apoa-iv knockout mice  <cit> ;  nassir et al. observed sharp decreasing gradient in cd <dig> levels from proximal to distal intestine  <cit> . de wit et al. showed prominent effect of dietary-fat doses on gene expression, mainly in the proximal and middle sections  <cit> . they concluded that differentially expressed genes correlated with the development of obesity, and the main shift towards an obese phenotype was observed when an amount of energy included between  <dig> and 30 % was derived from fat. previous research studies investigated the consequences of fat intake on transcriptomic response of intestine by individual, pairwise comparisons between control  diets and treatments   <cit> . their goal was detecting a significant difference between control and treatments, rather than quantifying the strength of the response as a function of different levels of fat intake. our work is a re-analysis of the data produced by de wit et al.  <cit> . we propose a novel approach to study whether linear or nonlinear response types characterize gene expression in the small intestine . we investigated dose-dependent transcriptomic response to dietary fat along the horizontal axis  of the small intestine of c57bl/6j mice. mice were fed with  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> energy%  derived from fat for four weeks  and corresponding gene expression levels served to fit dose-dependent responses. due to the unique morphological and functional characteristics of each intestinal section  <cit> , we expected to observe variations in transcriptomic response from proximal to distal section. our focus was mainly upon evaluating possible nonlinear relationships between gene expression and dietary fat percentage in the three sections. we aimed at categorizing changes in the response types of differentially expressed genes  among each of the three sections of the small intestine . the main advantage of studying continuous transcriptomic responses as a function of dietary fat intake is related to the chance of combining the information of different treatments into a unique picture. this helps in better understanding how the response to highest levels of fat intake is attained. thus, we can investigate whether biological processes are overloaded by highest levels of fat content  or modulated in order to cope with them . the presence of a constant, linear response type along the whole small intestine can indicate spatial-independent mechanisms . for example, such an approach can be used to illustrate whether an obese phenotype  corresponds to a ‘tipping point‘ of the system  or  is limited by the metabolic capacity of the system . moreover, distinguishing among the shape of the response types in differentially expressed genes adds a further qualitative level to the description of the biological processes . the broadest goal of our study was investigating whether the response types are gene-specific  or intestinal section-specific .fig.  <dig> comparison between classical and novel approach for identifying differentially expressed genes. we use as a reference the case study of mice fed with four levels of fat representing  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and 45 % of total energy intake  <cit> ; gene expression is measured in three sections of small intestine: a in the classical approach, the total number of differentially expressed genes is determined by comparing the control diet  with treatments . gene counts refer to results of de wit et al.  <cit> ; y-axis on log <dig> scale. b in the novel approach, all expression levels of each gene  are considered to fit linear or nonlinear  response types. three hypothetical patterns are described:  gene type a preserves a linear response in the three sections of small intestine;  gene type b displays overload  in the proximal and middle sections;  gene type c shows exponential responses in most downstream sections . transcriptomic response of gene type a is gene-specific while the patterns observed for gene type b and c are section-specific



methods
ethics statement
the institutional and national guidelines for the care and use of animals were followed. the experiment was approved by the local committee for care and use of laboratory animals at wageningen university.

dietary intervention
at  <dig> weeks of age, mice were fed for an initial period of four weeks with a control diet containing 10 % of energy intake from fat. the main reason for this relatively long run-in period was that we wanted to be sure that the effects of chow diet were highly diluted/not present when starting the dietary intervention. in addition, since we wanted to investigate the effect of diet-induced obesity in adults, we choose to start the experiment when the mice were 16 weeks old . after the initial period, mice were divided into four groups that received  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> or 45 % kcal from fat . the dietary intervention lasted four weeks and then mice were killed by cervical dislocation after five hours fasting and anesthesia with  <dig>  % isoflurane. the isoflurane was evaporated in a vaporizer using a mixture consisting of 70 % nitrous oxide and 30 % oxygen. ten biological replicates were carried out for each diet group in the three sections of the small intestine .

microarray data
we analyzed microarray transcriptomic data from the intestinal mucosa of male c57bl/6j mice. the small intestine was divided in three equal parts: proximal, middle and distal section. these three parts were chosen because of practical reasons; when dissecting the small intestine one has to process the tissue quickly to avoid rna degradation. the 1st part  consists of the duodenum plus proximal jejunum, the 2nd part  corresponds to jejunum, and the 3rd part  includes the distal jejunum and ileum. detailed protocols on dietary intervention and rna extraction are described by de wit et al.  <cit> . the microarray platform used for this study is nugomm1a520177mmentrezg, a custom affymetrix mouse array containing  <dig>  probesets. the nugo arrays are custom affymetrix genechip arrays designed by the european nutrigenomics organisation  and manufactured by affymetrix. these arrays contain in part common probe sets that are also present on standard affymetrix arrays and in part newly designed probe sets . the microarray data used for our analyses are miame compliant, available at geo . data pre-processing and quality assessment, statistical analysis to identify differentially expressed genes and gene set enrichment analysis have been carried out in the r statistical environment  <cit> .

data pre-processing and quality assessment
we used the affyplm  library for data preprocessing and quality assessment. we applied the fitplm function that fits iterative reweighted least squares m-estimation regression to the probe intensity  <cit> . background intensities  were adjusted with the gcrma library  <cit> . such adjustment is obtained via estimators derived from a statistical model that uses probe sequence information. the gcrma library has been shown to perform particularly well in adjusting background intensity in affymetrix genechips  <cit> . after background adjustment, technical variability between arrays was adjusted by quantile normalization  <cit> . the quality of the plmset object was assessed by plotting relative log expression  and normalized unscaled standard error   <cit> . genes with low variability across samples are usually considered as not expressed. this is motivated by the observation that, in general, unexpressed genes are detected most reliably through low variability of their features across samples. non-specific filtering of the genes was made with the genefilter library  <cit> . the povera r function was used for variance-based filtering; genes with unlogged intensity above five, in at least five arrays, were chosen for the subsequent analysis. genes without entrez gene id and affymetrix quality control probe-sets were excluded. after data pre-processing and quality assessment we selected  <dig>  genes in the proximal section,  <dig>  in the middle and  <dig>  in the distal.

statistical analysis to identify differentially expressed genes
we investigated the statistical relationship between gene expression and dietary fat intake. we fitted linear and nonlinear  responses describing gene expression levels  as a function of dietary fat intake . we considered nonlinear responses that reflect:  blunted differential expression at higher fat intake, which may indicate overloading of the relevant biological process ;  progressively stronger differential expression with increasing fat intake ;  parabola-like differential expression ;  oscillating trends . the array data were log <dig> transformed . all responses  were tested by modelling log <dig> transformed expression as a function of fat intake . when comparing the diets of  <dig> mice , there was no significant difference with respect to total food intake in grams per day . however, caloric intake increased with increasing fat percentage . fat intake  was considered as continuous predictor of log <dig> transformed gene expression. we used the limma library  <cit>  to perform linear regression on gcrma normalized data , and tested nonlinear responses by modeling expression as a function of logarithmic-, exponential-, quadratic- and cubic-transformed fat intake. to identify differentially expressed genes we performed multiple testing correction, using benjamini and hochberg’s false discovery rate . it should be noticed that many studies regularly adopt an adjusted p-value threshold of  <dig>  for identifying differentially expressed genes . in the case that both linear and nonlinear responses were significant for a given gene, we selected the one with the lowest p-value. the robustness of our analysis was then tested by comparing the results obtained with two criteria of model selection .

gene set enrichment analysis
we investigated whether fat-responsive genes were enriched within distinct biological processes , and tested whether each intestinal section displayed unique transcriptomic response to fat intake. we performed hypergeometric tests to functionally characterize groups of differentially expressed genes. we investigated over-represented gobp in each section  using the library htsanalyzer  <cit> . to understand whether specific response patterns  characterized certain biological processes, or changed according to the intestinal sections, we assessed trends of gobp terms passing from the proximal to the distal region. we studied gobp terms that preserved the same response pattern in different intestinal sections , and analyzed those changing response pattern between the sections . a flowchart of the overall analysis is shown in additional file  <dig> 

RESULTS
linear and nonlinear gene expression
pre-processed and filtered data concerning all differentially expressed genes found in the three sections of the small intestine are available in additional file  <dig>  this file contains details on gene nomenclature , response type  and direction of change . the count of genes that responded in a significant way  to fat intake varies between the three sections . the highest number of genes showing linear, exponential or quadratic transcriptomic response to fat intake was found in the middle section, but the highest number of genes displaying either logarithmic or cubic patterns of expression in response to fat intake was in the proximal section. the lowest number of differentially expressed genes, for all five response types, was observed in the distal section. the proportion of differentially expressed genes exhibiting a significant linear relationship with the dietary fat intake was always above 53 %. in the proximal and distal sections, the relative importance of logarithmic and exponential response, respectively, was the highest. both quadratic and cubic response types were of marginal importance in all intestine sections . the number of genes displaying a logarithmic response to fat intake dropped from the proximal to the distal section . the opposite trend was found for the exponential response: the percentage increases from  <dig>  % in the proximal to  <dig>  % in the distal section. thus, although the highest number of genes responding in an exponential way to fat intake was in the middle section, an increasing relative importance of this response was observed from the proximal to the distal part of the small intestine . in the three sections, if we consider the changes in gene expression that were significantly associated with varying levels of fat intake we observed a prevalence of up-regulated genes . these results were not affected by the model selection criteria chosen for the analysis .table  <dig> count of genes that responded to fat intake in a significant, dose-dependent manner

results were extracted using the limma library and are specific to each section of small intestine; adjusted p-value <  <dig> . genes are classified based on the mathematical function used to fit their expression in response to fat intake . for each section, we summarize the relative percentage of genes characterized by the five response types  and the number of significant go terms  found with hypergeometric test . only gobp terms with at least six differentially expressed genes  have been taken into account

fig.  <dig> percentages of differentially expressed genes that responded in a linear, logarithmic and exponential way to fat intake. histograms are grouped according to response type, while different colors are associated with three small intestine sections. linear response was highly represented in all sections, while the relative importance of logarithmic  response decreased  from the proximal to the distal part of small intestine

fig.  <dig> differentially expressed genes that were either up- or down-regulated in response to increasing fat intake. results were obtained using the limma library, modeling gene expression as a function of raw fat intake data , logarithm-, exponential-, quadratic- or cubic-transformed fat intake values; adjusted p-value <  <dig> . in each plot, y-axis represents the gene count and x-axis corresponds to response types . results refer to three sections of small intestine: a proximal; b middle; and c distal



functional annotation
in the previous section, we classified the genes according to their category of response to fat intake . we found two main classes:  genes that preserve linear responses along the whole longitudinal axis of small intestine; and  genes that alter the shape of their transcriptomic response depending on intestinal section. due to the progressive absorption that occurs in the small intestine the amount of available fat decreases from the proximal to the distal section. this pattern correlates well with the decrease of the relative importance of overload/logarithmic response, and with the increase in relative importance of exponential response. the broadest objective of our study was to characterize the biological processes that are associated with:  genes that maintain linear response types , and  genes that change their transcriptomic response as a function of fat availability . to this aim we applied hypergeometric test to investigate the presence of gobp terms that were significantly enriched with fat-responsive genes. we analyzed lists of genes associated with different response patterns to fat intake . first, we considered full lists of genes, including both up- and down-regulated genes. second, we performed gene set enrichment analysis by taking into account the direction of change . we found terms that were over-represented in more sections and, in some cases, they were characterized by changes in the response type along the longitudinal axis of small intestine . this served to understand whether gobp terms in different sections preserved their response type  or showed some changes . the complete list of genes associated with specific processes  that displayed unique patterns along different sections of the small intestine is summarized in additional file  <dig> . additional files  <dig>   <dig> ,  <dig> and  <dig> list gobp terms and genes with characteristic response types along the small intestine; they refer to strictly up- and down-regulated processes, respectively. we identified distinctive patterns for inflammation-related pathways  and cholesterol-related processes .table  <dig> over-represented gene ontology biological process  terms that can be found in various intestinal sections

we summarize total number of genes corresponding to a given go term in the microarray gene expression , count of genes extracted with our analysis  and adjusted p-values . intestine sections: prox = proximal; mid = middle; dist = distal. response types: lm = linear; log logarithm; exp = exponential. gobp terms showing quadratic and cubic response types have been excluded as they can be found in the middle section only 

 acute-phase response : genes belonging to this gobp term showed a constantly linear response in all three sections of small intestine, with mixed direction of regulation . the only gene differentially expressed in all three sections was serpina1b .

 negative regulation of caspase activity : caspase activity plays an essential role in apoptosis and inflammation. this is a section-specific process: from middle to distal section we observed a change from linear to exponential expression . the genes birc <dig>  and igbp <dig>  were significantly responsive in the middle and the distal sections. prdx <dig> and gpx <dig> were differentially expressed and up-regulated in the middle section only.

 cholesterol transport : the response of differentially expressed genes related to this gobp term changed from linear to exponential when passing from the proximal to the middle section . the gene abca <dig> was down-regulated in both proximal and middle small intestine. cd <dig> showed up-regulation proximally, while all differentially expressed genes that showed an exponential response in the middle section were down-regulated .

 cholesterol homeostasis : up-regulated genes involved in this process exhibited overload in the middle section only . most of the genes involved in cholesterol homeostasis were up-regulated . for example, the gene pla2g <dig> was up-regulated in both proximal and middle section, and the same positive regulation was displayed by apoa <dig> when moving from the middle to the distal part of small intestine . these findings illustrate how excessive fat intake can have detrimental consequences  in processes involved in the maintenance of the cholesterol steady state in cells, especially in the middle section.

 cholesterol efflux : this gobp term shares many genes with cholesterol transport and homeostasis, but with a less sharply defined behavior. up-regulated genes showed logarithmic and linear response in the middle and distal sections, respectively . down-regulated genes displayed linear and exponential response in proximal and middle parts, respectively . the overload of the process that regulates steady state of cholesterol within cells  represents a bottleneck, and the negative, exponential response found for cholesterol transport should be considered in relation to it . it seems that the directed movement of cholesterol into or between cells is impaired when cholesterol level reaches its carrying capacity.



in summary, by completing the analysis of transcriptomic response patterns  with functional annotation we highlighted three main mechanisms of action in the small intestine:  acute-phase response  is not section-specific and exhibits a linear regulation along the whole small intestine;  lipid absorption and transportation are particularly active in the middle section, but the coupling with other overloaded functions can limit the processing capacity ;  in the distal section, an exponential response characterizes the interplay between up- and down-regulated genes involved in the negative regulation of caspase activity, likely having a role in apoptosis and inflammation.

discussion
excessive saturated fat intake leads to metabolic disorders . especially in the small intestine, studies have shown connections to altered lipid metabolic functions or illustrated its role in the development of obesity and diabetes  <cit> . however, it is quite rare to find analyses on intestinal section-specific response to dietary fat, except for cases related to intestine resection that discuss the side effect after the loss of a single intestinal section. differences in the absorption capabilities of intestine sections are caused by changes in gene expression  <cit> . de wit and colleagues analyzed the transcriptomic variation between dietary groups , specific to three sections of small intestine of mice  <cit> . in their experiment, mice were fed diets that differed in dietary fat and carbohydrate content; the respective diets contained  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> or 45 % kcal fat, which was termed as fat intake . our goal was to re-analyze their data to assess linear and nonlinear transcriptomic response to fat intake by modeling gene expression as a function of fat intake %. the percentage of calories derived from fat intake represented the independent variable, even though such percentage might have been different from the relative amount of calories from fat that was effectively sensed by enterocytes. moreover, the absorption capacity of enterocytes could be modulated by dietary fat . we investigated whether the transcriptomic response type was related to specific intestine sections , or uniquely associated with specific genes and biological processes . due to progressive absorption along the intestine, we expected higher amount of fat to be available in the proximal section and a progressive decrease towards the distal section. furthermore, it can be the case that the quantity of dietary fat exceeds the absorption capacity of the proximal section, and thus “overflows” to the middle and distal sections. moreover, the middle section has greater absorptive area than proximal and distal sections, and is known to be highly affected by the dietary fat  <cit> . our results corroborate previous findings, confirming that the highest number of differentially expressed genes is in the middle section of small intestine . however, two new and clear patterns emerged from our analysis:  most of the genes characterized by a significant relationship between expression levels and dietary fat intake exhibited linear responses , and the prevalence of linear relationships was persistent along the whole small intestine;  the relevance of nonlinear relationships linking fat intake to gene expression levels was section-specific and reflected the progressive reduction of fat availability  along the longitudinal axis of the small intestine . the relevance of quadratic and cubic response types was marginal both in absolute and relative terms, in all sections. throughout the small-intestine, we observed biological processes that responded to fat intake in a single section, and other processes with either unaltered  or varying responses across the sections .

when analyzing differentially expressed genes, we observed that over-representation of apr was linked to fat intake through a linear relationship in all three intestinal sections . increasing dietary fat intake caused intestinal inflammatory transcriptomic response and led to linear increase in apr. this response did not show a univocal pattern and was associated with both up- and down-regulated genes . serine protease inhibitor  was found to be differentially expressed and up-regulated in all three sections. some studies have shown that the presence of lipopolysaccharide  in the small intestine stimulates pro-inflammatory mediators that are activators of insulin resistance  <cit> . the resultant inflammatory reaction causes apr and its prolonged activation is seen with increased plasma levels of small, low-density lipoproteins   <cit> . moreover, during inflammation plasma triglyceride and very low-density lipoprotein  levels rise, while high-density lipoprotein  level declines  <cit> . in the present study, reg3g and reg3b were down-regulated both in proximal and middle small intestine. the protein encoded by these genes  belong to the family of c-type lectins and are secreted by epithelial cells and paneth cells. their expression is reduced in the small intestine of mice fed alcohol compared with control mice, and the effect is more pronounced in the proximal part  <cit> . reg3g and reg3b play a protective role against gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria, respectively  <cit> . reg3g is essential for maintaining a zone that physically separates the lumina bacteria from the small intestinal epithelial surface  <cit> . dysregulation of a microorganism-induced program of epithelial cell homeostasis and repair can result in chronic inflammatory responses, and is associated with the development of colon cancer  <cit> . down-regulation of reg3g and reg3b is likely to result in increased bacterial colonization of the intestinal epithelial surface, with consequent induction of inflammation. the oncogenic transcription factor stat <dig> was down-regulated in both the proximal and the middle section, and the same pattern holds in middle and distal sections for saa <dig>  a member of the family of apr proteins that is usually up-regulated during infection, tissue damage or inflammation disease  <cit> .

a complex scenario characterizes cholesterol, with a prevalence of up- and down-regulation for what concerns cholesterol homeostasis and transport, respectively . in the middle section, cholesterol homeostasis was overloaded , while cholesterol transport was particularly impaired in presence of highest levels of fat intake . in the middle section, we observed the up-regulated, logarithmic response in the expression of cholesterol homeostasis genes , except for cyp7a <dig> . in different parts of the small intestine, we found down-regulation of abc transporters: abca <dig> in proximal as well as in the middle section, abcg <dig> in middle section, and abcg <dig> and abcg <dig> in the proximal section . these genes displayed fat-responsive expression pattern and are involved in cholesterol transport and cholesterol efflux. they were characterized by a change in the response pattern from proximal  to middle  section. these data suggest that high fat concentrations available in the proximal small intestine down-regulate abc transporters involved in cholesterol efflux . the linear response of these down-regulated genes stands for relevant effects also in presence of low fat intakes. the negative exponential response observed in the middle section for abca <dig> and abcg <dig> illustrates how only the highest level of fat intake results in the sharp impairment of cholesterol absorption. this is in line with the fact that the middle section is characterized by a higher uptake capacity than the proximal section. sections that are downstream the proximal small intestine  are exposed to smaller amounts of fat and less pronounced effects . the highest fat concentration was the only one that triggered a strong change, leading to the down-regulation of two abc transporters in the middle section.

the negative regulation of caspase activity showed a transition from linear response in the middle section to exponential response in the distal part. this process did not present a univocal response pattern and included both up- and down-regulated genes. in the middle and distal sections, there was up-regulation of the gene birc <dig> . birc <dig> is bifunctional, plays a key role in inhibition of apoptosis and regulation of mitosis, and is essential for cell division . birc <dig> is mostly linked with carcinogenesis; during early atherogenesis, it shows elevated expression in inflamed macrophage-rich areas  <cit> . linear and positive transcriptomic response of genes prdx <dig>  and gpx <dig>  was confined to the middle small intestine. bellafante et al. have shown that pgc-1β overexpression in enterocytes enhances antioxidant enzymes such as sod <dig>  gpx <dig>  prdx <dig>  prdx <dig>  txn <dig> and sirt <dig>  <cit> . up-regulation of these enzymes has an antiapoptotic role both in normal mucosa and protumorigenic conditions, and causes a greater increase in the length of the villi of the small intestine. chu et al. have observed that the targeted disruption of gpx <dig> and gpx <dig> harms two glutathione peroxidase  isoenzymes  <cit> . gpx isoenzymes reduce hydroperoxidases in intestinal epithelium and their impairment increases the sensitivity of ileum and colon to bacteria-associated inflammation and cancer. our results showed linear, up-regulation of prdx <dig> and gpx <dig> in the middle section of small intestine; this can activate antioxidant processes that are relevant for bacteria-associated inflammation, cancer-promoting conditions and tumor progression. our result suggests that these biological processes were not overloaded in the middle and distal sections, possibly due to the absorption that contributes, in a progressive way, to reduce the amount of fat in the small intestine lumen. the linear, positive responses found in the middle part illustrate the relevance of antiapoptotic processes, even in presence of low fat intake. the exponential, positive response identified in the distal section  is descriptive of an outstanding activation, only for most extreme values of fat intake.

our study aimed at identifying changes in differentially expressed genes in three small intestine sections as a response to dietary fat intake. kondo et al. analyzed differential gene expression among multiple metabolic organs, including small intestine  <cit> . they showed that some lipid metabolism-related genes  were significantly up-regulated in the intestine of both a/j  and c57bl/6j  mice fed with high fat diet. they observed that in the liver of a/j mice, high fat feeding significantly decreased the expression of mod <dig> and cyp4a <dig>  also, the expression of mod <dig>  hmgcs <dig>  acot <dig> and pdk <dig> was not increased during high fat feeding in the muscle and white adipose tissue. we found that:  fabp <dig> was up-regulated and linearly responsive in all the three sections of the small intestine;  hmgcs <dig>  acot <dig>  acaa1b and acadl were linearly responsive and up-regulated in the proximal and middle sections;  in the proximal and middle sections, the expression of pdk <dig> was up-regulated and displayed a logarithmic response;  acot <dig> was up-regulated and linearly responsive in the proximal section only. al-dwairi et al. reported that during diet-induced obesity, me <dig> over-expression in small intestine promoted the expression of hepatic genes associated with lipogenesis, cholesterol synthesis and cholesterol uptake  <cit> . this suggests gatekeeper functionality of the small intestine, with changes in the expression of me <dig> that influence metabolic processes in the liver. in our study, the gene me <dig> was up-regulated and logarithmically responsive in the proximal section, while the up-regulation was associated with linear response in the middle and distal sections. moreover, we found that processes related to cholesterol homeostasis were particularly active in the middle small intestine and only highest fat intake impaired cholesterol transport and efflux . in the small intestine, de wit et al. reported that high fat modulates the expression of secreted proteins such as il <dig>  fgf <dig>  mif, igfbp <dig> and angptl <dig>  <cit> . they suggested that these signaling molecules might have metabolic effects in liver, muscle and adipose tissue that underlie the development of the metabolic syndrome. in our study, the gene expression of il <dig> was down-regulated , while igfbp <dig> was linearly up-regulated in the middle section only.

CONCLUSIONS
our approach to modelling nonlinear transcriptomic signatures in the small intestine revealed that - for a range of biological processes including cholesterol transport and homeostasis - there exists a ‘tipping point’ for fat intake, beyond which the relationship between fat intake and gene expression either weakens  or strengthens . for example, the shift from linear to exponential response observed for down-regulated abc transporters  is representative of the intense absorption capability of the middle section . our results highlight the relevance of nonlinear analysis for modelling more precisely the effects of diet on molecular activity in the small intestine. the observation of increasing relative importance of exponential responses and decreasing relative importance of logarithmic responses from the proximal to distal section is in agreement with the hypothesis that when the absorptive capacity of the intestinal epithelia is overloaded, the remaining fat will overflow to more distal sections . although most of the genes related to inflammatory processes preserved their linear expression pattern along the whole small intestine , fat intake regulated in a section-specific fashion the transcriptomic response of birc <dig> . the regionalized behavior of birc <dig> suggests that antiapoptotic mechanisms are particularly relevant in the middle section of small intestine and can represent an adaptation to counteract the lipotoxic effect of high fat diets on intestinal cells  <cit> . future studies should assess whether the nonlinear patterns observed here are influenced by other factors , and investigate the relevance of nonlinear responses in other tissues and clinically relevant markers.table  <dig> fat-responsive differentially expressed genes and associated gene ontology biological process  terms

red colored genes: up-regulated; yellow colored genes: down-regulated. for each gene, site of expression  and response type/trend  are shown. these eight genes are the most representative for acute-phase response , cholesterol-related processes  and negative regulation of caspase 



availability of supporting data
all supporting data are included as additional files.

additional files
additional file 1: 
table a <dig> . diet composition. main ingredients are in bold .table a <dig> . food and caloric intake in week  <dig>  data refer to the week the mice were killed. we summarized the mean and standard error of the mean , based on n =  <dig> per diet group. the caloric intake consistently increased from  <dig> to 45 % diets, but the absolute amounts of food intake varied in a non-significant way. 

additional file 2: 
schematic representation of the workflow adopted for the analysis of microarray data. we identified linear and nonlinear response patterns for significantly over-represented gobp terms. trends for the response patterns specific to each term were examined from proximal to distal section. 

additional file 3: 
differentially expressed genes  in the three sections of small intestine. there are  <dig>  genes in the proximal section,  <dig>  genes in the middle part and  <dig> genes in the distal section. for each gene we indicated affymetrix id, gene symbol, response type , and response direction . last  <dig> columns refer to log <dig> transformed expression values in the small intestine of mice fed with  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> e% from fat. 

additional file 4: 
count of genes that responded in a significant, dose-dependent way to fat intake . we identified the significant responses in three sections of small intestine . differential gene expression was modelled as either a linear or nonlinear  function of dietary fat intake. for each section, we reported the percentage of genes per response type  and the number of significant go terms . only gobp terms with, at least, six differentially expressed genes  have been taken into account. outcomes obtained by using aic for model selection were coherent with the trends reported in the manuscript . in particular, with aic we found:  the prevalence of linear-responding genes in all intestine sections;  the decreasing relative importance of the logarithmic response when moving from the proximal to the distal section ;  the marginal relevance of other response types . 

additional file 5: 
over-represented gene ontology biological process  terms associated with differentially expressed genes in the three intestinal sections. genes are classified as linear, logarithmic or exponential, according to the best  response type describing their expression pattern . for each significant gobp term  we summarize number of genes corresponding to the process , number of genes found with our analysis  and adjusted p-value. universe size: proximal =  <dig> ; middle =  <dig> ; distal =  <dig> . 

additional file 6: 
over-represented gene ontology biological process  terms that can be found in various intestinal sections. for each gobp term we specify up- and down-regulated genes . 

additional file 7: 
over-represented gene ontology biological process  terms that are completely up-regulated. for each gobp term we summarize: the total number of genes in the microarray , the count of genes extracted with our analysis , and the adjusted p-values. intestine sections: prox = proximal; mid = middle; dist = distal. response types: lm = linear; log = logarithm; exp = exponential. 

additional file 8: 
over-represented gene ontology biological process  terms that include up-regulated genes only and can be found in various intestinal sections. such gobp terms can be found in various intestinal sections; lists of  differentially expressed genes associated with each gobp term are summarized . 

additional file 9: 
over-represented gene ontology biological process  terms that are completelydown-regulated. data refer to gobp terms that can be found in various intestinal sections. the following details are provided for each gobp term: total number of genes in the microarray , count of genes extracted with our analysis , and adjusted p-values. intestine sections: prox = proximal; mid = middle; dist = distal. response types: lm = linear; log = logarithm; exp = exponential. 

additional file 10: 
over-represented gene ontology biological process  terms that include down-regulated genes only and can be found in various intestinal sections. for each term we specify the associated differentially expressed genes . 



abbreviations
apracute-phase response

bpbiological process

fdrfalse discovery rate

gogene ontology

gobpgene ontology biological process

hdlhigh-density lipoprotein

lcfalong chain fatty acid

ldllow-density lipoprotein

lpslipopolysaccharide

nusenormalized unscaled standard error

plmprobe level model

rlerelative log expression

tgtriglyceride

vldlvery low-density lipoprotein

competing interests

the authors declare that they have no competing interests.

authors’ contributions

tn, mm, gjejh, ms and mjm conceived and designed the research. mm and gjejh generated the wet-lab data. tn processed and analyzed the data. tn, ms and mjm wrote the paper. all authors read and approved the final manuscript.

tenzin nyima was supported by a cosbi phd fellowship. the authors are grateful to bianca baldacci for the great help in graphic design. we also thank the editorial board of bmc genomics and three anonymous reviewers for extremely constructive comments.
