BACKGROUND
protein functions are annotated in genomic databases using automated routines that search for sequence homology to a gene product with an established function. the accuracy of these sequence-based annotations is often variable, particularly if the sequence identity to a known function is low. indeed recent work has shown that even proteins with very high sequence identity can have different folds and functions  <cit> , and therefore caution is needed in assigning functions simply by sequence homology in the absence of experimental validation. traditional experimental approaches to determine function such as enzyme assays are slow and painstaking and have not been able to keep up with the ever-increasing large body of genome sequence data that contains many genes with unconfirmed and undetermined function. clearly more efficient methods for accurate, experimental-based annotation and validation of function are needed.

one area where there is a strong demand for functional annotation is the large number of putative enzymes identified from structural genomics and other efforts . methods for rapidly establishing small molecule substrate or product specificity of putative enzymes are likely to be extremely useful on two levels. firstly, they would allow efficient testing of functional assignments that may be of variable reliability. secondly, such approaches may be extended to the characterization of partially assigned enzymatic functions like those annotated from structural genomics efforts. this article discusses a method that is applicable to the first level of testing current sequence-based annotations of enzymatic function. an nmr-based approach is described for identifying potential substrates or products of enzymes in vitro.

for the goal here of developing rapid approaches for annotating putative enzymes, we adopted a ligand-based nmr screening strategy  <cit> . in our hands, the most consistent results were obtained using the waterlogsy  pulse sequence  <cit> . this method was originally developed for ligand screening of drug targets and is amenable to a pipeline approach. the nmr experiment is based on magnetization transfer between ligand and water molecules. in the presence of a protein that binds to the ligand, there are two competing flows of magnetization: 1) from water to the free ligand and 2) from bound water  to the bound ligand. these two flows lead to opposite signs of the noes  between water and the ligand. the stronger magnetization flow determines the sign of the waterlogsy peak. compounds that bind the protein will give positive peaks whereas peaks generated from non-binding compounds will be negative in the waterlogsy spectrum. since exchangeable protons  also appear as positive peaks in waterlogsy spectra, these need to be identified and deconvoluted from the peaks due to protein-binding. this is readily achieved by recording a reference spectrum of the sample in which the water signal is saturated. through chemical exchange, the labile oh and nh protons are also saturated and their peak intensities are greatly decreased allowing straightforward distinction of peaks due to binding.

the case studies below illustrate how this method can be used to identify the chemical structures of potential substrates or products for putative enzyme proteins. the functional assignments were further supported by additional experiments . in all of the examples studied, we find that the initial nmr screen is indicative of whether the functional annotation is correct.

RESULTS
choice of organism and target selection
genes from the metabolically diverse methanogenic archaeon, methanosarcina acetivorans, were chosen for this study  <cit> . methane producing organisms are of interest because they provide an efficient and cost-effective biofuel which is self-harvesting and can be distributed readily using existing infrastructure. as with other genomes, however, accurate functional annotation of methanogens lags significantly behind the large body of sequence data, representing a sizable gap in understanding of the biology of these organisms. this project was initiated by updating functional annotations for over  <dig> of the  <dig> predicted genes in the ma genome. this was done by transferring many of the recently revised manual annotations in the closely related species m. burtonii <cit>  to homologous genes in ma. in combination, a thorough literature search was conducted for published data that experimentally confirms the functionality of ma genes and closely related orthologs in other species. a complete list of revised ma annotations is provided in additional file  <dig>  with summary statistics in additional file  <dig> 

by analogy with the m. burtonii re-annotation, confidence levels were given to each re-annotation based on current literature as follows: level 1: an exact match in the literature with an experimentally defined function. level 2: gene product contains all domains needed for enzymatic function with ≥35% sequence identity to a gene product of known function. level 3: gene product contains all domains needed for enzymatic function but ≤35% sequence identity to a gene product of known function. level 4: gene product has no experimental match but some domain similarities to a known function are recognizable. level 5: has no experimental match or domain similarities – i.e. annotated as hypothetical. this provided a list from which targets with varying confidence levels were selected for experimental validation using our pipeline approach.

the two main selection criteria were 1) the protein should have a putative enzymatic activity on a small molecule substrate and 2) the protein should be non-membranous based on amino acid sequence analysis. additional characteristics that were preferable but not absolutely required were that the gene product was expressed in vivo in ma based on published reports  <cit>  and that an e. coli homolog exists for potential genetic complementation studies. a total of  <dig> ma targets were cloned of which  <dig> were found to express soluble protein in e. coli. we describe here a number of these as case studies to illustrate our generalized approach.

case study #1: ma4265
the ma <dig> gene is annotated as a putative “isocitrate/isopropylmalate dehydrogenase family protein” in the doe integrated microbial genome  database . the re-annotation to a putative isocitrate/isopropylmalate dehydrogenase, transferred from the function re-assignment of the m. burtonii homolog  <cit> , is based on ~30-35% sequence identity to homologs where the function has been verified experimentally  <cit> . in our studies, the gene product of ma <dig>  was heterologously expressed in e. coli as a soluble protein at 25°c and was folded as judged by 1d 1h nmr spectroscopy. the putative enzymatic annotations, isocitrate dehydrogenase and/or isopropylmalate dehydrogenase, placed this gene product in the tricarboxylic acid  cycle and/or the leucine biosynthesis pathway, respectively. these predicted functional annotations were initially tested by waterlogsy nmr screening with relevant intermediates of the tca cycle and leucine biosynthesis pathways. nmr screening indicates that ma <dig> interacts with isocitrate but not other intermediates in the tca pathway  while no interactions were detected with intermediates of the leucine metabolic pathway . the nmr data therefore provides a rapid in vitro screen supporting the assignment of the isocitrate dehydrogenase function to ma <dig> 

the functional annotation of ma <dig> was further tested using genetic complementation studies. the e. coli genome contains three homologs of ma4265: yeau, a putative tartrate dehydrogenase ; leub, 3-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase ; and icd, isocitrate dehydrogenase . for each of these homologs, a gene knockout mutant strain is available in the keio collection  <cit>  for complementation studies. e. coli mutant strains carrying knockout alleles in these three homologs show lethal growth phenotypes when grown on minimal salt media with glucose as the carbon source. figure 2a shows that the lethal growth phenotype of icd can be partially recovered by expressing ma <dig>  while the expression of this gene was insufficient to rescue the growth of the leub and yeau mutants . to quantify the capacity of ma <dig> to complement the icd mutation, growth in liquid medium was monitored . in liquid m <dig> minimal media with a glucose-carbon source, no growth was observed in the icd-mutant strain transformed with an empty vector. in contrast, the icd mutants transformed with the plasmid expressing ma <dig> displayed growth with a doubling time of  <dig> ± <dig>  hours, which is slightly slower than the doubling time of  <dig> ± <dig>  hours for the parental control e. coli strain  expressing the same ma <dig> construct. in both bw <dig> and the icd mutant, expression of ma <dig> resulted in doubling times that were moderately slower than bw <dig> containing an empty pet-21a vector with a doubling time of  <dig> ± <dig>  hours.

thus the nmr and gene complementation data are both consistent with the isocitrate dehydrogenase function, but do not support the 3-isopropylmalate dehydrogenase or tartrate dehydrogenase annotations.

case study #2: ma0940
ma <dig> is currently annotated as a hypothetical protein in the img database. our revised annotation of ma <dig> as encoding alpha-ribazole-5’-phosphate phosphatase  is based on a literature search which identified an experimental study of a methanosarcina mazei homolog that is 91% identical to ma <dig>  <cit> . because there are known instances in which proteins with high sequence identity can adopt alternative folds and functions  <cit> , a rapid experimental test is needed that can verify or increase confidence in the annotation of ma <dig> as encoding a cobz ortholog. in this example the putative substrate and product were not commercially available but the use of suitable structural or sub-structural analogs in nmr screening provided insights into substrate recognition by ma <dig>  <cit> . nmr-based ligand screening of the nucleobase substructure of alpha-ribazole,  <dig> -dimethylbenzimidazole, which is commercially available, indicated that this compound does interact with ma <dig>  in contrast, similar compounds containing bicyclic aromatic rings such as adenine and guanine derivatives do not bind to ma <dig>  indicating that this gene product has a binding preference for the dimethylbenzimidazole moiety  and supporting the assignment of its function as alpha-ribazole-5’-phosphate phosphatase. the earlier study on the m. mazei homolog, mm <dig>  was done using gene complementation experiments which can be quite time consuming. the revised ma <dig> functional assignment, while not as definitive as the m. mazei study, is supported through a rapid in vitro screening process that does not require any specialized reagents  or pathway-specific knowledge.

case study #3: ma3706
ma <dig> is annotated as a putative ham <dig> protein in the img database and our re-annotation process does not change this annotation. ham <dig> proteins are nucleoside triphosphatases that are hypothesized to catalyze the hydrolysis of non-standard nucleoside triphosphates  to nucleoside monophosphates as a mechanism for preventing their incorporation into dna and rna  <cit> . in particular, they are thought to target the oxidatively modified inosine and xanthosine triphosphates. our annotation of ma <dig> is based on homology with mj <dig> from methanococcus jannaschii <cit> . ma <dig> and mj <dig> share 47% sequence identity and the latter has been shown to preferentially hydrolyze xanthosine triphosphate  and deoxyinosine triphosphate  over other canonical nucleoside triphosphates. we therefore tested whether ma <dig> interacts with nucleotides in a similar way by screening a series of standard and modified ntps from our small molecule library for binding with ma <dig> 

standard ntps do not bind to ma <dig> based on the negative peaks due to nucleotide observed in waterlogsy spectra . however, positive peaks indicative of a binding interaction are detected when ma <dig> is mixed with the non-canonical nucleotides itp  and xtp . binding of ma <dig> to itp was also characterized using isothermal titration calorimetry and a dissociation constant of  <dig>  μm was obtained for this interaction . because divalent cations are known to be essential for the enzymatic activity of many hydrolytic enzymes, magnesium chloride was added to the nmr samples to see if any chemical change in the nucleotides could be detected using 1d 1h nmr spectroscopy. indeed, the nmr spectra of both free itp and xtp differed substantially from their spectra in the presence of ma <dig> and magnesium chloride . the largest changes occurred in the ribose proton region between  <dig> - <dig>  ppm, indicating that itp and xtp had been chemically transformed. comparison with nmr spectra of reference compounds  showed that the new species generated in this reaction matched exactly with the corresponding nucleoside monophosphates imp and xmp. no signals due to any residual nucleoside triphosphates or diphosphates were evident. control experiments with the standard nucleotides atp and gtp did not show any changes in their nmr spectra in the presence of ma <dig> and magnesium ions. these results indicate unambiguously that ma <dig> has both an inosine triphosphate pyrophosphatase and xanthosine triphosphate pyrophosphatase biochemical function, consistent with the annotation of mj <dig> 

thus the nmr ligand screening approach provides a very efficient means for identifying the nucleotide binding preferences of ma <dig>  further, once binding specificity was established, the enzymatic activity was detected directly in the nmr sample without the need for involved assays.

other examples
using the approach described, a number of other ma gene product annotations were also investigated. table  <dig> summarizes the genes that were studied. the experimental data can be put into  <dig> categories. in several examples  the data are consistent with the putative biochemical function and therefore provide increased confidence in the existing annotation. this sometimes occurs even when the sequence homology to an ortholog of known function is not very high . other examples such as ma <dig> show that the existing annotations are only partially correct. here, the experimental data suggest that the function assignment needs to be narrowed. a third category contains genes where the present functional assignment is not supported by our experimental screening procedure. for example ma <dig> is currently annotated as biotin synthase in the img database, but our nmr-based ligand screening of the gene product did not detect binding to the putative substrate, product, or any other compounds in the biotin pathway . a report published subsequent to our testing showed that this gene is in fact involved in pyrrolysine biosynthesis  <cit> . this highlights another general problem with regard to assignment of function where database entries are sometimes not updated after the initial annotation. nevertheless, nmr screening was quickly able to detect that the ligand binding results were not consistent with the img annotation, indicating that this function assignment was likely to be incorrect.

CONCLUSIONS
correct annotation of function is essential if one is to take full advantage of the vast amounts of genomic sequence data. incorrect assignment of function is propagated by comparative annotation with mis-annotated genes and can potentially lead to mis-placed experimental efforts. conversely, a corrected annotation in one organism can provide tremendous leverage in re-annotation of orthologs from a diverse phylogeny of organisms. experimental methods are therefore needed to efficiently evaluate annotations in a way that complements current high throughput sequence homology-based techniques.

we describe here an nmr-based approach for rapidly and reliably testing functional assignments of putative enzymes. most importantly, no protein-specific assay that involves a chemical conversion needs to be developed for the initial screening, which makes the approach broadly applicable for validating putative functions using an automated pipeline strategy. thus the ligand screen provides guidance about which small molecules may serve as suitable substrates for an enzyme assay that can be developed subsequently. the case studies described here, as well as other examples summarized in table  <dig>  demonstrate that the nmr screen provides a quick indication of whether the putative function assignment is likely to be correct. this is done by identifying small molecule ligands that can act as either substrates or products, or their structural analogs. notably it was even possible to directly detect an enzymatic activity in the nmr tube for some examples  when the necessary cofactors are present.

ma0154
ma0246
ma0940
ma2498
ma3520
ma3706
ma4265
 <dig> obtained from the doe integrated microbial genomes database ;  <dig> revised annotations were based on comparison with the updated annotations in m. burtonii <cit>  as described in the text.

for the examples described here, where there is some pre-existing annotation of putative function, the ligand screening is targeted and generally involves fewer than  <dig> compounds per protein. where even less is known about gene function , a larger number of compounds will need to be screened. however, it is possible to develop a suite of compounds for screening in an automated fashion. we use a 24-sample robot for most screening applications, with automated sample change, shimming, acquisition and processing. typically we use 1- <dig> compounds per protein sample depending on how many compounds need to be screened. pooled compounds need to have at least one resolvable 1h nmr signal and be structurally as diverse as possible to minimize the chance of competition for binding. one limitation of this approach is that the most relevant compounds for testing may sometimes not be commercially available. nevertheless, as demonstrated in this report, structural analogs can often be used to gain insights into the types of small molecules recognized by the gene product even when the exact substrate or product is not readily available .

in principle, the approach described here is applicable to putative enzymes with completely undefined substrate specificity. further studies coupling nmr-screening with other methods such as mass spectrometry-based metabolite profiling will be needed to determine functions for the large numbers of such putative enzymes that are currently poorly defined.

