BACKGROUND
in the last few years it has became increasingly evident that, among the multiple gene expression regulation mechanisms, eukaryotic genes expression level is also dependent on their location within the genome  <cit> . for example, a more or less strong tendency for colocalization in the same chromosomal regions has been described for genes expressed at very high levels  <cit> , genes constitutively expressed in most tissues   <cit> , genes encoding proteins assigned to the same functional pathway  <cit>  or genes simultaneously expressed  in a particular tissue or organ  <cit> . the coexpression of colocalized genes could be determined by the conformation of chromatin domains to which they belong, or by local sharing of regulatory  elements, thus raising questions about the functional significance of clustering of coexpressed genes  <cit> . alternatively, clustering of genes could be explained by coinheritance, a selective pressure to maintain a genetic linkage among genes that encode for functionally related products and that will tend to be inherited together or, finally, it could merely reflect the origin of functionally related genes via tandem duplication of genes  <cit> .

further studies about the relationships between the expression of eukaryotic genes and their relative position in the genome are needed to clarify this biological issue. such studies will take great advantage of the ever increasing amount of genomic-scale expression data obtained by serial analysis of gene expression , gene expression microarrays or high-throughput rna sequencing that are now made available in public databases. in fact, the transcriptome maps studies mentioned above showed the biological relevance of a global view of gene expression distribution by exploiting the availability of gene expression profile data obtained by the method of sage  <cit> . these studies contributed to challenge the traditional view that genes are randomly distributed along each chromosome in eukaryotic genomes. however, no computational biology tool for the generation and analysis of transcriptome maps was released to perform the algorithms described in these papers, with the exception of the web-based application "transcriptome map"  <cit> . nevertheless, this only supports a limited number of input data types , normalization methods and visualization options. the application "caryoscope"  <cit>  is a java-based program, able to generate a graphical representation of microarray data in a genomic context. however, it is not intended to process input data , or to perform any test of statistical significance on the resulting plot. the lack of software dedicated to constructing and analyzing transcriptome maps was already pointed out in  <dig>  <cit> , emphasizing that up until then, only algorithms or scripts had been presented and these were often tailored to specific uses . in addition, the tools that are available typically accept only gene lists as input and are not able to represent and analyze the continuous change, along the chromosome, of expression intensity assigned to overlapping regions of desired size, on the basis of the mean expression value calculated across all genes located in that region. this representation better reflects the biological reality of the quantitative changes of regional gene activity, rather than a simple count of the enrichment in differentially expressed genes, which is however also a desirable additional parameter of analysis.

these considerations underline the need for a general tool able to generate and analyze quantitative transcriptome maps from any source, provided that gene expression values for a certain gene set are available. such a tool should also be capable of accepting and integrating data from multiple sources and be easily configurable for the investigation of any organism. here we describe tram , a user-friendly graphical interface software that may be run locally on personal computers  and that meets and exceeds these specifications, by integrating original methods for parsing, normalizing, mapping and statistically analyzing expression data ; in addition, it has the ability to easily generate maps showing differential expression between two sample groups, relative to two different biological conditions. the results of a test, using the hematopoietic progenitors cd34+ cells differentiation toward megakaryocytic cells  as a biological model, are also presented and discussed. this shows the ability of tram to identify chromosomal segments and gene clusters which are biologically relevant for the cell differentiation toward the megakaryocyte phenotype.

RESULTS
expression data import, parsing and normalization
the software is composed of a set of  <dig> related database tables, with  <dig> relationships among them. some tables are designed to convert gene identifiers associated with expression data, e.g. genbank accession numbers and/or unigene cluster identifiers, into official gene symbols. gene identifier conversion tables may be loaded or updated by the user, or are provided pre-loaded for human, mouse and zebrafish organisms. in addition, the user may download genomic data from entrez gene  relating to the organism investigated. these data files are then easily imported and processed by the software during the set up process. three species-specific pre-loaded  versions are also distributed.

in addition, tram makes fully original specific data management and analysis tools available, including a parser able to find the best and updated gene/rna cluster name available to be assigned to a probe identifier. this is based on a converter of any rna sequence accession number to the relative gene symbol, by searching an embedded parsed full unigene updatable database table. for the human version, the parser locally resolves all  <dig> , <dig> rna sequence accession numbers, which are related to both known transcripts and to expression sequence tags  included in h. sapiens unigene build # <dig>  december  <dig>  this allows a better conversion of those sequence accession numbers listed in a platform that may have been registered in the past few years without the availability of the presently corresponding gene symbols. for example, in the commonly used gpl <dig> geo platform ,  <dig> probe identifiers, with unavailable gene symbols in the affymetrix platform scheme, were successfully assigned to mapped gene symbols or unigene clusters.

a sample is defined as a homogeneous series of gene identifiers and their corresponding expression values, i.e. a list of values obtained in a single channel following a microarray hybridization experiment. to allow the comparison of expression data obtained from different samples, the absolute values of a sample may be converted into percentages of the mean  of all expression values within that sample. the software is also designed for the comparison between a sample  named 'a' and another sample  named 'b', each collected into specific tables. in this case, the ratio of 'a' and 'b'  expression for each locus will be analyzed.

although tram is a map-centred transcriptome analysis tool it can also summarize and allow the analysis of gene expression data of unmapped genes, exploiting its capability of parsing and normalization in order to highlight differential expression of single genes between two biological conditions even in the absence of data about genomic location of the gene.

scaled quantile normalization
we compared the correlation between sample datasets of the same pool but derived from different platforms, using the intra-sample normalization 'mean' method . inter-sample scaled quantile normalization always gave analogous or better results compared to standard quantile normalization. for example, the correlation coefficient between two series of locus-matched values obtained by distinct authors, using different microarray platforms , was  <dig>  in absence of any inter-sample normalization,  <dig>  following standard quantile normalization for all values and  <dig>  following scaled quantile method. in the case of b <dig> and b <dig> samples, the quantile method worsened the correlation coefficient from  <dig>  to  <dig> , while this remained stable using scaled quantile normalization .

sample: mk, megakaryocytic/megakaryoblast cells, obtained by in vitro differentiation of cd34+ cells; cd34+, undifferentiated cd34+ cells; ,  or : cd34+ cells derived from bone marrow, cord blood or peripheral blood, respectively. n = number of subjects from which the sample was derived . rep. = biological replicate. microarray: u133a: affymetrix human genome u133a array; 1a: agilent- <dig> human 1a microarray  g4110b;  <dig> k a: agilent human oligo  <dig> k a; hg-focus: affymetrix human hg-focus target array. when not directly provided, expression value was calculated as the median intensity value of a microarray feature minus the median background value.

in addition, we determined the standard deviation  of measurements from different samples for housekeeping loci such as beta actin  and a set of ribosomal proteins, using the intra-sample normalization 'mean' method. in the absence of any inter-sample normalization, the sd for actb was  <dig>  for pool 'a'  and  <dig>  for pool 'b' . after applying quantile normalization to all available data, the sd became  <dig>  and  <dig> , and following the use of the scaled quantile method it changed into  <dig>  and  <dig> , for pool 'a' and 'b' respectively. therefore, the scaled quantile method allowed both a decrease in the variability among the samples within a sample pool, and an increase in comparability between the 'a' and 'b' sample pools compared to a reference gene expected to be stably expressed in both pools. in the absence of any inter-sample normalization the sd for genes encoding small ribosomal proteins was  <dig>  for pool 'a' and  <dig>  for pool 'b' . following quantile normalization of all available data the sd changed to  <dig>  and  <dig> , and after using the scaled quantile method the sd decreased to  <dig>  and  <dig> , for pool 'a' and 'b' respectively, thus improving homogeneity within each sample pool as well as between the two sample pools.

generation and analysis of transcriptome maps
two main types of analysis are available within tram: 'transcriptome map - search for over/under-expressed segments'  mode and 'search for clusters of neighbouring over/under-expressed genes'  mode.

in 'map' mode, the software generates a graphical map of the transcriptome showing a vertical line representing each chromosome. an expression value for a selected area of a chromosome is calculated as the mean for all available expression data relating to the genes included in that segment. the mean expression level of the segment is represented by an horizontal bar next to the corresponding segment of the chromosome, the bar size being proportional to the segment expression level .

bars representing expression values included within the highest/lowest  user-defined percent of all segment expression values are pinpointed, thus highlighting genomic regions globally over/under-expressed with respect to the desired threshold. to avoid artefacts due to very high or very low expression of single genes in the region, the minimum number of over/under-expressed genes that must be present in the segment can be defined. the threshold for a gene to be considered as over- or under-expressed is the inclusion of the gene expression value within the highest/lowest  user-defined percent of all gene expression values.

the user may also set the 'shift' parameter that causes the window to slide along the chromosome at pre-arranged intervals. in this way the user obtains a set of partially overlapping segments thereby attaining better sensitivity because a rigid division in chromosome segments, always starting from the fixed position  <dig>  may let neighbouring over- or under-expressed genes be assigned to different segments.

the user maintains full control of the numerical data associated with each segment and may easily navigate among the map of the genes and gene expression values data tables. segments may be explored and searched according to any desired criteria and sorted and processed like ordinary database records. differential transcriptome maps, based on the ratio between corresponding gene expression values from two 'a' and 'b' samples or sample pools, relative to two different biological conditions, may be easily generated.

the statistical significance of the over/under-expression of each segment fulfilling the criteria to be tagged as over/under-expressed is displayed, and it is calculated as described in the "statistical analysis" methods section. the user may choose to refer the statistical calculations to data sets within each chromosome rather than to the whole genome dataset, in order to retrieve domains regionally over- or under-expressed within each dna molecule. differences between the genome- and chromosome-centred types of analysis are graphically highlighted when both have been performed.

search for clusters of neighbouring over/under-expressed genes
in 'cluster' mode, the software searches for a set of at least two successive genes, arranged according to the position indicated by their known transcription start site, and over/under-expressed in terms of inclusion of the gene expression value within the highest/lowest  user-defined percent of gene expression values. in this type of analysis, each horizontal bar represents the expression level of an individual gene . gene clusters are then built starting from over/under-expressed individual loci, if other contiguous genes fulfil the criteria defined for inclusion in the cluster. this analysis is complementary to that performed in 'map' mode, which requires an arbitrary segment window.

the results of the analysis are displayed in the 'cluster' layouts, as clusters of genes over/under-expressed. each gene is actually a record  of the database. the user can find and sort genes and gene clusters using any desired criteria. specific buttons help to retrieve entries from online databases for the desired genes. clusters of differentially expressed genes between two different biological conditions may be easily generated, based on the ratio between corresponding gene expression values from two defined 'a' and 'b' pools.

statistical significance of the over/under-expression of each gene cluster fulfilling the criteria to be tagged as over/under-expressed is displayed, and it is calculated as described in the "statistical analysis" methods section. in 'cluster' mode the user may choose if statistical calculations are to be performed separately for each chromosome as it is possible in 'map' mode. moreover, the user may choose how many genes can be tolerated in the cluster between each gene pair counted in the cluster, even if they do not fulfil the user-set criteria.

biological model - chromosomal segments
we compared several options of the software in the analysis of differential expression of pool 'a'  samples, including rna from at least  <dig> different subjects) versus pool 'b'  . a total of  <dig>  data points  from the pool 'a' and  <dig>  data points from the pool 'b', relative to  <dig>  distinct loci, for which an 'a'/'b' ratio value was determinable, were included in the analysis. results obtained by default analysis  included  <dig> significantly over- or under-expressed segments  and  <dig> clusters . the use of inter-sample normalization  improved the identification of significantly over/under-expressed genome segments versus absence of any inter-sample normalization . in addition, segments enriched in relevant genes known to be over- or under-expressed in megakaryocytes/platelets were not identified in the absence of inter-sample normalization. for example an over-expressed segment on chromosome  <dig> was found to contain, among others genes, icam <dig> and pecam <dig>  as well as an under-expressed segment on 6p <dig>  containing several hla  system class ii members. the differential expression of these genes is expected in the differentiation process studied in our model: icam <dig> is a functional integrin ligand present on platelets surface  <cit>  and pecam <dig> encodes platelet/endothelial cell adhesion molecule, while the down-regulated genes hla-dra, hla-drb <dig> and hla-dqa <dig> are typically expressed in antigen presenting cells.

chr: chromosome; segment start/end: chromosomal coordinates for each segment. bold and '+': over-expressed gene; bold and '-': under-expressed gene; '+' or '-': gene expression value higher or lower than the median value, respectively. analysis was performed using default parameters . segments are sorted by increasing 'a'/'b' ratio. in the 'map' mode, tram displays unigene est clusters  only if they have an expression value. five out of a total of  <dig> segments are not shown for simplicity, because their over-expressed genes are overlapping with those highlighted in the listed regions. the complete results for this model are available along with tram software.

chr: chromosome; cluster start/end: chromosomal coordinates for each gene cluster. bold and '+': over-expressed gene; bold and '-': under-expressed gene; '+' or '-': gene expression value higher or lower than the median value, respectively; gene name without '+' or '-' symbols: no expression value available in the investigated dataset. analysis was performed using default parameters , choosing to list all colocalized known genes and mapped est clusters, regardless of the availability of expression values for them in the investigated samples. clusters are sorted by increasing 'a'/'b' ratio. only the  <dig> cluster with the highest and the  <dig> cluster with the lowest cluster mean gene expression are shown . the complete results for this model are available along with tram software.

the higher expression ratio between mk and cd34+ cells  was observed in the segment at coordinates  <dig> ,001- <dig> , <dig> on chromosome  <dig> . all  <dig> genes in this location showed expression values greater than the median, and  <dig> out of  <dig> showed values within the higher  <dig> th percentile. while it was known that several genes in this region are sequence-related and form a structural cluster of members of the cxc chemokine gene family , this finding highlights the simultaneous very high activity of genes such as pf4v <dig> , pf <dig>  and ppbp , previously known as beta-thromboglobulin  <cit> , following differentiation of cd34+ cells in megakaryocytes. the second segment with highest expression was located on chromosome  <dig> and contained over-expressed genes such as gp1ba , encoding the alpha chain of megakaryocyte- and platelet-specific surface membrane glycoprotein ib, and kif1c . over-expression of kinesin 1c, which is recruited in neural cells app  transport vesicles, was not to date described in mk cells. however, it is known that during the complex and poorly understood process by which mks generate platelets, kinesin motors carry platelet-specific granules and organelles over microtubules into the pro-platelets  <cit> . the third over-expressed segment spans the cluster of haemoglobins on chromosome  <dig>  highlighting the known common early origin of erythroid and mk cells  <cit> . under-expressed segments included genes encoding surface antigens whose expression is known to be restricted to leukocytes or leukocyte subpopulations , highlighting their down-regulation during differentiation of common cd34+ progenitors to megakaryocyte.

switching from 'mean' to 'median' intra-sample normalization  globally decreased sensitivity from  <dig> significantly over- or under-expressed genome segments to  <dig>  however, one segment was identified only with the 'median' mode. this segment includes myom <dig> , myl12a  and myl12b  and it went undetected with the 'mean' mode. interestingly, myomesin  <dig>  <cit>  and myosins  <cit>  pathways have been involved in pro-platelet formation and platelet function. some differences in the results while using different intra-sample normalization parameters are expected on the basis of the different distribution of the values for each sample. for example the sample mean value is greater than the sample median value if there is a tail of high values. normalizing by median could uncover additional significantly over-expressed regions that were masked by the mean-based normalization.

concerning inter-sample normalization, the scaled quantile adjustment appeared to increase sensitivity in the identification of significantly over/under-expressed segments with respect to the standard quantile method . in particular, the quantile method was not able to detect any under-expressed segment, such as that containing the hla class ii genes typical of leukocytes that were identified by scaled quantile adjustment.

lowering or raising the threshold to define a gene and/or a segment as over/under-expressed makes the analysis more stringent or less stringent, respectively. we found that a good starting point is to use lower and upper  <dig> th percentile, so that 5% of the data are included as positive results, which in a gaussian distribution would roughly correspond to the percentage of values exceeding the mean by two standard deviations. the statistical test will compensate for the high number of segments or cluster marked as over/under-expressed obtained relaxing the threshold, by identifying which results are to be considered significant .

biological model - gene clusters
in the 'cluster' mode, the identified clusters included genes well known for being upregulated during megakaryocytopoiesis, as well as genes encoding leukocyte proteins expected to be down-regulated in the same context. for example, a cluster is composed by dntt, encoding deoxynucleotidyl transferase, expressed in a restricted population of pre-b and pre-t lymphocytes, and blnk, encoding b-cell linker, an adaptor protein that plays a critical role in b cell development . in this mode of use, the physical contiguity of at least two over/under-expressed genes is considered as the bond for cluster definition rather than an enrichment of such genes in a genomic region independently of their order. results are in part similar and in part complementary to those obtained in the 'map' mode. in particular, the cluster with lowest 'a'/'b' ratio mean value turned out to be the series of genes azu <dig> , prtn <dig>  and elane , located on chromosome  <dig> and known to be coordinately expressed in a granulocyte-specific fashion  <cit> , which resulted to be significantly under-expressed only in this mode of analysis. on the other hand, an over-expressed cluster composed only by the two contiguous genes, encoding platelet-specific proteins vwf  and cd <dig> , was identified on chromosome  <dig> . this would have been undetected in the 'map' mode because the minimal number of over/under-expressed genes required to be present in a chromosomal segment was by default set equal to  <dig>  another over-expressed cluster included gata <dig>  encoding a major transcription factor for megakaryocytopoiesis.

the modification of parameters used for 'cluster' mode analysis, such as those above listed for the 'map' mode, had analogous effects on the results.

some additional significant results were obtained by setting chromosome-specific thresholds for the analysis, rather than using the whole genome gene set as a reference. for example, the cluster of the two genes hipk <dig>   <cit>  and tbxas <dig>  scored as significantly over-expressed on a local basis when the gene expression of chromosome  <dig> but not whole genome dataset was considered.

in both 'map' and 'cluster' modes, tram displays est clusters, in addition to known genes, mapped in the region of interest. in the case of 'cluster' mode this occurs independently of the availability of expression values for the loci within the cluster extension .

the results for each mode of analysis of the presented test model, using default parameters, are available in the folder 'biological_model_test' of the tram distribution, allowing the user to explore the model following variation of analysis parameters.

individual gene expression values, summarized for each of the two pools 'a' and 'b', can be visualized and sorted in the 'cluster' results layout. amongst the first  <dig> genes with the highest 'a'/'b' ratio ,  <dig> were placed in one significantly over-expressed segment or gene cluster by the transcriptome mapping analysis.

the cd <dig> gene was under-expressed in mk cells compared to cd34+ cells, as expected .

discussion
here, we have described an original software named tram, designed to create and analyze transcriptome maps for any organism, based on gene expression data in a general form and able to generate a relational, fully-indexed map database, usable on macintosh and windows operating systems-based computers. the 'map' mode allows the identification of chromosomal regions of defined size  whose expression is defined as the gene expression average of the genes contained in the segment. this segment, also, must contain a specified number of loci transcribed beyond a desired threshold. the wide flexibility of the parameters required for the building of the map  makes an open exploration of the expression data feasible at different levels; in addition, an estimate of statistical significance for the definition of a segment as over/under-expressed can then be obtained. this type of analysis considers the global expression of all genes in the region, regardless of their exact reciprocal position: in fact, it has been shown, for example for genes belonging to the same functional pathway, that clustering is loose and individual genes may be spread, despite remaining closer to each other than expected by chance  <cit> . in addition, we added a complementary mode of data visualization and analysis, the 'cluster' mode, where the window width is defined by a number of clustered genes rather than nucleotide range. this method can consider the gene-by-gene order in the region and can provide results about clusters of over/under-expressed genes that are adjacent or separated by a small user-defined number of not over/under-expressed genes within the cluster. all tram data and results tables are widely interconnected by simple navigation buttons, as well as linked to the relevant entries available on line .

the novelty of the tool is supported by several arguments. firstly, the uniqueness of tram general basic architecture, which dynamically integrates an advanced and flexible relational database with parsing and meta-analysis capability, a map graphic displayer and a two-modes  analyzer searching for significantly over/under-expressed genomic regions, starting from any source of global gene expression profiles data . the tram data model is also unique in two other aspects: users are given direct access to expression numerical values, which are always visualized near the horizontal expression bar used to visualize the expression intensity of chromosomal segments or clustered genes localized on the map; moreover, the users do not need to provide genomic coordinates for the investigated genes, whose location is resolved by the pre-setup gene database table. a series of buttons allows an easy, transparent tracking of gene expression measurements from raw input data to normalized values, up to expression intensity display on the map.

in addition, tram makes original specific data management and analysis tools available such as: a parser which is able to find the best and updated gene/rna cluster name suitable to be assigned to a probe identifier ; a novel effective method for the normalization of data derived from platforms with highly different number of probes  which allows more samples to be included in a biologically homogeneous sample pool and maximizes gene expression information that may be extracted from each sample; the statistical analysis, based on individual chromosome data summary in addition to genome data summary, emphasizing local effects expected on the basis of the behaviour of single chromosomes with respect to chromatin organization and gene expression regulation.

finally, a powerful feature of tram is its ability to compare, within the same analysis, the transcriptome maps derived from two datasets  related to different biological conditions , such as two tissues or cell types, two developmental stages, normal vs pathological cells or cells maintained in absence or in presence of a substance. the generation of a transcriptome map of the relative 'a'/'b' ratio expression, allows the easy investigation of regional differential expression without the need to generate the results separately for the two datasets or pool of datasets and to devise additional calculations to compare them.

tram was able to generate original results of relevant biological interest in the ab initio modelling of differentiation from cd34+ stem cells to megakaryocyte  cells in a meta-analysis of a total of  <dig> publicly available microarray datasets obtained from different sources. many genes with a fundamental role in mk/platelet biology, known since early classical studies , were shown to significantly colocalize in genome segments or in clusters of adjacent genes. moreover, additional regions significantly over/under-expressed during megakaryocytopoiesis were identified . these results are original compared to the data analysis presented in the relative primary works from which expression data were derived  <cit> . this may be ascribed to the lack of data integration in the original studies   <cit> , to the lack of a search for local enrichment of over/under-expressed genes  <cit> , to the use of a different analysis pipeline when a localization study was performed   <cit> , or to the different biological model considered   <cit> .

est clusters can be mapped to the region of interest in addition to known genes by exploiting an original integration between ncbi unigene and ucsc genome browser data . this feature offers useful hints for the functional investigation of uncharacterized transcripts, on the basis of their presence, and in case of their over/under-expression, within genomic regions differentially expressed in a certain biological context.

while feasibility of integration of gene expression profile data, obtained from different experimental platforms or investigators, is highly desirable to build transcriptome maps representing all information available for a certain biological condition, the occurrence of systematic errors associated with each experimental situation requires advanced methods of inter-sample data normalization, such as the widely accepted quantile normalization  <cit> . however, this method may cause loss of data due to the removal of all genes whose expression values are missing for any dataset in order to obtain a fully filled data matrix, representing each sample as a column and the values for each gene as a row . alternatively, some authors retain all data values in quantile normalization by placing missing values at the end of each sorted column  <cit> . in such cases, all available data are analyzed but with an artefact due to the misalignment of values included in similar classes of expression level, compared to their sample of origin . the original method of scaled quantile we propose here in order to properly manage data derived from platforms with different number of analyzed genes, has proven to be effective, allowing maximization of information that can be extracted from all pertinent available data.

interestingly, after selecting for the analysis only samples homogeneous with respect to the used experimental platform, a decrease in sensitivity was observed, thus showing the effectiveness and usefulness of analysis starting from multiple sources. for example, by performing the analysis only on the datasets obtained with commonly used affymetrix u133a microarray  among those listed in table  <dig>  only  <dig> vs.  <dig> significantly over/under-expressed chromosomal segments, and  <dig> vs.  <dig> gene clusters were found, compared to the analysis integrating data from the whole available pool of samples.

a variation of analysis parameters allows the exploration of data from different points of view. the final statistical significance test will provide the actual reliability of the corresponding results independently of the parameters selected to define the thresholds for considering segments and genes as over/under-expressed . for example, lowering the threshold to consider segments and genes as over/under-expressed will retrieve a larger number of differentially expressed regions but this will be taken into account during the calculation of the statistical significance of each result where only a minor fraction of these regions will have a q-value  <  <dig> . it is noteworthy that, among the first  <dig> individual genes with the absolute highest 'a'/'b' ratio between cd34+ and mk cells,  <dig> were placed in one significantly over-expressed segment or gene cluster by the transcriptome mapping analysis. in addition, valuable information may also be extracted by using the capability of tram to numerically describe the normalized and summarized intensity of transcription along each chromosome. in this way a user could readily search, find and sort regions with no positive expression values despite containing known genes .

taken together, the described features of tram make it difficult to compare in details this tool with all other tools that, to our knowledge, are described in the literature as being capable of transcriptome mapping and analysis. this is because tram is actually a suite of different and strictly integrated data parsing and displaying as well as analysis tools. in particular, the existing software reviewed in the "background" section, accept gene lists as an input , so they cannot represent and analyze the gene expression level changing along the chromosome. neither will they generate differential expression maps comparing two different biological conditions such as the one we have discussed in our biological model showing progression from cd34+ cells to megakaryocytes. the local differential gene expression between two conditions is a function offered by the "r" library macat  <cit> , whose authors used a set of publicly available microarray data  <cit>  related to human t-  and b-cell  paediatric acute lymphoblastic leukaemias as biological test example. only one chromosomal region in chromosome  <dig> was found to be differentially expressed between t- and b-leukaemia cells. this was a biologically meaningful finding since hla genes are localized in this region and they are known to be under-expressed in t-cells vs. b-cells  <cit> . tram was able to replicate this result by using default analysis parameters. in addition, tram was able to individually list the loci under-expressed in t-cells present in this region . moreover, tram has been able to identify three additional differentially expressed chromosomal regions, each of which contained several genes over-expressed in t-cells, one on chromosome  <dig>  and two on chromosome  <dig> . these regions are of remarkable biological and clinical interest because they contain clusters of genes related to cd <dig>  cd <dig> and cd <dig>  respectively; these are well known as main and universally used specific surface markers of t-cells. in the "cluster" mode, tram identifies  <dig> gene clusters significantly over-  or under-expressed  in leukaemic t-cells compared to b-cells, including several other genes known to be t- or b-cell specific . finally, macat is limited to the analysis of affymetrix microarray, further underlining the need for a tool open to all platforms as well as to cross-platform analysis.

the batch effects are the systematic differences between batches  of samples in microarray experiments due to technical reasons, such as variability in materials, protocols or operators, possibly introducing a bias able to confound true biological differences . the tram data model described appears to be intrinsically resistant to the influence of batch effects, for the following reasons: the tram locus-centred data model does not attempt to separate subgroups within a sample pool, because it is assumed that the samples come from the same biological condition  for which only one aggregate value per locus is obtained and considered; the tram algorithm is non-parametric at different levels of normalization and analysis and this is expected to reduce the noise due to different value scales; the biological model discussed above deliberately used data from different platforms, protocols and operators, showing results coherent with the current biological knowledge and even better with respect to the results obtained analyzing data deriving from a single platform. however, if the user suspects that batch effects could confound the results, in particular if two single and distinct batches of samples are loaded as pool 'a' and 'b', respectively, it could be useful to attempt removing batch effects from the raw data using one of the existing tools  <cit>  prior to importing data in tram.

while this manuscript was being revised, two novel software were described in addition to those reviewed in the "background" section, able to analyze local enrichment of over/under-expressed genes. croc  <cit>  also uses the hypergeometric distribution to find genomic regions or gene clusters enriched in over/under-expressed genes, and supports calculations based on both whole genome data and individual chromosome values. however, like the previously published reef tool  <cit> , it accepts gene name lists as an input and it is not designed to parse, normalize and map original expression data and to display the corresponding quantitative transcriptome maps. the integrated genome browser  <cit>  can load expression data and visualize them along an x axis representing the chromosome sequence. however, it lacks any function of data integration, normalization and analysis , being essentially a graphical display tool for expression data, like the previously published program chromoviz  <cit> .

the large agreement of tram results, obtained without any a priori specific assumptions, with classical biological knowledge about megakaryocytopoiesis, shows that tram can perform integrated analysis of expression data from multiple platforms producing high confidence lists of over/under-expressed chromosomal segments and clustered genes. in conjunction with our previous implementation of a genbank format full parsing system  <cit>   and unigene tabulator  <cit> , tram may also contribute to the building of a novel, relational, multi-purpose, user-friendly and modular platform for the large-scale integrated analysis of genomic and post-genomic data.

CONCLUSIONS
we have here described a unique package able to create and analyze transcriptome maps by integrating gene expression profile data from multiple sources and generating a relational, fully-indexed database-structured map, usable on macintosh as well as on windows operating systems-based computers, features that are non commonly available in other applications.

tram provides a simple and intuitive system for the display and analysis of gene expression data within a single solution, including built-in multiple gene identifier conversion modules, intra-sample and inter-sample data normalization, map comparison between two biological conditions, graphical display and highly flexible data analysis  that has proven to generate results of biological interest.

the current release of tram software is freely available at tram home page  <cit> . we also distribute preconfigured implementations ready for analysis of homo sapiens , mus musculus  and danio rerio  gene expression profiles.

