BACKGROUND
preferential expression of one of the two alleles of a gene has been widely studied in the context of development, where key mechanisms such as genomic imprinting and x-inactivation lead to extreme allelic imbalances  <cit> . allele-specific expression has been linked to the susceptibility of many human diseases  <cit> .

various experimental techniques exist for measuring ase  <cit> , including microarray-based approaches that have been used in a number of studies to screen for ase in a high-throughput manner  <cit> . with microarrays, snps that fall within the coding regions of transcripts are used to quantify allelic imbalances in expression. probes that distinguish between the signal from allele a and allele b in genomic dna  can be used to measure the relative amount of expression from each allele when mrna  is hybridized to the array. typically both gdna and cdna hybridizations are carried out on each sample. for individuals who are heterozygous  at a particular snp, which is usually determined by the gdna hybridization, a distortion in the expected 1: <dig> ratio of allele a to allele b in the cdna signal is an indication of ase.

illumina's two-color goldengate technology has been used to measure ase in pancreatic cancer  <cit>  and lymphoblastoid cell lines  <cit> . the goldengate assay applied to genotyping allows around  <dig> snps to be investigated simultaneously in a sentrix array matrix , which is made up of  <dig> separate arrays  <cit> . each array contains around  <dig> replicate probes for each snp. the assay consists of a pcr with universal primers that amplify dna at the chosen loci to produce labelled material which is complementary to the appropriate  <dig> mer probe on the array at one end, and fluorescently labelled with either cy <dig>  or cy <dig>  dye depending on which nucleotide  is present. the relative signal for a given snp provides a surrogate measure of the genotype, with high green intensity indicative of an aa genotype, high red intensity indicative of a bb genotype and an intermediate intensity in both channels an ab genotype. the goldengate assay allows for a custom panel of snps to be chosen for the array. as mentioned previously, these snps need to fall within a transcript to be useful for ase profiling.

the fluorescence of each probe is quantified by illumina's scanning software  and summarized values for each snp are output by the beadstudio software. the default preprocessing steps used in this analysis have been shown to offer good performance on spike-in data sets for illumina's single-channel expression data  <cit> . in this paper, we investigate whether this holds true for two-color goldengate data. along with the usual preprocessing steps of background correction  <cit> , quality assessment and normalization  <cit> , adjustment for dye effects  <cit>  needs to be considered. recent examinations of two-color data from illumina's infinium platform have revealed that normalization can reduce dye-bias  <cit> .

in this paper, we focus on the data analysis issues that arise when illumina goldengate beadarrays are used to measure ase. this paper is organized as follows. we first present the raw data from a series of arrays, and explore the general signal characteristics. next, we examine a published control data set that allows us to quantify dye effects. we then look at the results from a mixture experiment, which is designed to produce known allelic imbalance at varying degrees for the majority of snps on each array, to assess the ability of different preprocessing methods to recover the true positives. finally, we investigate what effect a gene's expression level has on our ability to measure ase.

RESULTS
signal characteristics and quality assessment
boxplots of the raw red and green intensities from a set of  <dig> arrays with both gdna and cdna hybridizations  show that the overall signal from the cdna arrays is systematically lower than the signal from the gdna arrays. diagnostic plots such as this can be used to flag arrays with poor signal to exclude from further analysis; in figure  <dig>  we see that the 4th and 7th arrays have systematically lower signal over a compressed dynamic range compared to other arrays in the series. after examining these plots for many hundreds of arrays , we find low interquartile range  of the log <dig> signal to be a good predictor of failed hybridizations, and use a threshold criterion of iqr ≤  <dig> in either channel to flag poor quality arrays to exclude from further analysis  <cit> .

density plots of the intensities from each channel  show that the shape of the signal distribution depends on the sample type. for the gdna arrays, the major signal peak occurs at higher intensities , whereas for the cdna arrays , the reverse is true, with a peak at lower intensities. this has obvious implications for normalization; the cdna and gdna data must be treated separately given their very different signal characteristics.

the fundamental signal differences between the gdna and cdna hybridizations can also be seen by looking at their respective ma-plots  which display log-ratios  versus average intensities . for a typical gdna array, three major clusters of points  can be seen in the ma-plot . the data from a typical cdna array  is more diffuse, with a cluster of points occurring at low intensity, which presumably represents signal from snps in transcripts which are either non-expressed, or below the limits of detection using the goldengate technology.

dye effects
although dye effects have been well characterized for spotted arrays, their existence for illumina two-channel arrays has not been widely studied. by analyzing the summarized data from a dye-swap experiment, we assessed the magnitude of the dye effect for both gdna and cdna samples, and looked at whether within-array quantile normalization, as applied in other papers which analyze two-color data from various illumina platforms  <cit> , is beneficial.

snp-wise linear models were fitted separately to the gdna and cdna log-ratios and average intensities. each linear model summarizes the values from replicate arrays, and includes a global intercept  term, which measures the degree of asymmetry of the log-ratios when the dyes are swapped. figure  <dig>  shows how the dye effect estimated for the non-normalized gdna and cdna data changes with average intensity. in these plots, there is a clear increasing trend for dye effect as average intensity increases. probes at lower intensities tend to have a negative bias towards the cy <dig> channel, while probes with higher intensities generally have a positive bias towards the cy <dig> channel. figure 2c shows the dye effects before and after within-array quantile normalization. after normalization, these effects are closer to zero and on a more comparable scale. this is desirable, since dye-bias represents a technical effect which is a nuisance variable for the purpose of measuring ase.

for genotyping, the presence of dye-bias does not pose a problem, since the goal is to distinguish between three possible states  which are generally well separated. for this application, the actual level of each group is mostly unimportant. however, when measuring ase, dye-bias is of greater concern, as analysis methods typically search for systematic shifts in the heterozygous  cdna log-ratios away from the baseline heterozygote level inferred from the gdna log-ratios. such shifts are more likely to be driven by dye-bias in the absence of careful normalization. in addition, the magnitude of the dye effects need not be the same for rna and dna samples, and analysis methods which assume this may give rise to more false positives.

although having dye-swap data allows us to model and correct for dye effects explicitly, in practice, this is not routinely possible using standard goldengate protocol. hence throughout this paper, we have quantile normalized the data in an attempt to remove the dye effect as much as possible.

sensitivity and specificity
the design of the mixture experiment produces known allelic imbalances. snps which are of the same genotype in the different pooled individuals form the true negative set, while snps with different genotypes are true positives for allelic imbalance. the mixture experiment we analyze is made up of two independent series  which pool dna from different pairs of individuals . figure  <dig> shows examples of true positives  and true negatives  for allelic imbalance. when both individuals are homozygous for different alleles at a given snp , we see a trend from large positive or negative log-ratios at the extreme 100: <dig> and 0: <dig> mixtures, which get closer to zero as the mixtures become more even in concentration . this class of snps are the easiest to detect, as they exhibit allelic imbalance over a large range. the second class of true positives are snps which are homozygous in one individual and heterozygous in the second . these snps are more difficult to measure changes for than the first category, since their allelic imbalance occurs over a compressed dynamic range. finally, the true negative cases are snps for which both individuals have the same genotype . alterations in the mixing proportion does not alter the ratio of allele a to allele b for these snps.

the built-in truth for each snp from our mixture experiment, along with access to the raw data, allows us to measure the sensitivity and specificity of different preprocessing options applied to the data. in figure  <dig>  we see the receiver operator characteristic  curves for series a and b for each of the mixtures calculated using the true positives and true negatives determined a priori using the independent hapmap genotypes for each pair of individuals . each curve plots the sensitivity versus specificity of recovering snps with known allelic imbalance as the log-odds of detection is varied.

what is clear, and not unexpected from this analysis, is that the true positive rate declines as the mixing proportions of the samples become more even. this implies that goldengate can detect larger allelic imbalances more confidently than more subtle changes, which are more difficult to distinguish from experimental noise. for all mixtures down to the most similar 56: <dig> and 44: <dig> comparisons , our analysis  produces better results than selecting snps at random.

we next look at the effect of illumina's local background subtraction on the true positive rate. figure  <dig> shows roc curves for the 33: <dig> mixture from series a  and the 64: <dig> mixture from series b  which show that local background correction offers systematically better performance, delivering more true positives compared to not background correcting the data. for nearly all mixtures, the area under each roc curve is larger when local background subtraction has been applied , representing a global performance gain.

intensity-based filtering
the method used to detect ase in tan et al.   <cit>  and serre et al.   <cit>  involves linear interpolation of the ab heterozygote signal from the aa and bb homozygote log-ratios. briefly, for each snp, the center , upper  and lower  confidence intervals are calculated using the cdna log-ratios from the aa and bb genotypes respectively. this calculation is repeated for the gdna log-ratios. next, the cdna upper confidence intervals are regressed against the gdna lower confidence intervals and the cdna lower confidence intervals are regressed against the gdna upper confidence intervals. the respective centers for the homozygous genotypes are also regressed against each other. these regression lines provide upper and lower limits. ase is called when the observed cdna log-ratio from a heterozygous individual falls above or below the interpolated upper or lower value obtained using the gdna log-ratio from the same individual.

after examining many plots of cdna log-ratios versus gdna log-ratios, it is clear that for some probes there is a strong linear relationship between these values . in these situations, ase can be detected. there are also many examples where the two alleles cannot be clearly differentiated in the cdna samples, as shown in figure 6c. in this plot, the presence of allele a or allele b does not produce a noticeable difference in the homozygous cdna log-ratios.

to explore this phenomenon, we fitted a separate linear model for each snp, which regressed the average cdna log-ratio from each individual against the average gdna log-ratio for the homozygotes . this analysis summarizes the information displayed in figure  <dig> into two values per snp, a slope and an intercept. figure  <dig> shows the slope or intercept versus average intensity calculated across all samples for the different snp panels in tan et al. . for slope of the regression line, we see a clear increasing trend as average intensity increases. for intercept, there is no strong intensity-based trend.

a similar relationship also holds when average intensity is quantified using a different microarray platform . for each transcript interrogated for ase in the ceu  samples in tan et al. , an average expression level across the ceu series from stranger et al.   <cit>  was calculated. this data set measured expression in the same lymphoblastoid cell lines from ceu individuals using a different platform .

intuition would suggest that the strength of the regression line should be related to the overall expression level of the transcript in which the coding snp falls. lowly expressed, or non-expressed transcripts provide little or no starting template for the goldengate assay to pcr amplify and label, which produces either weak signal or signal that is pure noise. this results in a low slope in our regression analysis. figure  <dig> indicates that this is not due to the goldengate protocol working less well for these transcripts, as a similar trend can be seen when expression level is quantified using an independent array platform.

in light of these observations, we have found it useful to remove snps with average intensity below a particular threshold  <cit> . this has the effect of removing snps with non-specific allele a and allele b signals, which should reduce the number of false positives obtained by an appropriate ase testing procedure. figure  <dig> can be used to select this threshold; for lower cut-offs, more snps with non-specific signal  will be analyzed. in general the higher the average intensity, the greater the ability to distinguish between the two alleles. the cut-off can be adjusted depending upon the stringency desired.

CONCLUSIONS
our survey of ase experiments which use the illumina goldengate platform has highlighted a number of important data analysis issues to consider. analysis of a dye-swap data set generated in-house by illumina reveals significant dye effects in the log-ratios of both gdna and cdna hybridizations prior to normalization. applying within-array quantile normalization reduces this effect considerably, and is recommended in analyses of data from the goldengate platform.

our mixture data set showed that ase can be detected more reliably when the imbalances are large, with the true positive rate diminishing fairly monotonically as the mixtures get closer together . this experiment provides an overestimate of how well the goldengate assay will perform in practice, as the pooling of gdna samples ensures a relatively constant amount of template is available for each snp as input to the assay. in cdna samples, this amount will vary depending on the expression level of the transcript. in serre et al. , imbalances down to 60: <dig> or  <dig> -fold could be distinguished from experimental noise in cdna samples. to measure smaller changes, other technologies such as second-generation sequencing methods  <cit>  are likely to be more sensitive.

we find that the default background adjustment performed by illumina improves the detection of true ase using our control data. the benefit of local background subtraction has also been shown in analyses of control data from illumina's single-channel expression arrays  <cit> . the need to apply intensity-based filtering to remove non-responding snps was also highlighted. throughout this paper, we have used linear models and the limma package to summarize data from replicate hybridizations and derive test statistics for ase. when replicate data are not available, other tests may be more appropriate, such as snp-wise tests for increased variation in heterozygote log-ratios in cdna versus gdna samples . while the dye-bias issue is illumina-specific, the remaining points raised in this paper are likely to be pertinent when other array-based technologies are used to measure ase. a major limitation of goldengate is that it only allows a relatively small number of genes to be surveyed for ase per panel. current higher density microarrays, which genotype around  <dig> million snps per array, will allow studies to scale up genome-wide. the majority of snps on these arrays, which fall in non-coding regions, will however be non-informative for ase.

a final consideration when analyzing ase using microarrays is the impact copy number variation will have on the signal. in general, genotype calling methods assume three distinct clusters for each snp  in the gdna signal. in the presence of copy number variation, there may be additional clusters which will cause problems for standard genotype calling methods. incorrect genotypes can lead to misleading results, as the calls play an important role in any test for ase, which can only be ascertained at heterozygous loci. bearing this in mind, we recommend that ase calls in copy number variable regions be carefully scrutinized to avoid false positives.

