BACKGROUND
actinopterygian fishes have provided the first clear demonstration of an ancient whole genome duplication  in vertebrate evolution  <cit> . this event was originally suggested based on the finding that zebrafish and medaka possess seven hox clusters  <cit> , compared to four in mammals and one in most invertebrates. it was confirmed later on by comparative mapping  <cit>  and through the analysis of genome sequences of two pufferfishes  <cit> . indeed, many short duplicated groups of linked genes were identified in the takifugu rubripes and tetraodon nigroviridis genomes  <cit> . the duplication event leading to these duplicates was dated by molecular clock to a window between divergence of actinopterygians from tetrapods, and diversification of teleost fish  <cit> . in addition, all chromosomes of tetraodon nigroviridis were assigned to syntenic groups of duplicated genes, demonstrating the genomic scale of the duplication. it was further shown that each pair of duplicated genes was homologous to one non-duplicated human chromosomal region  <cit> .

direct dating of fish gene duplications based on molecular clock was hampered by saturation of synonymous changes at the time scales considered, as well as by differences in evolutionary rates between mammals and fishes  <cit> . less sensitive to these problems, phylogenies of a few tens of gene families have shown a high frequency of gene duplications to be a common feature among sampled teleosts or euteleosts, but not among other fishes  <cit> . comparative mapping has recently shown that paralogons are homologous between pufferfishes  and zebrafish , implying that the whole genome duplication event occurred before the divergence of these two lineages of euteleosts  <cit> . in addition, using a small number of genes, hoegg et al.  <cit>  have scrutinized the existence of duplications in basal actinopterygians and have found that the wgd event took place after the split of the acipenseriformes from the lineage leading to teleosts but before the divergence of osteoglossiformes, making it specific to the teleostean fish . because this event separates the species-poor basal lineages from the species-rich teleost lineages, the same authors have suggested that the additional number of genes resulting from this event might have facilitated the evolutionary radiation and the phenotypic diversification of teleosts  <cit> .

one basic question regarding gene duplication is the fate of duplicated genes. according to the duplication – degeneration – complementation  model proposed by force et al.  <cit> , duplicated genes may have three main fates: the majority of duplicated copies are lost, some duplicated genes are subfunctionalized  and some others undergo neofunctionalization . in most cases the sub- or neofunctionalization events are classically considered to have occurred relatively soon after the duplication event. we recently suggested that a biased subset of genes was retained as duplicates after the genome duplication and that gene retention was biased with regard to biological processes  <cit> . most notably, we observed an enrichment of fish genomes in new paralogs implicated in development, supporting the link between genome duplication and fish morphological diversity  <cit> . in addition, several studies have shown that sub- or neofunctionalization events can be observed at the expression level when specific pairs of duplicated genes are studied . of note, if there are some examples of neofunctionalization events affecting the biochemical function of genes after the vertebrate wgd, much less numerous specific examples of that sort were shown for fish duplicated genes  <cit> .

androgens play essential roles in sex differentiation, sex maturation and behavior in vertebrates, including actinopterygian fishes  <cit> , and their actions are mediated through a specific receptor, ar  which belongs to the nuclear receptor super-family  <cit> . in actinopterygians, the mediation of androgen action is far more complicated than in other vertebrates as there is a duality in the active androgens involved in reproduction, i.e. regular androgens  versus 11-oxygenated androgens   <cit> . like every nuclear receptor, ars are composed of three main domains  <cit> : a hypervariable n-terminal domain involved in transcriptional activation, a dna-binding domain  which permits the binding of receptor on target genes and a ligand-binding domain . the amino acid sequences of these last two domains  are highly conserved from actinopterygians to mammals with 90% and 70% identity with mammalian ars for the dbd and the lbd respectively  <cit> . in actinopterygians, several duplicates of ar were characterized in the rainbow trout, oncorhynchus mykiss  <cit> , the mosquitofish, gambusia affinis  <cit> , astatotilapia burtoni , the nile tilapia, oreochromis niloticus, the japanese eel, anguilla japonica  <cit>  and in gasterosteus aculeatus  <cit> . interestingly, in addition to these molecular clones corresponding to two duplicated genes, different forms of ars, termed ar-a and ar-b, have also been biochemically characterized based on their binding affinities for different androgen ligands in the atlantic croaker, micropogonias undulatus  <cit>  and the kelp bass, paralabrax clathratus  <cit> . these two receptors display different tissue distributions with ar-a present only in the brain and ar-b found both in the brain and the gonads  <cit> . in addition, the different binding affinities of these two ars suggest that the receptors mediate the actions of different androgens, 11kt and dht, in different tissues of teleost fish  <cit> .

names of the species used in this analysis and their accession numbers retrieved from swissprot, trembl, ensembl and genbank. asterisks show the genes sequenced in this survey. non available: n.a.

the case of ar in fish is particularly interesting to study as sex determination mechanisms are known to be particularly plastic in actinopterygians  <cit> . for example, sequential hermaphroditism is common among marine fishes, particularly in tropical and subtropical seas, and can involve females becoming males  or males becoming females , and also bidirectional  sex changes  <cit> . sex changes among species with well organized social and mating systems are controlled by social cues  <cit>  and involve complete alterations in gonadal anatomy and function, as well as changes in color and behavior. it is known that sex steroid hormones play important roles in sex change and behavior in many fish species, and androgens have been shown to be crucial for completion of this process in many protogynous hermaphrodites  <cit> .

interestingly, in human, mutations of the ar gene represent the molecular basis of androgen insensitivity syndrome   <cit> . ais is characterized by defective virilization in  <dig>  xy individuals. the phenotypic spectrum of ais is extremely large: complete ais  is characterized by completely female external genitalia. in partial ais  the phenotype ranges from almost female external genitalia through ambiguous forms to predominantly male external genitalia with hypospadias. minimal  forms of ais exist which are characterized by impaired spermatogenesis with or without a slight virilization deficit. in addition, the androgen receptor is also implicated in prostate cancer and a specific set of mutations often occurred in patients whose cancer became androgen-independent, an evolution of poor clinical prognosis  <cit> .

in this paper, we reconstructed the evolutionary history of ar in actinopterygians. we observed a complex history shaped by three successive events well separated in time:  an ancestral duplication event specific to teleost fishes corresponding to the wgd;  a parallel loss of one duplicated copy  in basal clupeocephala and  a major sequence divergence indicative of a change in functional constraints in the ar-b duplicate of percomorphs. this evolutionary history together with the striking mutation patterns is indicative of a putative neofunctionalization event that took place late during ar-b evolution it is tempting to link this neofunctionalization event to the plasticity of sex determination in percomorphs.

RESULTS
the androgen receptor is duplicated in teleost fishes
using a combination of rt-pcr with degenerate primers designed in the conserved c and e domains and in silico search against various databases, we were able to characterize  <dig> different new ar cdna fragments from  <dig> different fish species. along with these ar cdna fragments, we also identified other steroid receptors  in a. baerii and e. stoutii . this is probably due to a combination of the high conservation of the c and e domains used to design primers among all steroid nuclear receptors and the low stringency of touchdown pcr procedure that we used. in this study, five new sequences of ar were also identified using database searches and  <dig> new sequences of ar were isolated by rt-pcr with degenerated primers, the majority of them being teleosteans , one being chondrichthyan, one being dipnoi and one being chondrostean .

of note, one expressed sequence tag in oryzias latipes was found to match with the 5' end region of the divergent ar in haplochromis burtoni . the corresponding clone was further sequenced and was confirmed to be a medaka ar. no more than one gene was identified in zebrafish by searching both est databases and the whole genome sequence . additional file  <dig> provides an amino acid alignment of a representative choice of these sequences, focusing on complete dbd and lbd sequences. a complete alignment is available upon request to f.b.

using the  <dig> full length sequences identified in our screens, we reconstructed the phylogeny of the actinopterygian ars using neighbor-joining, maximum parsimony, maximum likelihood and bayesian methods . the shorter pcr fragments were used for sequence signature analysis to assess their orthology relationships. note that given the overall strong conservation of the ar sequences and the relatively short size of the alignable conserved regions, we obtained many branches supported by relatively weak bootstrap values. the ar gene is thus certainly not an adequate marker to decipher fish phylogeny and the topologies we obtained are often not in accordance with accepted concepts in fish phylogeny  <cit> . nevertheless, the main branches discussed in this paper are well supported and allow the drawing of clear conclusions.

in all cases, only one ar sequence was identified in each tetrapod. based on partial sequence analysis, the ar from the west african lungfish branched at the root of this tetrapod cluster . we obtained only one ar sequence in the sturgeon, acipenser baerii and this sequence is, as expected, clearly located at the base of the actinopterygian sequences, suggesting that it corresponds to a non-duplicated version of the ar gene . in contrast in heterodontis niloticus, a member of the osteoglossiformes, which is located at the base of the teleosts according to recent phylogenies based on mitochondrial and nuclear genes  <cit> , we found two ar sequences, as in many other teleost fishes such as the eel, the medaka or the cichlids . this suggests that the duplication giving rise to the ar-a and ar-b genes occurred specifically at the base of the teleost tree after the split of the acipenseriformes from the lineage leading to teleosts but before the divergence of osteoglossiformes . this phylogenetic dating obtained with ar is in accordance with the data recently obtained with other genes such as sox <dig> and tyrosinase by hoegg et al.,  <cit> . in contrast to the data from these authors, our data set does not contain sequences from semionotiformes  or amiiformes  that would allow us to confirm more accurately that the wgd occurred specifically in teleosts. nevertheless, our data are fully consistent with this likely scenario.

that the two sequences ar-a and ar-b are indeed the product of the ancestral wgd specific of teleosts is further supported by the chromosomal location of the two tetraodon ar sequences. indeed, these two genes are located on chromosomes t <dig> and t <dig> in the tetraodon genome . from a global synteny analysis, we have previously shown that these two chromosomal regions have a common origin  <cit> . this is further supported by the observation that in the medaka genome, the two ar genes are located on chromosomes m <dig> and m <dig> that also share many duplicated genes . taken together, these data unambiguously show that the ar gene was duplicated to give rise to two paralogs ar-a and ar-b during the teleost specific wgd.

ar-b was secondarily lost in basal clupeocephala, including zebrafish
when analyzing the tree presented in figure  <dig>  we were puzzled to observe that the ar-b sequence can be found in basal teleosts  as well as in many percomorphs but is missing in many basal clupeocephala lineages.

as this observation could be due to an experimental bias linked to a failure to amplify a divergent gene by pcr, we then first checked that this observation was not due to an artifactual lack of detection of the ar-b gene. to this end, we focused our analysis on zebrafish for which a large number of data  are available. first, we carried out rt-pcr experiments using different batches of primers and several rna extracts of zebrafish embryos at various developmental stages, as well as adult organs. in all cases, we detected only one ar sequence whereas our primer batches were able to detect divergent nr3c steroid receptors such as gr, mr or pr. pcr experiments based on dna amplification of short fragments contained in only one exon also failed. finally, we intensively screened the release zv <dig>  of the zebrafish genome using various fragments of the ar gene as baits without any significant hit. of note, no sequence reminiscent of a pseudogene was detected.

due to the availability of a complete and assembled zebrafish genome sequence, we tried to better understand the fate of the ar-b gene in zebrafish. in tetraodon, we found two ar genes, ar-a and ar-b . since we and others previously showed that an extensive synteny persists between tetraodontiformes and zebrafish genomes  <cit> , we precisely mapped in tetraodon and zebrafish the syntenic regions containing ar-a and ar-b. figure  <dig> clearly shows that ar genes map in a large duplicated region corresponding to chromosomes t <dig> and t <dig> in tetraodon. chromosome t <dig> in tetraodon is syntenic to chromosomes z <dig>  z <dig> and z <dig> in zebrafish. interestingly, the zebrafish ar-a ortholog is present in chromosome z <dig>  as predicted based on conserved synteny. a detailed map shows that the organization of this region is conserved between tetraodon and zebrafish . the tetraodon ar-b gene map to chromosome t <dig> and the region encompassing the gene corresponds mainly to the zebrafish chromosome z <dig>  the mapping of the region containing the tetraodon ar-b sequence on the zebrafish genome shows that this region has been scrambled during evolution. many gene orders are not conserved and large fragments are missing or were exchanged . the same consideration is reached when the medaka genome is considered .

these data indicate clearly that a secondary loss of ar-b occurred in zebrafish. interestingly, in related cypriniformes , characiformes  and siluriformes  that altogether form the well-supported clade otophysi  <cit> , we also found only one ar-a sequence and no ar-b one. we recently screened est data available for all these species and we could not find any sequence reminiscent of ar-b. of course, although complete genome sequences are not available and rt-pcr results can artifactually miss a divergent sequence, these data collectively suggest that an unique event of loss of ar-b occurred early on in the otophysi lineage.

strikingly, the exact same situation was observed in another independent lineage of clupeomorph: the salmoniformes. in the  <dig> species analyzed one more time, we found only ar-a and not ar-b. of note, in salmoniformes two ar-a sequences are observed . these correspond to the tetraploidization event that occurred  <dig> to  <dig> myr ago specifically in the salmonid lineage  <cit> ). it is important to note that even in the divergent ar-b sequences that we analyzed in percomorphs , the regions targeted by the various pcr primers that we used are well-conserved. in addition, once again, the screening of the ests available in salmon and trout  has not delivered any ar-b type sequence. thus, although this conclusion is only tentative in the absence of a complete genome, the most likely scenario, considering all existing data, is that ar-b gene was lost in salmoniformes as in otophysi .

it is clear that loss of duplicated genes is a very common fate after a genome duplication event but the present analysis nicely illustrates a late case of neofunctionalization. our data suggest that basal teleosts and percomorphs kept two functional copies of ar whereas "intermediate" lineages such as otophysi and salmoniformes lost it secondarily . according to the topology of teleost fish phylogeny presented in figure  <dig>  our results imply two independent losses of ar-b, one at the base of otophysi and one at the base of salmoniformes . this is based on the assumption that the current topology based essentially on complete mitochondrial dna analysis is correct in the respective placement of salmoniformes and otophysi  <cit> . if, as suggested by some authors, these two groups form a monophyletic clade, it may be possible that in fact only one ancestral event of loss occurred  <cit> . in that case, we can predict that ar-b should not be found in esociformes. in any case, our present data plead for the search of ar-a and ar-b in orders of actinopterygians located at key positions in the evolutionary tree: it would be interesting for example to see if ar-b is present in other ostariophysi lineages such as gonorhynchiformes, or clupeomorphs  <cit>  as well as other protacanthopterygii such as esociformes, argentinoidea and osmeroidea. this will allow a more precise determination of when the events of loss occurred  <cit> .

it is difficult to speculate with the data available why the otophysi and the salmonids apparently do not need a second ar-b gene. given the major function of ar in sex determination and sex organ differentiation, it is tempting to link these events with these processes but given that these data on otophysi and salmonids are limited to some specific models such as zebrafish, salmon and trout, it is up to now difficult to find an obvious connection. it is striking that zebrafish and salmonids are extremely different regarding sex determination and sex differentiation. in addition, as discussed above, the exact phylogenetic range of this loss of ar-b is still unclear.

functional shift of ar-b in euteleosts
in the tree presented in figure  <dig>  we noticed the presence of a highly divergent terminal group of ar-b sequences. this is confirmed when a larger dataset including partial sequences is used to construct a phylogeny with any of the  <dig> methods used . in all cases, we found a long terminal branch uniting divergent ar-b sequences. this divergent ar-b subtype unambiguously  clusters ar sequences of fish belonging to the percomorphs, i.e., the seabass d. labrax, the sand goby, p. minutus, the nile tilapia, o. niloticus and a. burtoni, a scorpaeniforme with m. scorpius, the shorthorn sculpin,; a beloniforme with the medaka, o. latipes, a cyprinodontiforme with the mosquitofish, g. affinis, and  <dig> tetraodontiformes with the tetraodon, t. nigroviridis and the fugu, t. rubripes. indeed, when we considered the sequence alignment , we observed a serie of mutations that are present only in the percomorph ar-b sequences . the divergence of these sequences corresponds to a transient episode of sequence divergence as the ar-b sequences clustered inside this group are not particularly variable. thus, all these data suggest that the percomorphs ar-b are connected to the basal teleosts ar-b through a long branch and exhibit some striking sequence divergence at key positions. from the phylogenetic range of species in which these divergent ar-b sequences are found, it is likely that this acceleration occurred specifically in percomorphs, although this remains to be fully established by a broader taxonomic sampling including other neotelestoi lineages such as basal acanthomorphs  as well as bericyformes  <cit> . to really assess if this event is found in all percomorphs, some basal lineages  of this extremely vast group of fishes should also be studied  <cit> . in the mean time, given our observation that divergent ar-bs are found only in percomorphs from our dataset, we will refer to these divergent sequences as "percomorph ar-b".

it is important to insist on the fact that basal teleosts  clearly contained ar-a and ar-b paralogs. for ar-a, this is not difficult to establish given that this gene is present in a wide phylogenetic range of species. for ar-b, the assignment is less obvious since, as discussed above, this gene has been lost in basal clupeocephala. the fact that the ar-bs from anguilla and heterotis are indeed orthologs of the percomorph ar-b is indicated by several features:  these sequences exhibit a few key sequence signatures that represent synapomorphies of ar-b sequences , this is for example the case of gly <dig>  ser <dig> and ser <dig> in the lbd;  the topology of the phylogenetic tree supports this assumption albeit with a moderate support . of note, we constructed trees based on bayesian analysis which confirm that the topology presented in figures  <dig> and  <dig> is robust .

the most likely scenario accounting for the data available concerning actinopterygian ar evolution is therefore a three step model :  ancestral duplication of a unique ar gene during the wgd event specific of teleost fishes. this explains why anguilla and heterotis have two ar sequences, ar-a and ar-b;  secondary loss of ar-b in basal clupeocephala  explaining the restricted phylogenetic occurrence of ar-b when compared to ar-a;  a late specific divergence of ar-b. the long branch connecting percomorph ar-b to the basal ar-b sequences is indicative of the accumulation of numerous mutations and we thus proposed that it corresponds to a functional shift that has affected the ar-b protein.

we therefore wanted to test whether the two groups of paralogous genes ar-a and percomorph ar-b were under different selective pressures. we reasoned that if selective pressures differed between the two groups, there should be sites undergoing substitutions in the ar-a subtree and constrained in the percomorph ar-b subtree, and symmetrically sites constrained in the ar-a subtree undergoing substitutions in the ar-b subtree. patterns of evolutionary rates in one subtree versus the other were compared to answer this question: are they significantly more different than they would be if branches were picked at random among the two subtrees? expected numbers of substitutions were estimated for all branches of the tree and all sites of the alignment  <cit> . a non-symmetric correspondence analysis was applied on these numbers of substitutions, and the percentage of variance between branches explained when branches are clustered according to the two subtrees was computed. the significance of this percentage was assessed by a permutation test based on  <dig>  <dig> replicates, where branches are picked randomly from the two subtrees. among the  <dig>  <dig> random clusterings, only  <dig> % explained a higher percentage of variance among branches than the clustering according to the paralogous subtrees . as branches have been normalized with respect to their lengths by the correspondence analysis, this variance comes from differences in patterns of substitutions, not branch lengths. therefore, patterns of substitutions are significantly more different between the two groups of paralogous genes than between two random groups of branches. this suggests that selective pressures differ between ar-a and ar-b genes, which is in favor of a possible neofunctionalization. the same conclusion is reached with the use of the paml software  <cit> . a significant change in the selective pressure onto the branch specific to the ar-b in percomorphs  is unequivocally detected, although the test is not sensitive enough to tell whether it is a relaxation of the selective pressure or positive selection that drove this change. it should be made clear that, in the absence of a functional characterization, including a comparison of a basal non-duplicated ar , duplicated ar with a non-divergent ar-b  and duplicated ar with a divergent ar-b  this neofunctionalization cannot yet be formaly proved and should be regarded as only putative.

this pattern of a late spectacular divergence of a duplicated gene in a precise taxonomic group is an interesting case in which the duplication and the functional shifts are clearly two recognizable events that were decoupled in time. the ar-b gene will thus be a very interesting model to study the precise functional and biological impact of these two events since we have sequences of non-duplicated fish ar , duplicated ar-a , duplicated and non divergent ar-b  and duplicated and divergent ar-b . in addition, we have other interesting cases for comparison such as a unique zebrafish ar-a gene with secondary loss of ar-b. the fact that ar is a gene encoding a nuclear hormone receptor with a known ligand, a clear biological role and for which several functional tests are available renders this gene particularly suitable for a precise integrated study of the consequences and respective roles of duplication and evolutionary sequence divergence. for example, it may be very interesting to study if, as proposed recently at a broader scale for nuclear receptors, sequence divergence is correlated to expression divergence  <cit> .

analysis of the substitution pattern in relation to human androgen insensitivity syndrome
as a first step to analyze the possible consequences of the duplication and divergence of ar-b in percomorphs, we scrutinized the mutations found in divergent ar-b versus ar-a. we first detected how the various mutations observed in actinopterygian ars are located in function of the complex evolutionary history described above. we thus categorized the mutations in four classes :  mutations found only in ar-a and not in ar-b or ars from amniotes ;  mutations observed specifically in divergent ar-b ;  positions found to be identical in ar-a and ar-b but different in amniotes ar ; and finally  positions that are different in amniotes ar-a and ar-b . from this analysis, it is obvious that the divergent ar-b effectively accumulated mutations. out of  <dig> amino acid mutations, we found that ar-as exhibit  <dig>  specific mutations whereas divergent ar-b have  <dig>  specific mutations. this difference is highly significant .

we thus studied in more detail the  <dig> mutations found in the divergent ar-b sequences in order to see if some of them could have obvious functional consequences. of note, and not surprisingly, none of these mutations affect the positions known to directly interact with the ligand or implicated in coactivator binding as determined in the 3d structure of the ar lbd complexed with various ligands  <cit> . few specific changes are observed such as l744v, m749l, q783h and m895i . some substitutions are also observed in the af- <dig> region: a <dig> is substituted to a s in most ar-bs and to a g in most ar-as, as well as i <dig> is substituted to a v in most ar-bs. of note, they are observed in both ar-as and divergent ar-bs and overall, they are unlikely to account for significant functional consequences.

then, we scrutinized the positions in the dbd and lbd divergent in ar-b and we checked whether these mutations are affecting amino acids found mutated in human pathologic conditions . we were particularly interested by mutations occurring in androgen insensitivity syndrome  or prostate cancer since these pathologies affect the ability of the receptor to regulate transcription of target genes in response to ligand binding. ais is a pathologic condition in humans defined by the eventual occurrence of female differentiation despite the male xy genome and results from germinal mutations in the human ar gene. as discussed above, ais can be complete , partial  or mild   <cit> . we noted that effectively, some divergent ar-b specific mutations are localized in close proximity to functionally relevant residues and may thus impact, in a subtle manner, the function of the receptor. for example the substitution y739l is observed in all divergent ar-bs . located close to m <dig>  another amino acid involved in ligand binding, y <dig> could influence ligand binding by itself since its substitution to aspartic acid has been described in a cais patient  <cit> . the same question addresses several other amino acids specifically different in divergent ar-bs as compared to ar-as, such as the f856l substitution which has been observed in patients with cais  <cit>  .

we thus compared the mutation pattern observed in the divergent percomorphs ar-b gene  which are linked to a neofunctionalization event to the mutation pattern occurring in the pathological conditions . when these various types of mutations are mapped on the structure of the human receptor , we found that most of the mutations found in ar-b are distinct from pathological mutations. nevertheless, as discussed above, we also observed some positions mutated both in ar-b and in human patients. globally,  <dig> of the  <dig> lbd mutations found in the divergent ar-b involve amino acids known to be implicated in pais + mais, whereas only  <dig> are found in cais . although this difference is not statistically significant, this is in accordance with the notion that ar-b is a functional gene the function of which is only modified  by the specific mutations arising during the putative neofunctionalization event. the fact that we found  <dig> mutations common between fish ar-b and prostate cancer mutants is more difficult to interpret since mutated ars in prostate cancer are functionally diverse .

number of substitutions common to the various human phenotypes of ar diseases and ar-a and ar-b in fish 

CONCLUSIONS
the above analyses suggest that these sequence differences between ar-a and ar-b will affect the functionality of these receptors and are linked to a putative neofunctionalization event. this remains of course to be directly addressed through in vitro and in vivo analysis of the role of ar-a and ar-b in suitable fish models. how this functionality is precisely affected remains therefore an open question. the teleost duality in terms of active androgens involved in reproduction  <cit>  is of great interest in that context. of note, ar-a and ar-b have been shown to both bind regular androgens and the fish specific 11-oxygenated androgens  although no direct comparison between ar-a and ar-b has been carried out in the same species until now. we thus have no clear comparison of the respective affinities and potencies of ar-a and ar-b for dht and 11kt. of special interest are the in vivo binding studies carried out in two perciform species, i.e. the atlantic croaker, micropogonias undulates and the kelp bass, paralabrax clathratus, that demonstrated the existence of two different nuclear androgen receptors that may mediate the physiological actions of different androgens  <cit> . the mutation pattern we observed in ar-b is indicative of a neofunctionalization event at the functional level, but it is likely that this may also be coupled to differences at the expression level. indeed, neofunctionalization of the expression pattern has been suggested in the cichlid fish a. burtoni in which it has been shown that ar-a and ar-b have distinct expression patterns in the brain  <cit> , with a differential implication of these receptors in the maintenance of social dominance status of male fish  <cit> . taking into account the functional shift that we specifically observed in the percomorph lineage, it is tempting to link this functional shift and the sexual lability that is observed in this lineage as the percomorphs contain nearly 90% of all the hermaphrodite species known to date  <cit> . one may thus hypothesize that the existence of two functionally divergent ar genes play a role in the plasticity of sex determination often observed in these fishes. in this sense, the presence of the divergent ar-b gene could be viewed as a permissive factor allowing the evolvability of divergent sex determination in these fishes.

