BACKGROUND
ejaculated spermatozoa represent terminally differentiated cells in which transcription and/or translation of nuclear encoded mrnas are considered to be unlikely. therefore, the paternal genome is the only cargo carried by the spermatozoa to the ooplasm. discovery of several transcription factors, soluble signaling molecules and structures delivered by spermatozoan into the zygotic cytoplasm upon fertilization have changed this perception  <cit> . despite the transcriptionally inactive state, spermatozoa retain an entourage of mrna transcripts encoding transcription factors and proteins involved in signal transduction, cell proliferation, chromatin condensation, regulation of sperm motility, capacitation and acrosome reaction  <cit> . delivery of such spermatozoal transcripts to ooplasm is envisaged to have their potential significance during fertilization, embryogenesis and morphogenesis. approximately 3000– <dig> mrna transcripts have been suggested to be present in the spermatozoa  <cit> . however, these remain to be characterized for their organization, expression and association with different regulatory elements and repetitive sequences.

repetitive dna sequences are dynamic components of the genome encompassing transposable elements, major satellites, minisatellites and microsatellites  <cit> . most of these repeats are found in the non-coding regions of the genomes while a small fraction is retained within the transcriptome  <cit>  and participate in gene regulation through transcription, translation or gene silencing  <cit> . surprisingly, organization of the repeats within the transcriptomes of any mammalian species, particularly in the spermatozoa has remained undeciphered. to explore the organization of such repeats and the repeat tagged genes, we undertook the transcriptome analysis of water buffalo bubalus bubalis, an important player in the agriculture, dairy and meat industries in the indian sub-continent.

minisatellite  <dig>   originating from the human myoglobin gene  has been studied in a number of species  <cit> . this repeat has also been found to be associated with the heterochromatic sequences of the human y chromosome  <cit> . in our previous in-silico study, we demonstrated presence of minisatellite  <dig>  within the transcriptomes of several eukaryotes. following this, we isolated and characterized several known and novel mrna transcripts tagged with the consensus of  <dig>  repeat loci from different somatic tissues and gonads of water buffalo bubalus bubalis  <cit> .

owing to the envisaged participation of the spermatozoal mrna transcripts during early zygotic and embryonic development, we studied the spermatozoal transcriptome of water buffalo bubalus bubalis tagged with minisatellite  <dig>  employing minisatellite associated sequence amplification . these mrna transcripts were further characterized for their sequence organization, homology status, variation of gene expression, copy number and evolutionary status of the corresponding genes.

RESULTS
differential distribution of the consensus sequence of  <dig>  repeat loci within the spermatozoal and somatic transcriptomes
in previous study, we identified  <dig> different mrna transcripts from various tissues of water buffalo using oligos based on the consensus of  <dig>  repeat loci  <cit> . in the present study, we used this oligo  for masa and uncovered a total of  <dig> amplicons comprising  <dig> different mrna transcripts from the spermatozoa . cloning and sequencing followed by the blast search of these transcripts showed that  <dig> had no homology with the sequences in the genbank and  <dig> were similar to uncharacterized bac clones originating from cattle bos taurus, human homo sapiens and mouse mus musculus. only one mrna transcript was found to be homologous to the bovine steroid 21-hydroxylase  gene . interestingly, comparative analysis of these spermatozoal mrna transcripts showed that none was common to those identified from different somatic tissues, testis and ovary in earlier study  <cit> . however, cloning and sequencing of ~ <dig> recombinant clones corresponding to each of these  <dig> fragments from seven different animals demonstrated their consistent presence in the spermatozoa. in order to ascertain the structural, functional and regulatory status of the masa uncovered genes/gene fragments, we conducted a comprehensive database search for each mrna transcript independently. the details of these homologous genes, their accession numbers with chromosomal locations , species, position of our cdna sequences and their possible functions are given in the table  <dig> 

77004-77124
24056-24175
117725–117896
94
conserved  <dig>  tagged spermatozoal genes are present as single to double copy in buffalo genome
to determine possible evolutionary significance of masa uncovered genes/gene fragments, we conducted cross-hybridization studies using individual recombinant clone containing corresponding gene fragment with the gdna of  <dig> different species . all the  <dig>  tagged spermatozoal genes were found to cross hybridize with all the thirteen species suggesting their ubiquitous roles in the higher eukaryotes.

following sequence analyses and conservation studies, the copy number status was calculated for these genes/gene fragments using standard curve method and sybr green chemistry. extrapolation of the standard curves obtained with  <dig> fold dilution series of the respective recombinant plasmids containing corresponding gene fragments  demonstrated their  <dig> to  <dig> copies per haploid genome in buffalo .

differential expression profiles of  <dig>  tagged mrna transcripts
comparative expression profiles of the uncovered genes were studied to explore their functional status in different somatic tissues, gonads and spermatozoa. the expression study for each masa uncovered gene/gene fragments was done first by rna slot blot hybridization  and later by rt-pcr analysis . the quantitative expressional analysis was then performed for individual transcript using equal amount of cdna templates and gapdh as an internal control employing sybr green assays in real time pcr.

the primer specificity for each individual gene was established using five fold dilution series of the template cdna . straight standard curve with a slope =  to  and a single peak in the dissociation protocol established the maximum specificity and efficiency of the primers. for more accuracy, the expression study was conducted using three different dilutions of cdna. the relative quantitation of expression so obtained was substantiated further using somatic/gonadal/spermatozoal cdna from five additional animals.

the relative expression study amongst all the somatic tissues, gonads and spermatozoa demonstrated the highest and/or unique expression of all the  <dig> transcripts in the spermatozoa including that of pjsc <dig> . when expression was compared amongst different somatic and gonadal tissues, only one transcript showed uniform expression and the other one, highest expression in testis, liver, lung & brain. the remaining ten transcripts showed highest expression in the testis compared to that in other somatic tissues and ovary . significantly,  <dig>  of the  <dig> uncovered genes showed negligible expression in the forebrain but comparatively higher expression  in the hindbrain of buffalo.

discussion
minisatellites have been implicated with gene regulation, chromosomal fragile sites and genome imprinting  <cit>  but the biological significance of their association with the coding regions remains largely unresolved. in the present study, we established the association of  <dig>  repeats with the spermatozoal transcriptome of water buffalo, bubalus bubalis and observed highest expression of these transcripts in testis and/or spermatozoa indicating their crucial roles in male gametogenesis.

potential implications of association of repeats with the spermatozoal transcriptome
our previous study showed distribution of  <dig>  sequences in the flanking regions and within the mrna transcripts of many structural, functional and regulatory genes in buffalo and six other species  <cit> . previously, various  <dig>  tagged mrna transcripts were uncovered from somatic tissues and gonads of buffalo. here, a total of  <dig> different mrna transcripts, representing one known and others mostly uncharacterized ones from spermatozoa were identified  complementing our earlier study. notably, none of the transcripts was shared between somatic/gonadal tissues and spermatozoa. the differential transcript profile may be a reflection of their diverse functions in somatic tissues, gonads , and spermatozoa. alternatively, they may have specific roles to play during different stages of development. these transcripts could not be picked up in somatic tissues/gonad and vice-versa due to either polymorphic nature of ssrs or their much lower numbers. a comparison of the mrna transcripts uncovered in the present study with those reported earlier  <cit>  confirmed that these were the different ones.

thus, present study can be used as a basis for evaluation of other repeats to unveil their combined significance within and adjacent to the coding regions. spermatozoa have come a long way from being regarded as an artifact to a repository of a variety of rnas. the initial controversy which shrouded the existence of spermatozoal rna pool has now been cleared by the identification of several transcripts in different species including human  <cit> .

many signaling molecules and transcription factors have been identified which are transported into the zygotic cytoplasm upon fertilization by the spermatozoa  <cit> . however, several other spermatozoal transcripts remain to be characterized. present study seems to be the first one, unveiling existence of the minisatellite tagged transcripts in the buffalo spermatozoa suggesting their predominant involvements in the pre- and post-fertilization events. it becomes more significant, when these transcripts showed faithful conservation across thirteen different species suggesting their testicular functions in much broader number of higher eukaryotes.

prospects of repeat tagged transcripts carrying highest expression in the testis and spermatozoa
all the  <dig>  tagged genes/gene fragments showing highest expression in the testis and spermatozoa suggested their strong participations in the testicular development and spermatogenesis. further, uniform expression of steroid 21-hydroxylase gene suggested its consistent requirement in all the tissues except spermatozoa. the steroid 21-hydroxylase; p <dig>  belongs to the cytochrome p- <dig> super-gene family and plays a crucial role in the synthesis of steroid hormones such as cortisol and aldosterone. mutations in this gene have been implicated in causing adrenal hyperplasia  <cit> .

this gene has been reported to show maximum expression in adrenal glands and minimum in liver and testis. however, in our study, this gene showed maximum expression in spermatozoa thus, adding a new dimension towards its unidentified functions in the sperm development and maintenance. expression of p <dig>  gene could not be confirmed in the adrenal gland of buffalo due to unavailability of the tissue sample. since the spermatozoal mrna is delivered to the ooplasm, and has its potential roles in the chromatin repackaging, early zygotic and embryonic development and post syngamy events  <cit> , the observed highest expression of all the  <dig>  tagged mrna transcripts in spermatozoa suggest their important roles towards specific functions of paternal genome sustenance.

CONCLUSIONS
present work demonstrated the association of consensus sequence of minisatellite  <dig>  with buffalo spermatozoal transcriptome. maximum expression of all the  <dig> -tagged mrna transcripts in testis and spermatozoa suggested their involvement in various testicular functions and fertilization. following this approach, other repeat tagged mrna transcripts may be studied within the buffalo genome and across the species. a comparative mrna fingerprint based on several minisatellites resulting in detailed expression profile would allow the identification of common and uncommon transcripts in somatic tissues and gonads. indeed, this would help understanding the more focused roles of repetitive dna sequences in the paternal genome during and post fertilization events and different stages of embryonic development.

