BACKGROUND
the blood brain barrier  in the central nervous system  regulates the passage of nutrients, essential components and metabolic constituents between the blood stream and the parenchymal tissue. although local neural activity is known to promote local blood supply and is the basis of the so-called blood-oxygen level gradient/dependency   <cit> , the regulation of local blood flow in the parenchyma of the cns is not well understood. contraction of pre-capillary arterioles has been suggested but so far without clear demonstration  <cit> . capillaries of the cns do not have smooth musculature but contractility of pericytes associated with the capillaries of peripheral tissue such as the retina, cardiac and skeletal muscles has been observed  <cit> , suggesting that contraction of these cells in the cns can be a mechanism of blood supply regulation  <cit> . however, the finding that pericytes of the cns lack the α-actin protein isoform found in contractile cells  <cit> , appears to exclude their participation in cns capillary contraction. angiogenesis described during brain development  <cit>  has also been suggested as a mechanism of blood flow increment, although without clear support in normal adulthood or non-pathological contexts  <cit> . the endothelial cells , pericytes and basal lamina , together with elements of the neurovascular compartment such as neurons, astrocytes, and other glial cells, adapt themselves to maintain homeostasis that promotes tissue survival  <cit> . although the endothelial cell can be considered as an element which plays an important role in blood flow regulation its participation has been little analyzed, at least partly due to the intrinsic difficulty of its individual staining in capillaries of the cns  <cit> .

however, in order to better understand the mechanisms that occur during local blood flow changes in the cns parenchyma, the role of capillary morphology needs to be considered as an important issue. electron microscopy  has provided knowledge of the capillary wall constituents  <cit> , but the small spatial range of this method is a critical and important limitation of this powerful tool, e.g. the size of a capillary endothelial cell is still not known. despite attempts to obtain markers enabling cns capillary imaging or visualization of capillary networks through extracellular tracers, fluorescent markers, diamine benzidine reaction, immunocytochemistry as well as brain arterial injection with black ink or venous plastic infusion  <cit> , a complete view of the morphology of cns capillaries still is lacking. in this respect, recently we proposed an alternative histological tool focused on detecting the relative space occupied by the capillary endothelial cell  <cit> . this visualization through light microscopy is based on two facts: first, the optical effect that reflecting light produces in fixed and unstained capillaries, and second, evidence provided by em  <cit>  showing that the internal wall of cns capillaries is exclusively constituted by the endothelial cell. using this procedure we found that changes in capillary luminal area can be detected indirectly via changes in the inner capillary diameter .

with the aim of investigating the participation of the capillary endothelial cell in the regulation of blood flow fluctuations that occur in response to changes in neuronal activity, the present study was directed to quantifying the internal diameter of capillaries in the anterior hypothalamic paraventricular nucleus  in female rats. we chose this nucleus since several of its physiological aspects but not its microvasculature have been intensely studied  <cit> . for example, it is well known that the magno- and parvocellular regions via a neuroendocrine reflex are involved in oxytocin  production and release in response to mammary gland sensory stimulation  <cit> , and that the effect varies according to the reproductive phase of the female rat  <cit> . thus, we decided to measure and compare the capillary internal diameter during the diestrous phase of virgin rats and during the lactation period of mother rats. to ensure that the sensory information received by the two groups was significantly different, mammary glands of the mother rats were stimulated by their pups suckling for two weeks of lactation, while virgin rats had no stimulation.

RESULTS
general microvasculature characteristics
unstained brain sections from all animals were characterized by networks of highly interconnected blood vessels with a wide range of calibers . in particular, sections from the anterior hypothalamic region showed an area of high capillary density corresponding to the pvn  <cit> ; clearly seen in six serial sections with an anterior-posterior length of approximately  <dig> μm . this conspicuous density of capillaries could no longer be visualized after cresyl violet staining , since application of the cover slip and permount modified the optical effect that reflecting light produces on the capillaries, thus impeding their visualization. however, the stained neurons enabled us to confirm the exact pvn location as well as the location of the magno- and parvocellular regions . 

inner capillary diameter 
when for the virgin animals in diestrous phase  the icd  values from the magnocellular subdivision of the left pvn were compared with those of the right pvn there was no difference . similarly there was no difference when the values from the parvocellular subdivision of the left pvn were compared with those of the right pvn . also in the mother lactating animals  the icd values of the left and right magnocellular subdivisions did not differ , nor in the left and right parvocellular subdivisions . therefore, the data from each cellular subdivision were combined. as shown in figure  <dig>  the vir group presented icds ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> μm in both regions, with most capillaries located in the 6-μm range, followed by the 5- and 7-μm ranges, respectively. when the percentage values of the icd magnocellular and parvocellular subdivisions were compared, they did not differ significantly . in contrast, the lac group showed an icd distribution that ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> μm in both regions, with most capillaries located in the 7-μm range followed by the 8- and 6-μm ranges, respectively. again, when the percentage values from the two regions were compared, no difference was found . thus, as seen in figure  <dig>  the lac group showed a tendency towards a greater percentage of capillaries with large icd.

to clarify this observation and since there were no significant differences between the measurements obtained in the two pvn subdivisions of either group, we decided to compare the data between the two experimental conditions by grouping the icd measurements into two capillary ranges: with small  and large  diameters . this confirmed that the lac group had a significantly higher percentage of large diameter capillaries compared to the vir group .

pvn neurovascular compartment
when values  for the space occupied by neural  and glial , but excluding vascular elements of the neurovascular compartment were compared between pvn magno- and parvocellular subdivisions from the vir and lac groups, we found no significant differences between the two groups ; neural and glial elements  occupied approximately 30% of the space in all the sample fields analyzed.

discussion
whereas the physiology and neuronal characteristics of the pvn have been widely investigated  <cit> , its microvasculature has been much less so  <cit> . morphological changes such as glial retraction, neuronal remodeling, c-fos expression and electrophysiological activity increment during lactation have been reported  <cit> , and there is no doubt that greater synthesis and release of ot from both the pvn and supraoptic nucleus occurs  <cit> . this could reflect an increment in the local neural activity of these structures that in turn promotes an increment in local blood flow  <cit> . in the present study our results suggest that, at least in the pvn, local blood flow increment could be via an increment in the icd rather by an increase in outer capillary diameter or angiogenesis. our findings showing that the area occupied by the neural and glial elements of the neurovascular compartment did not change in virgin compared to lactating rats, suggest that angiogenesis is not present. in addition, it has been suggested that components of the capillary basal lamina such as laminin, cablin, fibronectin and type iv collagen among others  <cit>  prevent the outer ec diameter from expanding.

in relation to our proposal that icd increment promotes increases in blood flow, we mention the following: local blood flow regulation in the parenchyma of the cns is not well understood  <cit> . however, capillary contraction caused by swelling of ec with no change in the external diameter of the capillary has been previously suggested as an active mechanism of local capillary constriction in peripheral tissue  <cit> . thus, in accordance with our findings of significant changes in the icd of pvn microvasculature in the lac group, we take up this idea again to offer an account of how fast, regional, and reversible control of blood supply in the cns might occur. changes in the icd might take place via modifications of ec cytoplasmic volume; when this decreases the capillary lumen increases , and the time needed for cytoplasmic transport of substances from the luminal to the abluminal side of the membrane decreases. it is known that the reduction or increase in either local blood supply or the bidirectional “blood ↔ parenchyma” transport of metabolic constituents depends upon the ec which, together with the basal lamina, constitute the capillary wall  <cit> . accordingly, when the cytoplasmic volume increases, the capillary lumen decreases , causing cytoplasmic transport of metabolites from the luminal to the abluminal side of the membrane to be slowed. there are a wide variety of factors that modify intracellular osmolarity, thereby promoting changes in cytoplasmic ec volume. organic osmolytes, taurine, cyclosporine, water, some hormones such as vasopressin  or ot, and free radicals have all been implicated in mechanisms of cell volume regulation  <cit> . thus, it is possible that neurons and/or astrocytes could modulate their own capillary blood supply as well as the transport and supply of metabolically important substances via such factors. 

in addition, it is currently thought that transport of water-soluble molecules across ec is accomplished by the continuous formation of plasmalemma vesicles followed by detachment and fusion to the membrane on the other side of the cell or by transport of cytoplasmic vesicles moving from one surface to the other without membrane fusion  <cit> . either of these mechanisms of intracellular transport could be present in the capillary ec and depending on the luminal-abluminal distance the cytoplasmic transport time could be faster or slower. this could represent a dynamic and plastic mechanism by which constantly changing neuronal needs are rapidly met. as physiological changes associated with chronic dehydration, hemorrhage, stress condition as well as pregnancy and parturition  <cit> , are associated with the synthesis and release of ot or vp from the pvn and supraoptic nucleus, then, based on our results, we should not reject the idea that a similar dynamic mechanism of blood flow regulation in response to such stimuli might occur.

finally, it is well-known that during lactation progesterone  and prolactin  reach high levels in the blood stream  <cit> . since prl has been implicated in ot release  <cit> , this hormone could be a potential candidate to participate in pvn blood flow regulation.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings suggest that during lactation the microvasculature of the pvn of female rats undergoes dynamic, transitory changes in blood supply represented by an increment in the icd through self-cytoplasmic volume modification reflected by ec changes. this is relevant to consider from the pharmacological point of view, since changes in cytoplasmic volume in the ec could help to increase blood flow and in this way facilitate the metabolic exchange between capillaries and the cns parenchyma.

