BACKGROUND
cleistogamy is a special mating system of flowering plants and has been reported for approximately  <dig> species . three categories of cleistogamy are recognized: dimorphic cleistogamy, complete cleistogamy and induced cleistogamy  <cit> . dimorphic cleistogamous plants produce both closed  flowers and open  flowers on the same individual or on different individuals. the cl flower is often more juvenile in appearance and is characterized mainly by reductions in flower size, corolla and stamen number. a cl flower is also considered to be a modified form of a ch flower . complete cleistogamous plants produce only cl flowers, whereas induced cleistogamous plants can produce both cl and ch flowers but without any floral organ reduction in the cl flowers. the cl flowers are induced due to the failure of the flowers to open when changes in certain environmental factors  <cit> . in several cleistogamous species, the ability to produce ch and cl flowers can be affected by seasonal and environmental stresses, including drought, flood, salinity, nutrient deprivation, and shade . cleistogamy may be advantageous because cl flowers ensure seed set by self-pollination under severe environmental conditions  <cit> . the energetic costs  of cl flowers appear to be considerably lower than those of ch flowers  <cit> .

the genetic regulation and mechanisms of cleistogamy have been studied in several crops that are not naturally cleistogamous. cleistogamous flowers in barley and rice lack lodicules or display lodicule deformities due to mutations in certain floral identity genes. a mutation in the erect panicle <dig> gene is responsible for the rice cleistogamy mutant cl <dig>  in which the lodicules exhibit a weak swelling ability, resulting in the failure of flowers to open  <cit> . the barley cleistogamy <dig>  gene is a homolog of a-class apetala <dig>  and is targeted by microrna mir <dig>  the down-regulation of barley cly <dig> caused by a mutation in the mir <dig> targeting site represses the development of lodicules, thereby leading to cleistogamy  <cit> . the bn-clg1a  gene encoding a ringv e <dig> ubiquitin ligase was isolated from a brassica napusmutant; this gene leads to the formation of petal-closed flowers  <cit> .

however, few studies investigated the genetic regulation of ch and cl flowering patterning in naturally cleistogamous species. the genetic regulatory mechanisms of natural cleistogamy may be quite different from those in crops using rare mutants. in naturally cleistogamous plants, both ch and cl flowers are produced by the same individual exposed to different environments . although the appearance of morphologically reduced cl flowers is not caused by the mutation of certain genes, it may be caused by variations in gene expression in some gene regulatory networks  controlling the flowering processes. in a cross-species microarray analysis, morinage et al.  <cit>  identified  <dig> genes, including those related to floral development and cold stress response that were differentially expressed in ch and cl flowers of an annual cleistogamous herb, cardamine kokaiensisyahara.

pseudostellaria heterophylla  pax  is a native perennial herb widely distributed in north-eastern and eastern china  <cit> , and its roots are used as one of the most popular traditional chinese medicines. p. heterophylla demonstrates typical dimorphic cleistogamy, usually producing both ch and cl flowers on the same individual plant that appear in different positions and indifferent seasons . this species provides an excellent model for investigating the gene regulatory networks that control ch and cl flowering.

in this study, the rna-seq platform based on illumina hiseq technology was used to compare the transcriptome of p. heterophylla ch and cl flowers to investigate differences in gene transcription patterns relating to ch and cl flowering processes. the aims of this study were  to identify differentially expressed genes involved in the transition from ch to cl flowering in this dimorphic cleistogamous species, and  to investigate putative gene regulatory pathways that might determine differences between ch and cl flowering patterning and processes. because cleistogamous plants produce cl flowers adapted to severe environmental conditions, our study may help to shed light on the molecular basis for the evolution of environmentally-dependent plant mating systems.

RESULTS
morphological characters of ch and cl flower in p. heterophylla
ch flowers of p. heterophylla appear in early spring , when the deciduous trees and shrubs begin to grow new leaves . mature ch flowers develop at the apical shoot and are composed of four whorls of floral organs: five green sepals, five white petals,  <dig> stamens, and a single ovary with three stigmas . cl flowers of p. heterophylla appear in late spring to summer , after the withering of ch flowers and once light levels fall as the forest canopy forms . mature cl flowers develop at the axils of the first several nodes of the shoot, are smaller than ch flowers and are composed of three whorls of floral organs  that include four purple-red sepals, two stamens, and a single ovary with two stigmas . the initiation of floral organ primordia is also different between ch and cl flowers. in ch flowers,  <dig> sepal primordia,  <dig> stamen primordia,  <dig> petal primordiaand  <dig> carpel primordia are initiated , whereas  <dig> sepal primordia,  <dig> stamen primordia and  <dig> carpel primordia are initiated in cl flowers   <cit> .fig.  <dig> two types of flower of pseudostellaria heterophylla. a-d chasmogamous  flowering. a habitat of p. heterophylla when producing ch flower. b
p. heterophylla individuals with ch flowers. c ch flower is at the apical shoot. d sem images of the early stage of ch flower development, with initiation of floral organs . e–h cleistogamous  flowering. e habitat of p. heterophylla when producing cl flower. f
p. heterophylla individuals with cl flowers . g cl flower is in a lateral position on the stem . h sem images of the early stage of cl flower development, with initiation of floral organs. bars show 5 mm in c and g, bars show 40 μm in d and h




sequencing and assembly
high-throughput sequencing of normalized cdna libraries resulted in  <dig>  million clean pair-end reads for p. heterophylla ch flowers and  <dig>  million for cl flowers. the raw sequence files have been uploaded to the national center for biotechnology information sequence read archive  under the study accession number srp <dig> 

using high-throughput rna-seq analysis, we identified  <dig>  unigenes in the total transcriptome of p. heterophylla, with an average length of 860 bp . the length distributions of the contigs, transcripts and unigenes are provided in additional file  <dig>  after strict quality control, the total clean pair-end reads of the two libraries were utilized to reveal transcriptomic information for p. heterophylla. using trinity, the assembly of clean reads resulted in  <dig>  contigs, with an average length of 354 bp, and  <dig>  transcripts, with average length of 610 bp. the species that provided most of the top blast hits was vitis vinifera, with  <dig>  hits, followed by populus trichocarpa and ricinus communis, with  <dig>  and  <dig>  hits, respectively.table  <dig> characteristics of total assembly data



functional annotation
to obtain functional annotations, all of unigenes were blasted against the ncbi non-redundant database, and  <dig>  unigenes were searched using blast in the swiss-prot database . the functional annotations of p. heterophylla genes by the go, eggnog and kegg databases are also shown in additional file  <dig>  using the eggnog database, total unigenes were annotated and subdivided into  <dig> clusters of orthologous groups . among them,  <dig>  %  and  <dig>  % , respectively, of the unigenes obtained from p. heterophylla were assigned to “function unknown” and “general function prediction only”. these categories were followed by a cluster of “signal transduction mechanisms” , “posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones” , and “transcription” ; the cluster of “cell mobility”  was the smallest group.fig.  <dig> evolutionary genealogy of genes: non-supervised orthologous groups  analysis. a total of  <dig> unigenes were analyzed using eggnog database and subdivided into  <dig> clusters of orthologous  classifications. x-axis, cog classifications; y-axis, number of unigenes



floral genes are identified
because one of our aims was to identify candidate genes that are responsible for flowering processes, we specifically searched for p. heterophylla homologues of genes and gene families that are known to be involved in flowering time, floral identity, and flower development in arabidopsis thaliana. candidate homologues were identified as blast hits. for the arabidopsis flowering related genes with more than one blast hit to our transcriptome, we chose the longest transcript with the highest identity with arabidopsis. we identified homologues of  <dig> arabidopsis genes involved in regulating flowering processes, sharing 64–83 % nucleic acid identity with the arabidopsis genes. these candidate flowering-related genes included those affecting flowering time regulation, floral meristem identity, floral organ identity, flower organ development, and establishment of organ and whorl boundaries. among them were putative homologous genes controlling floral organ identity  and some other mads-box genes , genes controlling flowering time , squamosa promoter binding protein-like ), genes involved in meristem size determination and maintenance , genes involved in organ boundary establishment , and genes involved in controlling organ number, shape, size, and proportions  .

validation of expression of floral genes involved in flowering gene regulatory networks
the expression of the  <dig> key candidate genes  involved in three flowering regulatory modules was validated using qrt-pcr . the expression patterns of most of loci were consistent with transcriptome sequencing based on the pearson correlation coefficient value . fkf <dig>  ft, stm, ap <dig>  ap <dig>  and pi, which were expressed differentially between ch and cl flowers, were detected both by rna-seq and qrt-pcr . the remaining flowering genes such as cry <dig>  phy, co, soc <dig>  agl <dig>  etc. were not expressed differentially between ch and cl flowers. the expression of gi and cdf were not considered differentially expressed between ch and cl flowers as they were not consistent between rna-sequencing and qrt-pcr. the expression variation of these genes may play important roles in determining ch and cl flowering, however, as we discuss below.fig.  <dig> comparisons of rna sequencing and qpcr expression data for twenty-four genes associated with flowering process between ch and cl flowers. the log fold-change  in rna sequencing was estimated based on the data obtained by reads per kilobase of exon per million mapped reads values . the log fold-change in qpcr were calculated using the comparative ct method . we calculated the pearson correlation coefficient between the different methods for all transcripts. the correlation coefficient was  <dig> , p < <dig> 



differentially expressed transcripts abundance
comparing the rna-seq data between ch and cl flowers, we found a total of  <dig> genes were differentially expressed using the strict cutoff thresholds ; of this total,  <dig> were up-regulated in ch flowers,  <dig> were up-regulated in cl flowers, three transcripts were expressed only in ch flowers, and  <dig> were expressed only in cl flowers .

the go enrichment analyses showed that the differentially expressed transcripts  were enriched in biological process, cellular components and molecular functions  using cutoffs of fdr < <dig> . a total of thirteen enriched go terms were identified, including eight of biological process, three of cellular components and two of molecular functions . further, the biological process are related to the response to biotic and abiotic stimulus, the response to endogenous stimulus, the response to external stimulus, the response to stress, and sequence-specific dna binding transcription activity were attributing to the significant enrichment . moreover, cellular component associated with external encapsulating structure and extracellular region, and molecular function associated with molecular function and binding, were attributing to the enrichment .fig.  <dig> distributions of differentially expressed transcripts   into gene ontology  categories  according to go enrichment analysis. up-regulated transcript numbers were shown in bars, red bars representing up-regulated in ch flowers and blue bars representing up-regulated in cl flowers. a p-value and a false discovery rate  were given for significance



to identify significantly enriched kegg categories for the dets from the ch and cl libraries, we assigned  <dig> dets to the kegg database. the details of the kegg classification are presented in additional file  <dig> and  <dig>  the major pathways identified were “metabolism”, “biosynthesis of secondary metabolites”, “hormone signal transduction”, and “plant-pathogen interaction”.

discussion
this is the first work to analyse the flowering grns with rna-seq based transcriptomes in a naturally cleistogamous plant to understand the genetic mechanisms for different flower patterning. gene expression controlling development can be modified as a consequence of environmental changes, leading to altered multiple flower developmental pathways. three modules are proposed to determine ch and cl flower process in natural populations .fig.  <dig> the putative gene regulatory networks  that regulate the production of chagamous  and cleistogamous  flowering in pseudostellaria heterophylla. genes represented by blocks. lines with an arrow represent promotion, and those with a perpendicular bar represent repression. a grns in ch flower production. b grns in cl flower production. gene expression variation represented by different colour in cl flowering grns: gene expression level not to change is shown in white; gene expression level up-regulated is shown in red; gene expression level down-regulated is shown in green. fkf1down-regulated due to the change of circadian clock, ft down-regulated due to the poor light quality, the floral identity gene ap1up-regulated due to stm promotion. ap <dig> and pi down-regulated due to down-regulated upstream genes



the co-ft module regulates ch and cl flowering time
day length and the quality of light play a significant role in the floral transition in many plants  <cit> . the co-ft module was proposed to explain how plants might initiate flowering in response to photoperiod  <cit> , and this module is highly conserved across plant species  <cit> . in arabidopsis, the expression of ft is regulated by the co protein and is a crucial aspect of photoperiodic flowering. co expression is associated with the combined action of photoreceptors  and the circadian clock system  . further, the protein ft, which acts as a universal florigen , is a major target of co. transport of the transcription factor ft from the leaves to the shoot apical meristem results in the activation of transcriptional cascades that specify the transition from vegetative to reproductive growth.

homologues of most genes associated with the co-ft module were identified in the p. heterophylla transcriptome, including fkf <dig>  gi, co, ft, and other factors. interestingly, the upstream genefkf <dig> and the downstream gene ft of the co-ft module both showed lower expression levels in cl flowers than in ch flowers . fkf <dig> has been reported to play a key role in regulating the circadian clock and photoperiodic flowering . searle et al.  <cit>  reported that reducing expression of ft indirectly repressed expression of genes involved in floral induction at the meristem and delayed flowering time in arabidopsis. the lower levels of fkf <dig> and ft expression might play important roles in the delay of flowering time in cl flowers in our species. natural p. heterophylla populations usually grow under temperate forests. ch flowers are produced only in early spring when the deciduous trees and shrubs begin to grow new leaves; the appearance of cl flowers appears a few weeks later, and light levels fall as the forest canopy forms. the photoperiod and circadian clock changes from those in spring might regulate fkf <dig> expression and further regulate ft gene expression in cl flowers.

the stm-ap <dig> module regulates cl flower meristem specification
the specification of fm is crucial for successful flower development . two fm identity genes, ap <dig> and lfy, are conserved in their fm specification function , and are regulated by multiple factors .

homologues of these fm identity genes and their regulatory factors were also identified in the p. heterophylla transcriptome. surprisingly, although ft and soc <dig> expression was reduced in cl flowers, their targetsap <dig> and lfy were up-regulated. ap <dig> is highly expressed in cl flowers, which makes it a good candidate for contributing to the spatial specification of fm initiation. we found that stm, which directly activateap <dig> and lfy, was significantly up-regulated in cl flowers . in arabidopsis, stm acts to regulate flower patterning, branching, and internode growth and the specification of axillary meristems during inflorescence development . in p. heterophylla, cl inflorescences develop in the axils of the first several nodes of the shoot. unlike ch flower production at the apical meristem, the axillary flower meristems may play a crucial role in the establishment of a cl inflorescence, ultimately leading to the formation of cl flowers. we speculate that stm plays a fundamental role in promoting the formation of cl fms in the axils of cauline leaves in p. heterophylla.

the abce model regulates ch and cl floral patterning
the classic abc  model proposed to determine floral organ identity is conserved across angiosperms . four classes of genes  are well known to act in combination for proper organ formation in each whorl  <cit> . all of the floral organ identity genes homologous to those of arabidopsis a, b, c, and e genes were also identified in p. heterophylla . the ch flower of p. heterophylla is a typical eudicot pentamerous flower with four whorls: five sepals, five petals, ten stamens and three carpels. however, the p. heterophylla cl flower displays floral organ reductions: sepals are reduced to four; petals are absent; stamens are reduced to two; and carpels are reduced to two   <cit> . the a class gene ap <dig> is highly expressed in cl flowers. ap <dig> has two functions, floral meristem specification and perianth identity, and these two functions may not be separable  <cit> . our previous study found the significant difference in the initiation sequence of sepals in ch vs cl flowers of p. heterophylla: five sepal primordia are initiated one by one in a 2/ <dig> helix sequence in the ch flower; in contrast, four sepal primordia in the cl flower initiate alternatively in pairs  <cit> . the four sepals of the cl flower are not derived from sepal reduction of the pentamerous ch flower but may arise as a continuation of bracteole initiation  <cit> . increased levels of ap <dig> expression may strengthen the floral meristem specification function of ap <dig>  resulting in bracteole-like sepal formation in the cl flower.

the b class genes ap <dig> and pi are significantly decreased in cl flowers. ap <dig> and pi are closely related mads paralogous lineages, and their functions in establishing the identity of petals and stamens in floral development are conserved in both eudicots and monocots  <cit> . in our previous floral organogenesis study  <cit> , we found that, in floral organ identity stages, fewer primordia of stamen and absence of petal primordia in cl flowers , which might explain the stamen number reduction and absence of petals compared to ch flowers. mondragon-palomino et al.  <cit>  found that the complex perianth in orchids is patterned by differential expression of multiple b-class gene paralogs. zhang et al.  <cit>  suggested that disruption of the petal identity gene ap3- <dig> is highly correlated with loss of petals in the buttercup family . thus, the reduced stamen number and absence of petals in cl flowers in our species are likely related to the decreased levels of expression in b class genes . however, further investigations for abce functions in cl and ch flower patterning are needed.

other differentially expressed genes in ch and cl flowering
except for those flowering related genes,  <dig> transcripts were considered significantly differentially expressed between ch and cl flowers. these differentially expressed genes include those related to environmental stress responses, plant defence response, plant hormone signal transduction, plant development and growth and secondary metabolite biosynthesis. especially, genes involved in stress response were significantly overrepresented , with <dig> and  <dig> stress-response genes up-regulated in ch and cl flowers, respectively. we could not rule out the possibility that the expression differences of stress-related genes could be a result of the specific experimental design. nevertheless, sixteen transcripts with homology to the hsp family such as hsp <dig>  hsp <dig>  hsp <dig>  and some small heat shock protein  families were detected in cl flowers . hsp induction may reflect differential physiological responses to environmental stresses, such as drought, cold, and high temperature . in a previous study, two hsp genes were reported to be up-regulated with cold treatment in cardamine kokaiensis cl flowers  <cit> . further, eight homologues of wrky transcription factor genes , which are important regulators of active biotic and abiotic stress responses  <cit> , were significantly up-regulated in cl flowers. it is also evident that some members of the wrky family may play important regulatory roles in promoting flowering .

with the kegg analysis, we found nine genes related to flavonoid biosynthesis pathway were significantly up-regulated in cl flowers . these included encoding enzymes involved in flavonoid and anthocyanin syntheses, such as anthocyanidin synthase, flavonoid 3′-hydroxylase. flavonoids are important secondary compounds and the main pigments in flowers  <cit> . the blue and purple flower colours are derived from flavonoids and anthocyanins . the up-regulation of genes related to flavonoid and anthocyanin biosyntheses in cl flowers may result in the purple colour of the sepals, instead of the white colour of the petals in ch flowers.

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first work to investigate the flowering grns in a naturally cleistogamous plant. gene expression patterns are modified as a consequence of environmental changes, leading to altered multiple flower developmental pathways. we proposed three modules that regulate flowering time, meristem development and patterning in a natural populations of p. heterophylla. even though investigations of the spatiotemporal expression patterns of these genes are required to assess their functions in determining ch and cl flowering, our study provided a foundation for dissecting the molecular basis of flowering time and patterns in naturally cleistogamous plants. cleistogamous plants can be a very important model for studying the adaption and evolution of flowering behaviour.

