BACKGROUND
listeria monocytogenes is a facultatively anaerobic, gram-positive bacterium that occurs naturally in plant, soil, and surface water environments  <cit> . however, l. monocytogenes may also be isolated from domestic cattle, sheep, goats, and poultry  <cit>  and can make its way into the food supply, causing sporadic and outbreak cases of foodborne listeriosis  <cit> . listeriosis is commonly associated with life-threatening meningitis and septicemia in adults and may lead to miscarriages in pregnant women  <cit> . thus, molecular characterization  of l. monocytogenes is important to clinical microbiology and to the epidemiological analysis of listeriosis  <cit> .

molecular typing methods such as pulsed-field gel electrophoresis  <cit> , ribotyping  <cit> , and multi-locus sequence typing   <cit>  have provided greatly improved resolving power relative to previously used phenotypic methods, such as serotyping, phage typing, biotyping, antibiotic susceptibility testing, and bacteriocin typing  <cit> . recent advances in dna sequencing technologies and reduced costs have made high-quality whole-genome sequence  data readily available  <cit> . comprehensive sequencing and analysis of bacterial genomes has been shown to be a valuable tool for epidemiological studies  <cit> . in particular, wgs data are commonly used to identify nucleotide differences, so-called single-nucleotide polymorphisms , between bacterial chromosomes  <cit> . however, studies have shown that the use of either de-novo or reference-guided assemblies for identifying snp differences between subjects and references can lead to errors that make interpretation difficult . alternatively, wgs data may be assembled de-novo into chromosome sequence data that can be aligned and phylogenetically analyzed in order to compare them directly. however, we show that this method can generate misleading results, presumably due to differences between sequencing runs and/or the computational challenges of aligning short-read sequence data without a reference. most importantly, the manner in which these methods are currently used ultimately relies upon the accurate interpretation of phylogenetic trees, a requirement that can make the assignment of discrete groupings  difficult and can make these approaches less accessible than the typing methods they are intended to replace.

whole-genome multi-locus sequence typing  has been shown to be a powerful alternative to snp or whole-chromosome analyses  <cit>  that is amenable to the assignment of discrete groupings in addition to phylogenetic analysis. in concept, this method is nearly identical to the mlst approach, during which  <dig> or so loci are studied, with the exception that all the genes in a genome are examined. this scheme takes advantage of the discriminating power of wgs data while providing the basis for the grouping of organisms into sequence types. wgmlst also makes the interpretation of data easier and more accessible. however, the accurate identification of orthologous sequences is computationally expensive and there is no current consensus on how this should be accomplished, making wgmlst methods difficult to standardize and distribute. researchers have shown that using the loci that comprise an organisms core-genome  provides a powerful means of analyzing wgs data that can be standardized  <cit> . while cgmlst is an improvement over wgmlst, both methods, like standard mlst, rely upon allele numbering systems that often provide scant information regarding the evolutionary relationships of organisms.

here, we present a cgmlst-style typing method for the molecular characterization of l. monocytogenes  that has several advantages over other proposed methods. in order to ensure that orthologs are properly identified, we calculated a high-confidence core  of genes that is useful for reliable and efficient large-scale typing. furthermore, we developed a nomenclature that is based upon nucleotide distances between hcc profiles, providing phylogenetically meaningful groupings. finally, we wrote a bioinformatic pipeline  that can: i) analyze raw reads, contiguous sequences, or closed chromosome sequences; ii) identify an organism’s hcc profile; iii) compare that profile to an expandable database; iv) provide an evolutionarily meaningful sequence type assignment; and v) generate a phylogenetic analysis that illustrates the evolutionary relationship of the subject to the members of the database. in total, the cgst method provides an approach that is highly reproducible, easily standardized, portable, and accessible.

RESULTS
calculation of the listeria monocytogenes core-genome
in order to calculate the pan- and core-genomes of listeria monocytogenes, we used a semi-automated approach in which protein sequence translations of open reading frames  predicted from a set of  <dig> high-quality, phylogenetically diverse chromosome sequences obtained from the national center for biotechnology information  were analyzed . a pan-genome is defined as the total pool of orfs present within the genomes examined  and a core-genome is defined as the subset of orfs that are present within every genome  . based upon pairwise comparisons with the basic local alignment search tool   <cit> , using a protein sequence similarity cut-off of 60 % and a minimum coverage of 80 %  <cit> , we determined that the l. monocytogenes pan- and core-genomes consist of  <dig> and  <dig> orfs, respectively . our results are consistent with the analysis of 17 l. monocytogenes genomes performed by kuenne, et al.   <cit> .

calculation of a high-confidence core
during the course of calculating the l. monocytogenes pan- and core-genomes, we identified conditions that confound pairwise homology searches, such as loci that retrieve multiple hits , the use of different orf prediction software, and the presence of low complexity regions within orfs. therefore, we further curated the set of  <dig> core orfs as described below in order to develop a robust database, ensuring that all orthologs used for downstream comparisons are properly identified. we found and removed  <dig> predicted multi-copy orfs. in addition, we annotated the  <dig> high-quality, closed genome sequences obtained from ncbi with genemark  <cit> , glimmer  <cit> , and prokka v <dig>   <cit> . we then used these datasets to estimate three different single-copy core-genomes that are composed of  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> orfs, respectively. differences in the numbers of orfs predicted may occur as programs use a variety of methods to identify start/stop codons and overlapping orfs  <cit> . we performed an all versus all bidirectional protein sequence blast to identify  <dig> orfs that are shared in all four datasets. then, we performed an all versus all bidirectional nucleotide blast with  <dig> taxa in order to identify orfs that fail to generate hits  or generate ambiguous results. any orf that did not generate hits to all other taxa when used as a query were removed from the analysis. this resulted in the removal of an additional  <dig> orfs. in total,  <dig> orfs were identified  that are reliable targets of nucleotide and protein sequence blast searches and, so, comprise hour high-confidence core  of predicted genes.

in order to characterize the hcc, we assigned clusters of orthologous groups  categories to the full set of strain 08– <dig> protein sequences  and compared it to the suite of predicted proteins in the hcc . the distributions of both the full-set of proteins and the hcc-set within cogs categories are similar. this result indicates that the hcc provides a good approximation of the diversity of functions present in the full complement of l. monocytogenes genes. we also mapped the strain 08– <dig> hcc genes and the hcc loci appear to be evenly distributed throughout the chromosome .

core-genome sequence typing of listeria monocytogenes
we developed a bioinformatic pipeline using the perl programming language  for identifying hcc loci in genome sequence data and comparing a subject hcc to a database that has been seeded with hcc profiles calculated from  <dig> unique, high-quality chromosome sequences . the script can take raw short-read sequence data , contiguous sequences, closed chromosome sequences, or fully annotated orfs as input. the software compares the subject hcc to the database and identifies the hcc profile with the fewest nucleotide differences. a file is also generated that reports on the numbers of perfect orf matches, partial orf matches, missing orfs, and the numbers of snps, along with the identities of snp-containing orfs and the positions of the snps.

a phylogenetically relevant typing scheme was developed by grouping hcc profiles by evolutionary lineages . then we calculated the pairwise nucleotide distances between hcc profiles of each member of the database. we identified and grouped those hcc profiles with less than or equal to  <dig> base-pair differences and those with less than or equal to  <dig> base-pair differences. finally, unique hcc profiles that differ by fewer than  <dig> nucleotides were numbered in the order that they were processed. a core-genome sequence type is, therefore, defined as a unique set of hcc sequences and subjects must be 100 % identical at the nucleotide level with no missing or partial orfs to be considered a match to any hcc profile in the database. this typing scheme allows for the assignment of unique identifiers that specify the evolutionary relationships of subjects to members of the database within the l. monocytogenes phylogeny . finally, a phylogenetic analyses of the hcc profiles of the subject and the database are generated in order to visualize their evolutionary relationships .fig.  <dig> 
listeria monocytogenes high-confidence core profiles grouped by nucleotide distances. a cladogram was calculated by aligning and concatenating  <dig> loci that comprise the l. monocytogenes high-confidence core  genomes of  <dig> taxa and analyzing the resulting alignment of  <dig> , <dig> nucleotide positions with the randomized axelerated maximum likelihood tool . the best of  <dig> bootstrap replicates is shown. nucleotide distances were measured with phylip. taxa were grouped by evolutionary lineage  and those that have  <dig> and  <dig> or fewer nucleotide differences, while unique hcc profiles that differ by no more than  <dig> nucleotides were numbered in the order that they were processed



in order to establish the levels of genome sequence coverage necessary for accurate core-genome sequence typing, we tested the pipeline with a set of 12 l. monocytogenes strain 08– <dig> illumina short-read sequence datasets obtained from sequencing runs of varying qualities . we found that de-novo sequence assemblies of at least 66-fold coverage provide reliable results, with no false snps, missing orfs, or partial orfs.

in order to predict the amount of time required to run the lmcgst pipeline as the size of the database increases, we documented the amount of time necessary for the pipeline to complete the genome assembly, annotation, hcc comparisons, and phylogenetic analyses for databases containing  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> randomly selected hcc profiles . in addition, we estimated the amount of time required to assemble and annotate a single genome. genome assembly with spades takes approximately  <dig>  h, while it takes approximately  <dig>  h to perform annotation with prokka. although these times may change with different genomes and short-read sequence datasets, they did not increase with the size of the database . for the hcc comparison and optional tree-building steps, processing times did increase with the size of the database. we fitted the amount of time necessary to perform the hcc comparisons and phylogenetic analyses to a polynomial regression model . with  <dig> taxa occupying the database, the comparison step took approximately  <dig>  h and the tree-building step took approximately  <dig>  h. when we predicted processing times with  <dig> taxa present in the database, we estimated that it will take approximately  <dig>  h for the comparison step and  <dig>  h to estimate the phylogeny. the total amount of time that is predicted to be necessary for the lmcgst pipeline to run with a database of  <dig> hcc profiles is  <dig>  h, with the assembly, annotation, and comparison steps accounting for approximately  <dig>  h.

comparison of molecular typing methods
in order to compare the core-genome sequence typing  method to currently used molecular typing methods, we randomly selected  <dig> strains from the collection at the listeriosis reference service for canada. then, we performed pulsed-field gel electrophoresis   <cit>  with both apai and asci restriction enzymes and ribotyping  <cit> . in addition, we generated whole-genome sequence data with an illumina miseq benchtop sequencer and performed in silico multi-locus sequence typing   <cit>  with abcz, bgla, cat, dape, dat, ldh, and lhka loci  <cit>  and cgst . previous studies have shown that in silico mlst analyses of next-generation sequence data allow for high levels of allelic identification and are highly-concordant with published and publicly available sequence types  <cit> . we analyzed the congruence and discriminating power of each typing method individually and in two combinations in which we analyzed apai and asci pfge together  and we analyzed apai, asci, and ribotyping together . we began by calculating the simpson’s index of diversity  <cit>  with 95 % confidence intervals . the values for all categories range from  <dig>   to  <dig>   and the data indicate that cgst has higher discriminating power than the other typing methods, either individually or combined. in addition, the data indicate that the strains randomly selected for this study are sufficiently diverse for purposes of comparing these different typing methods.fig.  <dig> typing data derived from  <dig> listeria monocytogenes strains. strains were selected randomly from the collection stored at the listeriosis reference service for canada. standard typing assays, such as serotyping, asci and apai pulsed-field gel electrophoresis , and ribotyping were performed. in addition, whole-genome sequence data were generated and analyzed with in silico multi-locus sequence typing  and core-genome sequence typing 



we then calculated the adjusted wallace coefficients  <cit>  with 95 % confidence intervals  <cit>  for the typing datasets . the data indicate that the typing methods tested here are fairly congruent. for example, if two strains are identified as belonging to the same group using the cgst method, there is approximately a  <dig>  % chance that they will be grouped together with pfge or pfge + ribo and a  <dig>  % chance they will be grouped together with ribotyping or mlst methods . the data also indicate that, due to the increased number of categories, the cgst method has greater discriminatory power than the other methods tested here. that is, if two strains are identified as belonging to the same group with either pfge or pfge + ribo, there is a  <dig>  % chance that they will be grouped together with the cgst method, while ribotyping and mlst methods yielded values of  <dig>  and  <dig>  %, respectively .table  <dig> adjusted wallace coefficient and 95 % confidence intervals

the wallace coefficient measures agreement between groupings made with different typing methods. row headers indicate methods from which two random samples were drawn and column headers identify the methods that were compared. the probabilities that two samples grouped together with one method  will also be grouped together with another method  are shown along with 95 % confidence intervals 

apai and asci data were combined to generate the pfge category and apai, asci, and ribotype data were combined to generate the pfge + ribo category



CONCLUSIONS
here, we have calculated a listeria monocytogenes high-confidence core  genome which serves as the basis for an extended multi-locus sequence typing regime called core-genome sequence typing . we have shown that analysis of next-generation sequence data with cgst provides significantly increased power to distinguish isolates of l. monocytogenes relative to currently used methods of molecular characterization. furthermore, cgst provides several advantages over other typing methods that utilize next-generation sequence data, such as the analysis of single-nucleotide polymorphisms  or phylogenetic analysis of whole-chromosome sequence data. recent studies have shown that snp analyses can be problematic and can result in phylogenetic artifacts that may obscure the true relationships between isolates, whether a de-novo or reference-guided approach is used . theoretically, simply performing phylogenetic analysis of whole-chromosome sequence data should provide the highest levels of resolution. however, differences between next-generation sequencing runs may introduce errors that make chromosome sequences appear more evolutionarily distant than they really are . that is, phylogenetic analyses may yield branches separating taxa, due to differences between sequencing runs, when no differences between chromosomes actually exist. although, it is possible that high sequence coverage  may reduce the numbers of differences, the cgst method is capable of accurately resolving relationships with much lower levels of sequence coverage . furthermore, accurate alignment and phylogenetic analysis of large numbers of whole-chromosomes is computationally expensive and accessible methods are currently lacking. finally, both snp and whole-chromosome analyses ultimately rely upon the interpretation of phylogenetic trees while keeping all of these considerations in mind. while methods that utilize next-generation sequence data can deliver increased resolution, they may lack discrete, well-defined types and may be less accessible than the typing methods they are meant to replace.

the aim of developing the extended mlst scheme presented here is to remedy the shortcomings of other methods of molecular characterization that utilize next-generation sequence data by providing discrete, well-defined groupings  of organisms that are phylogenetically relevant and easily interpreted. in addition, because we target  <dig> hcc loci retrieved from de-novo genome assemblies, only the most reliable portions of chromosome sequence assemblies are used; regions that are common sources of error, such as gaps and repetitive regions, are avoided  <cit> . an additional, significant benefit of the cgst scheme is that it can be expanded in the future to include multi-copy and accessory genes, as necessary or desired, and studies correlating nucleotide differences between loci with important phenotypes can be incorporated. furthermore, the database can be continually improved with the addition of novel hcc profiles. thus, the cgst provides the best of next-generation sequence data analysis while avoiding several sources of error.

