BACKGROUND
one of the most remarkable features of biological systems is their inherent robustness against external perturbations. living systems are continuously confronted with a variety of outside stimuli, such as nutrition, toxins, temperature and humidity. these external inputs must be properly processed to reach a relative self-stability and stability in the output. to achieve this, there must be certain buffering mechanisms to compensate for the genetic or environmental perturbation. for example, gene expression in the cell is rigorously regulated in response to external signals. these genes should be constrained or "canalized" in their expression to an appropriate level. on the other hand, genes have different expression patterns under various biological and environmental conditions; they present different degrees of sensitivity to external perturbation. the expression of many genes is considered robust as they are relatively stable upon perturbations. how this is achieved, i.e. the genetic buffering mechanisms that mediate the stability and robustness are largely unknown. it is suggested that negative feedback loops within regulatory networks serve to buffer expression variation and reduce expression noise in the cell  <cit> . also, specific genes could play a role in canalizing gene expression, such as the zygotic gap genes including kruppel and knirps in drosophila  <cit> . however, it is still largely unclear whether there are any canalizing/buffering mechanisms acting on the genome wide expression.

micrornas  are endogenously expressed small  noncoding rnas that regulate gene expression at the post-transcriptional level  <cit> . by binding to the 3'-untranslated regions  of target mrnas, mirna can block the expression of their target genes through translational repression or mrna degradation  <cit> . mirna-mediated gene expression regulation is widespread in eukaryotes. a single mirna can regulate up to several hundred genes, and it is speculated that more than one-third of the genes in the human genome are mirna targets  <cit> . considering the prevalence of mirna mediated gene expression regulation in mammalian cells, it is fascinating to inquire whether these small ncrnas can serve as genetic factors that buffer whole genome expression. this hypothesis has been supported in several studies. for example, mir- <dig> can function in an incoherent feed-forward loop to buffer the translation of e2f <dig>  which is activated by c-myc  <cit> . another evolutionarily conserved mirna, mir- <dig>  could act in some interlocking feedback and feed-forward loops to confer network stability against perturbation. the mir- <dig> mediated network is essential for buffering the gene expression variation resulting from temperature fluctuation in drosophila  <cit> .

in addition, some studies have also used bioinformatics tools to investigate the influence of mirnas on gene expression fluctuation. cui et al. suggested that mirnas could decrease the cross-species expression divergence and constrain the evolutionary expression variation  <cit> . another study indicated that mirna targets are enriched in duplicated genes, which could be a mechanism for buffering the gene expression variation resulting from whole genome duplication  <cit> . however, it was suggested that on the population level, mirnas could increase gene expression variability  <cit> , and wu et al., indicated that mirna targets are enriched in environmental chemical regulated genes, which have a more variable expressed pattern than others  <cit> . this controversy likely results from the scales used in different studies and the data sets used, which indicated that a systematic study of this issue is required.

we therefore explored the stably expressed genes  and fluctuant genes  by comprehensive investigation of mrna expression profiling data under various environmental conditions. we found that these two groups of genes have a very distinct function distribution. by evaluation of the propensity of mirna regulation, we found that mirna targets are significantly enriched among se genes. this effect is independent of the number of regulatory mrnas but is relevant to their 3'-utr length. these observations indicated that mirnas can play a genetic buffering role to confront genome wide expression fluctuation.

RESULTS
functional enrichment of se and fl genes
to inspect the influence of mirnas on gene expression fluctuation, we first conducted a comprehensive analysis of microarray data to retrieve the se genes and fl genes. we collected the expression profiles under various environmental conditions based on the hgu133plus <dig>  platform. to minimize variation caused by different experimental platform, we only investigated expression data generated from this platform. for each gene, a fluctuant score  was calculated by meta-analysis to quantify the expression sensitivity in response to environmental perturbations. the top and bottom 5% of genes in the list were defined as se genes and fl genes respectively. to evaluate the validity of this categorization, we performed gene ontology  enrichment analysis on these genes  <cit> . from the resultant go graph, we observed a distinct function distribution for these two groups of genes . specifically, for "molecular function", the se genes were enriched in terms of some basic activities, such as rna binding, protein binding, nadh dehydrogenase activity, constituent of the ribosome etc, whereas fl genes are involved in environmental factor response, such as receptor binding, cytokine activity, growth factor receptor binding, peptide hormone binding and dopamine binding. for "biological processes", the se genes were enriched in translation, gene expression, metabolic processes, and biosynthetic processes, whereas fl genes were enriched in signaling pathways, defence response, regulation of immune system process and mediation by a chemical signal etc. similar results were also obtained when the top and bottom 10% of genes were defined as se genes and fl genes. this suggests that our classification of sr and fl genes are biologically meaningful and these genes occupy distinct positions in the cell.

mirna targets are preferentially enriched in se genes
we evaluated the propensity of mirna regulation based on the se gene and fl gene classification scheme. the predicted targets of human mirnas were retrieved from targetscan  <cit> , pictar  <cit> , pita  <cit>  and miranda  <cit> , which to our knowledge are regarded in the community as having higher prediction accuracy. a more stringent prediction result derived from intersection of targetscan and pictar provided by the mirgen database was also used  <cit> . in addition, another set of experimentally validated mirna targets integrated from mirtarbase  <cit> , mirrecords  <cit> , mirwalk  <cit>  and mir2disease  <cit>  was also included in this analysis. based on these data sets, we observed that mirna targets were significantly enriched in se genes. as shown in figure 1a, mirna targets comprised  <dig> % of se genes, but only 28% of fl genes as predicted by pictar . we observed similar results when using the data sets from other algorithms and experimentally validated mirna targets . as a control, we randomly selected the same number of genes from the list to analyze this trend, no obvious propensity of mirna regulation was found in the control data sets . the propensity of mirna regulation was also observed when we selected the top and bottom 10% of the genes as se genes and fl genes respectively . furthermore, to exclude the interference of datasets from cancer tissue or cell lines, we selected  <dig> microarray datasets that were derived only from normal tissues to screen the se genes and fl genes. the propensity analysis of mirna regulation gave similar results .

to avoid potential bias derived from sampling, we next divided the total genes into two groups and calculated the average fl score in each group. the first group contained all the predicted mirna target genes whereas the second group contained the other genes. we found that the expression fluctuation of mirna target genes was significantly lower than that of the non-mirna-target genes for the four data sets . for example with pictar, the average fl score of mirna target genes was  <dig> , significantly lower than the non-mirna targets . for a more detailed analysis, we subgrouped the total genes according to their fl scores, and calculated the average fl score and mirna target proportion in each group. as shown in figure  <dig>  there was a negative correlation between expression fluctuation and mirna target proportion, and mirna target proportion declined dramatically with increasing fl score. taken together, these results indicated that mirna target genes are significantly enriched in se genes, which suggests that mirnas have a negative effect on whole genome expression fluctuation.

average fl score of mirna targets is significantly lower than that of non-mirna targets, the p-value was drawn from wilcoxon rank sum test.

gene expression fluctuation buffering is independent of the number of regulatory mirnas
several studies have demonstrated that a single mirna can regulate hundreds of mrnas and that a single mrna can be regulated by multiple mirnas. this complex interaction makes the synergistic effect of mirna regulation in biological networks and pathways possible  <cit> . the synergistic effect of different mirnas on the expression level of a single gene has been reported  <cit> . however, whether this effect exists on the genome-wide level is largely unknown. we therefore analyzed the correlation between number of regulatory mirnas in the 3'-utr and gene expression fluctuation. in the following analysis, we only use the predicted mirna targets from pictar, targetscan and pita in that too large or too small data sets may introduce interference. predicted mirna target genes were subgrouped according to the number of regulatory mirnas within 3'-utr and then the average fl score in each group was calculated. we did not observe any significant correlation between the number of regulatory mirnas and the expression fluctuation . this result is somewhat in disagreement with the previously reported positive correlation between gene expression variability and mirna seed number  <cit> . to account for such disagreement, we propose that following explanation. on one hand, a gene that is regulated by multiple micrornas may be an indication of its functional importance, which requires complex post-transcriptional control by mirnas. such functional importance suggests that the expression of such genes are tightly controlled and has less variations. on the other hand, such sophisticated regulation by multiple mirnas may render it prone to fluctuations and accumulation of noise. we believe that these two factors may be both in play for the majority of the mirna target genes, and for any given gene it is uncertain which factor is more dominant. as a result, we do not expect any straightforward and overwhelming correlation between the gene expression fluctuation level and the number of mirna seeds.

gene expression fluctuation and 3'-utr length
most of the mirna target sites are located in the 3'-utr of mrnas, whereas the lengths of 3'-utr of protein coding genes vary substantially, and it has been shown that mirna regulation has an effect on 3'-utr evolution. it is also known that genes with different 3'-utr lengths have distinct expression patterns  <cit> . along this line, we performed a correlation analysis between 3'-utr length and gene expression fluctuation. predicted mirna targets were subgrouped by length in  <dig> nt intervals and the average fl score within each group was calculated. as shown in figure  <dig>  a positive correlation between expression fluctuation and 3'-utr length was observed. the average fl score increased with the 3'-utr length, for example among the pictar prediction results , r =  <dig> , p value =  <dig> e- <dig>  similar results were obtained when using mirna targets predicted by targetscan  and pita . this result was confirmed when we directly compared the 3'-utr length of mirna targets in both se genes and fl genes. we found that the 3'-utr length of mirna targets in se genes was shorter as compared to that of the fl genes , which suggested that mirna targets with longer 3'-utr length were more likely to have higher expression fluctuation, thus other confounding factors may interfere with the gene expression.

to investigate whether the expression intensity of mirnas have an effect on target expression fluctuation, we obtained the mirna expression data from micorrna.org database  <cit>  and calculated the average expression level in  <dig> normal human tissues. we compared the average expression intensity of mirnas that regulate se genes and fl genes. we did not find any significant difference between these groups , indicating that mirna expression level is not a decisive factor for target expression fluctuation.

discussion
human genes have different expression patterns and sensitivity in response to external environment perturbations, thus the global analysis of mirnas on whole genome expression has drawn much attention recently. in this study, we conducted a large scale meta-analysis to explore the genes with different degrees of expression fluctuations. the gene ontology enrichment analysis revealed that the stably expressed genes and fluctuant genes have distinct functional categories. stably expressed genes are mainly involved in basic and essential biological processes and the fluctuant genes are mainly involved in processes in response to external signals. we found that mirna targets were significantly enriched in stably expressed genes relative to fluctuant genes, suggesting that mirnas act on the genome-wide expression to reduce their fluctuation. in addition, we found that the gene expression buffering effect was independent of the number of mirna target sites within the 3'-utr. however, expression fluctuation was correlated with the 3'-utr length; and this could result from alternative polyadenylation signals or cis-acting elements other than mirna binding  <cit> . to explore the mirnas that play an important role in gene expression buffering, we counted the number of targets for each mirna in both se genes and fl genes and investigated whether the targets are more enriched or specific in se genes or fl genes. according to their preference of regulation, mirnas were classified as se gene-related mirnas  or fl gene-related mirnas  . interestedly, we found that the number of se-mirnas is greater than that of fl genes, which is consistent with the previous observation.

our work provides some important insights into the functions of mirnas. mirnas have been postulated to play a dual role in regulating gene expression, i.e. to regulate the mean of the expression output and to modulate the expression variation  <cit> . on one hand, mirnas can regulate the expression level of critical genes during animal development, which make them indispensable for the survival and normal growth of the cell, and thus evolutionarily conserved  <cit> . on the other hand, many mirnas are believed to preferentially regulate ubiquitously-expressed genes other than tissue-specific genes  <cit> , and in most cases they only have moderate effect on the mean expression level of the targets as their primary function is to minimize the expression fluctuation in different tissues and in different conditions  <cit> .

as a part of the expression regulatory network, mirnas are suggested to be involved in mechanisms such as feedback loops and feed-forward loops. within these mechanisms, mirnas can cooperate with transcription factors to balance the outputs of their target  <cit> . the expression level of transcription factors are known to be stochastic, which could induce very high level of noise in the regulatory network, and could be detrimental to the cell. the expression buffering role of mirnas could beneficial to the organism to minimize such noise.

motivated by this hypothesis, we obtained the transcription factor binding sites  that were previously identified by xie et al.,  <cit>  and the promoter sequences from ucsc genome browser  <cit> . as shown in figure  <dig>  we found a positive correlation between the number of tfbs and average fl scores, which indicated that tfs could contribute to the regulatory complexity. this result is also consistent with the observation that mirnas preferentially regulate genes with high transcriptional regulation complexity  <cit> . these observations suggest that the coordination of tfs and mirnas in complex networks lead to the internal stability in gene expression of the cell.

CONCLUSIONS
it was hypothesized previously that mirna mediated regulation can confer expression stability and robustness of their target genes. in this paper, our systematic study provided evidence that mirnas can buffer expression fluctuation of many human genes. interestingly we found such effect to be independent from the number of mirna target sites per gene. we further show evidence that coordination between mirnas and transcription factors could result in the stability of transcriptional regulatory networks.

