BACKGROUND
gene regulation represents a central mechanism in the control of the phenotype of an organism. thus, the comprehension of gene regulatory mechanisms is a central topic in systems biology  <cit> . the prokaryote escherichia coli is best suited as a model organism for genome-wide network inference studies due to the available and well-documented molecular biological knowledge and the remarkable amount of published genome-wide data. relevance or association networks  <cit>  are widely used for genome-wide network inference. they require, first, a measure to evaluate association of pairs of genes, second, a threshold to cut off irrelevant associations, and, third, a criterion or algorithm to discriminate between direct and indirect interactions. the ready-to-use algorithms aracne  <cit> , context likelihood of relatedness  and mrnet  <cit>  use mutual information  as the association measure. a drawback of mi is represented by the fact that it is an undirected measure. that is, to derive causal relations from the inferred associations between interacting nodes, further information is necessary, in particular, to qualify one node as the regulator and the other as the target. there are several ways to derive a causal interaction from an inferred association: first, one can integrate prior knowledge. in  <cit>  the inferred interactions are restricted to cases where one partner is a transcription factor . another approach is to use active and gene-specific interventions, like knockouts, knockdowns or over expressions. a third way is to exploit time series data and use them to infer the direction of association from temporal patterns. in this context directed information  can be used. dti is an extension of the concept of mi that allows to measure the direction of an information flow between two random variables. it has been used earlier to infer gene regulatory mechanisms in kidney development  <cit> . in this work we improved the computation of dti and used it to infer regulatory networks on a genome scale.

a second important step in the inference of gene-regulatory networks is the integration of additional knowledge. this process allows one to reduce the number of false positive predictions. one such approach is the integration of information extracted from genome sequence data. for predicted interactions between tfs and genes it is, for instance, possible to align the promoter regions of the predicted targets of a specific tf with each other to detect overrepresented motifs  <cit> . one possible explanation of such overrepresented motifs is that they correspond to a binding site of a common tf. on the other hand, if some binding sites of a tf are already known, the promoter regions of the putative target genes can be searched for sequences resembling these known binding sites. however, the sequences of binding sites can be very heterogeneous. in consequence, a binding site can be additionally validated by checking its phylogenetical conservation over several species  <cit> . this approach was used in this work.

a third step to reduce the number of false positive interactions is to integrate prior knowledge in form of known functional relationships between the regulator and the predicted target into the inference procedure. finally, the predicted interactions have to be verified experimentally. in order to select a candidate interaction to verify we chose the regulation of a gene by a transcription factor whose targets are most suitably detected by our method. thus, the present work demonstrates the full cycle of systems biological work, from genome-wide data analysis via large-scale modeling, to prediction of testable hypothesis by studying certain regulatory modules of interest, and, finally, to the prediction and experimental validation of novel molecular mechanisms.

RESULTS
the setup of our analysis is outlined in fig.  <dig>  the procedure started by the extraction of microarray experiments containing equidistant time-series data from the many microbes microarray database . in the second step a dti matrix was calculated. afterward, tf-gene interactions were selected and a background correction was performed using the clr algorithm  <cit>  by computing the significances  of the dti values. the threshold for the acceptance of an interaction was determined by a comparison of the inferred network to known tf-gene interactions contained within regulondb version  <dig>   <cit> . there are  <dig> known and predicted tfs denoted in regulondb . a precision of 40% was used to calculate the threshold for the z-score. usually, precision is defined as the fraction of known interactions within the inferred graph. note that we did not compute here precision in this classical sense, but similar to  <cit> . thus, we inferred  <dig> interactions, of which  <dig> are known. we compared our results to those that can be obtained using other inferences procedures building on mutual information. at the same precision, clr based on mutual information  <cit>  infers  <dig> interactions of which  <dig> are known. using aracne  <cit>  and the same mutual information matrix we obtain  <dig> interactions of which  <dig> are known. in conclusion, our method, i.e. dti with clr, as well as mutual information in combination with clr perform much better than aracne that does not use clr. for a more detailed comparison of precision at different numbers of inferred interactions see additional file 1: supplemental material s <dig> 

the inferred interactions were validated by a search for a phylogenetically conserved binding site of the tf upstream of its putative target. the validated interactions were manually enriched for functional relationships between the regulator and the targets to select candidates for an experimental verification. finally, the most promising regulatory interaction between pdhr and lipa was experimentally verified by an electrophoretic mobility shift assay .

validation of predicted interactions by sequence analysis
the predicted tf - gene interactions were validated by searching for phylogenetically conserved transcription factor binding sites  in the promoter region of the presumed target genes. to this end known binding sites of the regulator are aligned with the promoter region of the putative target using the motif discovery tools cosmo  <cit> . if a region that resembles the known binding sites of the regulator was discovered, we checked whether this region overlaps to more than 50% with a phylogenetically conserved region of the genome. if we found such an overlap, the interaction was accepted. for more information on the search for binding sites see methods and additional file 1: supplemental material s <dig>  this leads to  <dig> accepted interactions, of which  <dig> are known according to regulondb . while the total number of predicted interactions dropped from  <dig> to  <dig>  the fraction of known interactions increased from 166/ <dig> = 19% within the network inferred using dti to 65/ <dig> = 60% when additionally requiring the presence of a phylogenetically conserved binding site of the regulator. thus, the search for phylogenetically conserved binding sites reduces the number of inferred interactions to a much smaller set which is supported by additional evidence. however, due to this step we might also loose true positive interactions since only about one third of the tfbs overlap to more than 50% with a conserved region of the e. coli genome .

for the  <dig>  interactions not reported in regulondb for which we found a phylogenetically conserved binding site, we checked for functional relationships between the regulator and the target. thus, we found ten interactions . five of them have already been reported in the literature  <cit> , but were not yet included in regulondb  <dig> .

overview over the regulatory interactions inferred by the use of dti and validated through a phylogenetically conserved tfbs in the promoter region of the target gene not yet reported in regulondb. a total of  <dig> interactions of which five have already been reported elsewhere are predicted . of the  <dig> interactions that have been not included in regulon db v.  <dig>  but have been validated through the search for a phylogenetically conserved binding site of the regulator, ten were ascertained through a functional relationship of the putative target with other known targets of the regulator. in the third column the z-score of the interaction and in the forth column the average overlap of known tfbs of the regulator with conserved regions of the genome are given. the interaction marked with $ lies within the same operon like a gene for which an interaction has been inferred. for additional interactions validated through the chromosomal location of the target downstream of an operon known to be regulated by the putative regulator see additional file 1: supplemental material s <dig> 

predicted and functionally related interactions
predicted targets of lexa
lexa is an important regulator in the bacterial sos response allowing to bypass lesions or errors in dna during replication  <cit> . as already observed by  <cit> , many of the known targets of lexa can be correctly identified from microarray experiments present in m3d since a significant portion of the experiments stored in this database involve dna damage. additionally, lexa binds to a very specific dna sequence : the lexa binding site is flanked by three very well preserved nucleotides containing a stretch of at repeats.

the search for phylogenetically conserved binding sites for predicted interactions identified five new targets of the transcription factor lexa: cho, dinb, dini, dind and yebg. these five genes have been reported previously to be regulated by lexa  <cit> , but were not yet included in regulon db  <dig> .

pdhr
we found strong evidence, both on an expression and phylogenetic level, for the regulation of lipa by pdhr. pdhr is an important regulator of central metabolism by controlling the transcription of the components of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex and several genes involved in the respiratory chain  <cit> . lipa encodes the lipoate synthase which catalyzes the last step in lipoate biosynthesis and incorporation. lipoate is an important co-factor of lpda that is contained in the the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, oxoglutarate dehydrogenase and the glycine cleavage complex  <cit> .

phop
according to regulondb, phop binds in the promoter regions of  <dig> genes. among the genes regulated by phop are two genes involved in methionine biosynthesis. one of the corresponding enzymes, encoded by metb, catalyzes the step of the incorporation of sulfur contained within cysteine into o-succinyl-l-homoserine to produce cystathionine, subsequently converted into methionine. a putative phylogenetically conserved binding site of phop in the upstream region of cysb was detected. cysb encodes a tf regulating several genes necessary for the production of cysteine from which methionine is synthesized in e. coli  <cit> .

kdgr
a newly predicted target of kdgr is edd encoding a gluconate dehydratase in the entner-doudoroff pathway. while a binding site of kdgr in the upstream region of eda, the entner-doudoroff aldolase, is known  <cit> , hitherto no binding site upstream of edd which precedes eda on the chromosome has been reported. regulation by kdgr induces eda if glucuronate, galacturonate, or methyl-β-d-glucuronide are present in the growth media  <cit> . the activation of eda allows the growth on these compounds. the existence of a binding site upstream of edd would furthermore allow a control of the metabolic flux into the pentose-phosphate-pathway.

fis
fis is a small protein that plays an important role in the organization and maintenance of nucleotide structure by binding to dna. furthermore, it modulates the expression of other proteins serving this purpose  <cit>  and is involved in the regulation of many other processes of the cell. in  <cit>  it was found that the expression of 21% of all genes of e. coli changed after an knockout of fis. due to its involvement in nucleotide organization, only some of the binding sites of fis confer a regulatory influence. in contrast to lexa, the binding sites of fis are less preserved in their sequence . in consequence, the evidence from a detected binding site of fis in the promoter regions of rplm and rpsi is not as strong as in the case of the detected binding sites of lexa. rplm and rpsi encode ribosomal proteins. many proteins of the translational apparatus in turn are known to be regulated by fis  <cit> . however, in  <cit>  who studied the distribution of fis binding sites within the entire genome of e. coli, no binding site of fis upstream of these two genes was identified.

selection of candidates and experimental verification
in order to select a candidate for the experimental validation of a predicted interaction we compared the z-scores and the average phylogenetical conservation of known binding sites of each tf  for the interactions reported in the last section. especially, the tfbs of lexa and pdhr are well conserved. furthermore, the z-scores of the interactions of these regulators are the highest. since the predicted targets of lexa have already been experimentally verified in  <cit> , we thus chose the regulation of lipa by pdhr as best candidate for an experimental validation of a predicted interaction.

to confirm the presence of a pdhr binding site in the promoter region of lipa, we performed electrophoretic mobility shift assays. as a positive control we used standard conditions to detect the pdhr-dependent shift of the dna fragment of the previously reported pdhr binding site within the promoter region of the pdhr-aceef-ldpa operon . previous studies on the regulation of pdhr unveiled that pyruvate inactivates the pdhr binding activity in several promoter regions including the pdhr binding site in the pdhr-aceef-ldpa operon  <cit> . we could confirm this result, which also indicated a completely functional pdhr protein . to exclude unspecific binding of pdhr to heterologous dna, which does not contain any pdhr binding site, we incubated the repressor with a dna fragment, which includes the mlc binding site within the ptsg operator promoter region. no shift of this dna fragment was observed . for the promotor region of lipa, the pdhr-dependent complex of dna and repressor protein became evident in the appearance of the shifted promoter region of lipa . furthermore, we could demonstrate that the interaction of pdhr with the lipa promoter region was abolished in the presence of pyruvate .

r-package for network inference
the methods for the inference of gene regulatory networks presented in this work have been implemented in an r-package that can be downloaded from http://users.minet.uni-jena.de/~m3kach/dtinfer/. given the time-courses of expression values for a set of genes over one or several experiments, dti values are computed between arbitrary sets of genes. additionally it is possible to compute mi values. dtis and mis can be estimated using one of two estimators; a kernel density estimator we implemented based on the work of  <cit>  and a b-spline estimator based on the work of  <cit> , implemented by boris hayete and provided by courtesy of the gardner lab of the berkeley university. significance of the mi or dti values, as well as those provided by the user are assessed through the context likelihood of relatedness algorithm presented in  <cit> . finally, interactions are inferred either at a certain precision , for a given number of interactions or a user-defined threshold.

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we used directed information  to infer transcription factor gene interactions in e. coli. in contrast to previous works using dti  <cit>  we improved the inference procedure in several points. first, we used a more precise algorithm for the computation of mutual information required for the estimation of dti. second, we used clr  <cit>  in order to determine the significance of the dti values. this step is necessary to remove interactions starting or ending in genes which have high dti values with many other genes. third, we validated the inferred interactions by the search for phylogenetically conserved transcription factor binding sites. especially this last step allows to drastically increase the fraction of true positives in the set of inferred interactions. finally, by additionally requiring a functional relationship between regulator and target, we extracted a set of ten tf - gene interactions of which five are unknown in the literature. we predicted that phop regulates cysb encoding a global regulator of cysteine biosynthesis, kdgr putatively regulates edd encoding the gluconate dehydratase, fis putatively regulates rpsi and rplm encoding two ribosomal proteins, and pdhr regulates lipa encoding the lipoate synthase.

experimentally validating the most likely candidate of a predicted interaction we were able to shed new light on the regulation of central metabolism. we found that the transcription factor pdhr does not only regulate the expression of the the pyruvate dehydrogenase  multi-enzyme complex, but additionally controls the production of the co-factor lipoate required for the activity of this enzyme complex by regulating the expression of the lipoate synthase lipa. thus, these new findings further emphasize the role of pyruvate-sensing pdhr in the control of the activity of lpda, the e <dig> component of the pyruvate dehydrogenase complex, the oxoglutarate dehydrogenase complex and the glycine cleavage complex. moreover they underline the key role of the regulator pdhr in the control of fluxes at the pyruvate node that connects glycolysis, citric acid cycle and lipid metabolism.

additional to the ten predicted interactions, we found eight cases for which we did not detect a phylogenetically conserved binding site, but we could support our prediction using data from the literature . in one case a binding site has been detected independently. in seven cases an alternative operon structure reported in the literature supports the predicted interactions.

in conclusion, our work demonstrates the importance of integration of different types of data and prior knowledge into network inference algorithms in order to stringently plan new experiments that are able to identify hitherto unknown molecular interactions in gene regulatory networks. we started from a large compendium of gene-expression experiments and inferred  <dig> putative regulatory interactions. by probing these predicted interactions with independent knowledge from phylogenetic and sequence data we were able to narrow down the list of potential interactions to a smaller list of  <dig> validated interactions, which could be surveyed by manual inspection. of the  <dig> interactions contained in this list, which were not yet present in regulondb  <dig> , we identified ten interactions where we could also identify a functional relationship between the regulator and the target. of these ten targets, five were already reported in the literature. thus, we narrowed down the list of  <dig> interactions to five very likely targets that should be verified by experiment. finally, genome-wide data analysis and modeling was the driving force to design experiments for the discovery of the regulation of lipa by pdhr. in consequence, our approach further emphasizes the vital importance of the combination of different bioinformatics methods for saving resources in experimental work by in silico selection of most likely candidates for the time-consuming and expensive procedure of experimental verification.

