BACKGROUND
while sexual selection has long been regarded as the engine responsible for the co-evolution of male traits and female preferences  <cit> , antagonistic co-evolution between the sexes has only recently gained growing attention . evolutionary conflicts of interest between the sexes are common, and increasingly recognized as a powerful force driving the evolution of traits involved in reproduction  <cit> . sexual conflict is expected to fuel the evolution of adaptations that bias the outcome of reproduction towards one sex, even at the expense of the fitness interests of the other. in response, the latter sex should evolve countermeasures that effectively minimize the costs of sexual interactions. heightened resistance in turn promotes further persistence, leading to an escalating co-evolutionary arms race similar to the red queen dynamics in parasite-host relationships  <cit> . the intraspecific conflict between males and females arises for control over aspects of reproduction such as mating rate, female propensity to remate, female proximate fecundity, or relative parental effort .

the optimal outcome of reproductive interactions for males and females rarely, if ever, coincides  <cit> . in promiscuous species where sperm competition occurs, males can enhance their reproductive success by either increasing the number of inseminated partners or by preventing their partners from remating. the two strategies are to some extent mutually exclusive, since the time and energy budgeted on a given mating will be traded against the acquisition of further matings  <cit> . hence, whenever males incur nontrivial mating costs, they should prudently partition reproductive effort over a series of matings to maximize lifetime reproductive success . the operational sex ratio  is a reliable predictor of the probability that a male will have to outcompete sperm of rival males to fertilize a female's eggs. while reproductive investment is predicted to rise linearly with the degree of sperm competition across species and indeed does so in several groups , a different pattern is predicted within species. within species, a male's expenditure should not only depend on the risk of sperm competition  but also on the intensity of competition . parker et al's  <cit>  series of evolutionarily stable strategy models predicts that males should invest little when there are no competitors and most in the presence of one competitor. somewhat counter intuitively, as the number of competitors exceeds two the models predict a corresponding decrease in expenditure because the marginal gains from any additional unit of investment decrease. empirical tests have provided some, albeit not ubiquitous, support for a curvilinear relationship between competition intensity and male investment . when facing competition in fertilising eggs, males of some species have been found to prolong copulation duration, e.g.  <cit> .

long-lasting copulations are widespread in insect species, despite associated potential costs in terms of time, energy, increased predation vulnerability and disease transmission  <cit> . two main hypotheses, 'the ejaculate transfer hypothesis' and 'the extended mate guarding hypothesis', have been put forward to explain the advantage of protracted mating associations. the 'ejaculate transfer hypothesis' presupposes a more or less linear relationship between copulation duration and sperm transfer and storage, and suggests that longer copulations facilitate ejaculate transfer and lead to increased female lifetime fecundity . in several species, sperm is known to be transferred only at the very beginning of copulation, while during the later stages of copulation males transfer substances that build effective mating plugs or other manipulating seminal fluids  <cit> . the 'extended mate guarding hypothesis' posits that with longer mating, the chances of the female being inseminated by a subsequent male are reduced  <cit> . prolonged copulation durations have been found to act directly as mate guarding . to understand the adaptive significance of prolonged copulations, it is necessary to identify which sex controls the duration of copulation. among drosophila species, copulation duration has been found to be largely under male control in d. melanogaster, d. simulans, d. mojavensis and d. athabasca  <cit>  or determined through interactions between males and females in d. elegans  <cit> . a recent study of the functional significance of external genital structures in d. melanogaster and d. simulans  <cit>  confirmed that females are coerced into mating for as long as suits the males' interests. here, the male control relies on a 'lock'-like genital coupling mechanism and females are unable to break the lock without sustaining harm. while there is ample evidence for anatomical modifications enabling males to coerce females into mating, so far no indication has been found in drosophilidae of modifications of the female genitalia that may have evolved to defy male control, as documented in other insects  <cit> . in general, up to date, reports of  female control over copulation duration are sparse . the ejaculate transferred to females consists not only of sperm but also seminal fluids. in several species, seminal fluids have been shown to contain substances that manipulate female physiology and behaviour  <cit> . possible manipulations e.g. in d. melanogaster  <cit>  include prolonged latency to remating or preventing remating altogether, decrease of subsequent copulation durations, enhanced reproductive output, sometimes at the females' expense by derogating longevity, alteration of immune response and feeding behaviour, increased storage and utilization of sperm.

accessory gland proteins  most likely evolved to stimulate reproductive processes in order to synchronise female receptivity with male reproductive effort. however, these substances can be deleterious in high doses  <cit>  and males can utilize them to manipulate female physiology and behaviour to their advantage. seminal fluid proteins evolve much faster than non-reproductive proteins, providing indirect evidence for sexual selection or an underlying arms race of sexual antagonistic co-evolution between male coercion and female resistance .

in drosophila montana, a promiscuous species in the large drosophila virilis species group, males and females apparently undergo a conflict of interest during copulation. once a female has allowed a courting male to mount, and after an initial phase of apparent harmony, copulating pairs enter an obvious conflict phase, where females conspicuously attempt to dislodge the mounting male by vigorously kicking with their hind legs, wing flicking or decamping. while there is good knowledge of sexual selection processes in d. montana and other species of the d. virilis species group , little is known about the potential for sexually antagonistic co-evolution in this group. our aim was to explain the males' efforts to prolong matings beyond the females' preferred duration. first, we tested whether copulation duration is a form of reproductive investment that responds to variation in the osr as predicted by sperm competition game models. second, we investigated which of the sexes exerts control over the duration of copulation by comparing the duration of copulation of unmanipulated females and of females whose resistance attempts were precluded. third, we addressed potential costs arising from prolonged copulations to females and potential benefits accruing to perseverant males, in terms of reproductive output and in terms of the share of paternity in the face of competition against a later rival.

RESULTS
sex ratio manipulation
across matings, the durations of the struggle phase and of the entire copulation were significantly positively correlated , indicating that perseverant males indeed obtained increased mating time. the length of copulation until the onset of female reluctance and the length of the struggle were significantly negatively correlated . hence, the earlier on males were rejected, the longer they struggled to hold on. conversely, males that had been tolerated for longer already soon gave up when rejected, or even disengaged on their own accord.

in agreement with theoretical predictions, matings were longest in the presence of two males contending for a single female, shortest when five males were competing, and intermediate at even sex ratios . even though conventional  analysis of variance failed to reveal significant effects of the sex ratio manipulation, the means of copulation duration precisely matched our a priori ordered hypothesis . alternative hypotheses linking the duration of matings and struggles with the total density of individuals, or with the density of one sex  are not supported by the observed response pattern.

control over copulation duration
when females were prevented from dislodging the copulating male, matings lasted one and a half times longer than when female movement was unconstrained . hence, female reluctance behaviour effectively contributes to reducing copulation durations.

mating interruptions
the reproductive output in terms of egg production, egg hatching success and larvae production of females whose matings were interrupted at predetermined times showed an overall positive relationship with copulation duration, up to a certain plateau . none of the matings interrupted within one minute of initiation produced any offspring. female productivity rose steeply during the second minute into copulation but soon levelled off, such that not significantly fewer eggs or progeny were produced in matings interrupted two minutes after their commencement than in naturally terminated matings .

within groups of females that were allowed to terminate matings naturally, progeny production bore no relationship to copulation duration . one out of  <dig> unmanipulated matings in the egg production and hatching success assay, and two out of  <dig> unmanipulated matings in the larvae production assay yielded no eggs, giving an estimate of female infertility rate of ca  <dig> to 11%. for comparison, ca 3% of the females whose mating was interrupted  did not lay any eggs . three of the  <dig> unmanipulated matings that did yield eggs did not result in viable offspring, providing an estimate of male sterility of ca 12%, possibly inflated by environmental causes of egg mortality.

the dynamics of sperm transfer closely matched the pattern inferred from the female productivity data. no sperm was recovered from females whose matings lasted less than one minute. the proportion of inseminated females asymptotically increased in subsequent intervals to reach a plateau at around  <dig> s, after which time 90% to 100% of all females were inseminated . accordingly, inseminated females experienced significantly longer copulations than non-inseminated ones .

double matings
female remating
all females that were allowed only  <dig> s for the first copulation remated in the remating experiment. then the proportion of remating females dropped in each of the time classes to about one half in the class where the first copulation was interrupted after  <dig> s. the remating rate remained largely unchanged for first copulations that lasted longer than  <dig> s . accordingly, females that remated had experienced significantly shorter first copulations than females that did not remate .

females that did eventually remate did so faster, the sooner their first copulation had been interrupted . latency to remating was significantly shorter when the first copulation had been interrupted after  <dig> s than when the first copulation was terminated naturally  or interrupted after  <dig> s . a trend is still present in the  <dig> s class as compared to naturally ended first copulations .

paternity analyses
in remating experiments where the first mating was interrupted while the second was allowed to be completed, the proportion of progeny sired by the first male relative to a subsequent rival  increased with the duration of the first mating . however, the paternity share of the first male  rose only up to a copulation duration of about  <dig> s and remained stable thereafter at the level of naturally terminated matings . conservatively, the comparison neglects females that did not remate , which were often precisely those experiencing the longest copulations. similarly conservatively, we did not determine p <dig> for pairs with copulation durations shorter than  <dig> s, because of previous indications that no sperm is transferred within such a short time frame and thus that the second male to mate would sire all of the produced offspring .

discussion
sex ratio manipulation
male d. montana gauged the intensity of competition from rival males and adjusted the duration of copulation, used as a proxy of reproductive investment, accordingly. copulations were longest in the presence of one potential rival, shortest in the presence of four potential rivals, and intermediate in the absence of competition. the pattern thus precisely matches theoretical predictions based on diminishing returns per unit of expenditure with increasing competition  <cit> . parker et al.'s  <cit>  evolutionary stable strategy  models were originally derived to determine optimal sperm expenditure in external spawners, but they have been equally applied to internally fertilizing species in which ejaculates compete in a fair raffle, i.e. in which fertilization success is proportional to the number of sperm transferred  <cit> . when the raffle is loaded, i.e. when one male's sperm is devalued relative to the sperm of another male, the ess depends on the information the parties have about their role, and whether or not their roles are occupied randomly  <cit> . in d. montana, the raffle is loaded in favour of the last male . all our experimental males housed for the time of the experiment with one or more rivals mated under the overt threat of not being the last male to mate. while we used only virgin females in our study, in nature most matings will involve non-virgins, and most males will not be their partner's last mate. however, copulation durations in our double mating experiments suggest that the ability of d. montana males to distinguish virgin from mated females is at most imperfect.

a few studies have addressed the question of how flexible the response to changes in osr  is. osr can fluctuate substantially in both space and time  <cit> , and the individual ability to promptly track changes in osr would optimize the adjustment of investment to the prevailing circumstances  <cit> . for d. montana males used in our sex ratio manipulation, the effect of ambient osr overshadowed the effect of the premating osr . species of the d. virilis group have a short reproductive season in spring, during which flies of both sexes converge on food patches of rotting plant material to mate  <cit> . under such a 'sex at the restaurant' scenario, it makes adaptive sense to respond to the current osr, rather than to the osr experienced beforehand elsewhere.

control over copulation duration
in contrast to earlier reports that copulation duration is ultimately under the control of males in various drosophila species  <cit> , we showed that d. montana females make a substantial contribution towards shortening the duration of copulation. when female resistance attempts were suppressed, males persisted in copula far longer than they ever managed to in unmanipulated matings. to a human observer, the females' desperate efforts to shake off the mounted male appear to reflect a premium for keeping matings within a certain optimal time frame or, conversely, a cost from matings that last longer than required from their own perspective.

costs and benefits of prolonged copulation durations
we explicitly addressed and documented a potential cost accruing to females coerced into exceedingly long matings, relative to their preferred duration. the longer the females' first copulation, the lower the proportion of females that remated on the following day, and the longer the remating latency for eventually remating females. males clearly profit from a delay in subsequent female remating through the extended period during which their sperm is used exclusively to sire progeny . nearly all females were inseminated well before the end of naturally terminated copulations. thus, the 'ejaculate transfer hypothesis', which postulates that copulation duration and sperm transfer/storage are positively correlated, does not fit the observed pattern as well as the 'extended mate guarding hypothesis'. the latter hypothesis provides here a better explanation, as the prolonged remating latency in females after longer copulations reduces the likelihood of females being inseminated by a subsequent male. the onset of female reluctance behaviour after sperm transfer seems to have reached its maximum suggests that males avail themselves of proteins in the seminal fluid to modify female behaviour to their advantage, as has earlier been shown in other species  <cit> . also, the fact that females produced eggs after copulations lasting less than required for sperm transfer to occur  might be attributed to the action of fecundity-enhancing seminal fluids transferred at the very beginning of copulation, even before sperm transfer begins. even though an induced refractoriness can under certain circumstances be beneficial to females  <cit> , it turns detrimental when it drives female mating rate away from the optimum, and obviously compromises female interests when it curtails the benefits to be derived from multiple mating.

arnqvist and nilsson  <cit>  provide convincing arguments for the claim that a single mating does not in general maximize lifetime fitness of female insects. even in species without nuptial feeding, direct benefits of remating in the form of replenished sperm supplies, stimulating or gonadotropic effects of mating, and nutritional or hydrating effects of male ejaculate substances more than offset negative effects for moderate remating rates. another direct benefit of multiple matings for females lays in counteracting male sterility, which can be as substantial as the approximate 12% we estimated in male d. montana. additional indirect benefits accruing to females from mating with different partners  such as increased offspring diversity and the opportunity for bet-hedging against genetically incompatible or inferior males  <cit>  further promote and maintain female remating behaviour. aspi's  <cit>  survey of a natural population of d. montana in finland revealed that virtually all sampled females carried sperm of at least two males. in the field, copulations were commonly observed posterior to the date when 95% of all the females were inseminated  <cit> . in the laboratory, females readily remate when given the opportunity, some within minutes, and ca 40% within one day . as female cooperation is an essential prerequisite for copulation to occur in d. montana  <cit> , remating is likely an adaptively favoured female strategy, rather than an inability to physically resist coercive manipulation. whether the reported delay in remating associated with longer first copulations imposes a significant fitness penalty is an issue that merits further attention, as is the investigation of other potentially incurred costs in terms of lifetime fecundity and of survival.

CONCLUSIONS
while male interests in sexual and sexually antagonistic selection scenarios have been studied intensively and are rather straightforward, females' interests have only lately come under scrutiny. the fact that the general effect is notoriously difficult to gauge in females  may account for this delay in interest. our study provides empirical evidence for substantial female control over copulation duration in a drosophila species. we also show for the first time in a drosophila virilis group species  that the main cost to females and fitness benefit to males of prolonged copulations lay in the extended latency to female remating, leading to a conflict of interest between the sexes.

