BACKGROUND
plant tissue culture, being comprised of sequential dedifferentiation  and re-differentiation  phases
 <cit> , represents a traumatic stress to plant cells and often provokes an array of genetic and epigenetic instabilities
 <cit> . at least a portion of the genetic and/or epigenetic alterations can be manifested as heritable phenotypic changes, and which is collectively termed somaclonal variation
 <cit> . based on the complexity as well as the often genetic-context-dependent features of somaclonal variation, phillips and colleagues  proposed that somaclonal variation is a “self-imposed” mutagenesis, which can be largely attributable to the breakdown of normal cellular controls for genetic and epigenetic integrity
 <cit> .

although extensive studies have been conducted on the molecular nature and spectrum of tissue culture-induced genomic alterations
 <cit> , whether and to what extent distinct plant genotypes, e.g., pure-lines, hybrids and polyploids, may respond differentially to the tissue culture condition remain to be fully understood.

the difference as well as its attendant biological effects between a hybrid  genome and that of a pure-line are fundamental and myriad, as being reflected by both their distinct evolutionary trajectories as biological species and agricultural utilization as different crops. an issue bearing both theoretical and applied implications is whether and to what extent the distinct types of genomes, pure-line, hybrid and polyploid, are different under various environmental conditions
 <cit> . given the unique properties of plant tissue culture, mentioned above, it is of interest to compare the different types of genomes under the tissue culture condition with respect to genomic instability. hitherto, this issue has been sparsely addressed.

we recently reported in sorghum  that there exists a sharp difference in the degree of both genetic and epigenetic instabilities at randomly sampled genomic loci under tissue culture between f <dig> hybrids and their parental pure lines, with the former being highly stable while the later highly mutable
 <cit> . this trend, however, was not observed in a set of maize  inbred lines and their f <dig> hybrids, in which the frequencies of both genetic and epigenetic alterations were largely dependent on genotypes, and f <dig> hybrids were not more stable than inbred parents
 <cit> . although this discrepancy can be explained by difference in plant taxa, more investigations involving different plants are needed in order to unravel possible general rules. moreover, an allopolyploid genome that possesses distinct properties from those of both a pure-line and a f <dig> hybrid has not been assessed for its possible differential response with regard to genetic and epigenetic stability to tissue culture.

in this study, we investigated tissue culture-induced genetic and epigenetic alterations in a set of rice  genotypes including two pure-lines , a pair of reciprocal f <dig> hybrids parented by the two pure-lines, and a pair of reciprocal tetraploids resulted from the hybrids. there are dual advantages to use the rice system for this investigation, i.e., its unrivaled rich genomic information as a monocot model, and its status as a staple food crop for two-thirds of the human population
 <cit> . we aimed to explore whether and to what extent these three distinct types of rice genotypes may respond differentially to the tissue culture condition with respect of genetic and epigenetic alterations, and their possible connectivity with perturbed expression of critical genes involved in dna repair and dna methylation.

RESULTS
genetic alteration in calli and regenerants of rice pure-lines, their reciprocal f <dig> hybrids, and tetraploids
the aflp maker has been widely used to detect length changes of restricted dna fragments subsequent to pcr amplifications
 <cit> . it is the method of choice for fingerprinting genomic instability from a global perspective without entailing large-scale sequencing. by using  <dig> pairs of selective primer combinations ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig> , and  <dig>  reproducible bands  were resolved for three kinds of samples  from each of the six genotypes. these six genotypes included two pure-lines , a pair of reciprocal f <dig> hybrids between the two lines , and a pair of reciprocal tetraploids resulting from the hybrids . alteration in the aflp banding patterns was detected in both calli and regenerants of all six genotypes compared with their respective seed-plants as controls. the alterations can be divided into two types, loss  and gain  . due to the co-dominant nature of the aflp marker, loss can be detected in the pure-lines and tetraploids only if both copies of the locus in question have been altered, but loss of one copy is detectable in the f <dig> hybrids if the locus was heterozygous. thus, frequencies of the loss-type alteration would have been under-estimated in the pure-lines and the tetraploids relative to the hybrids. indeed, in one of the pure-lines , the gain-type alteration is predominant, but this is not apparent in the other pure-line  in which the alteration type is mainly dependent on the different regenerants .

the most dramatic difference in genetic alteration frequencies are observed between the pair of reciprocal f <dig> hybrids, with calli and regenerants of n/ <dig>  showing more than 30-fold more alterations than those of 9/n , and nearly all the alterations are of the loss-type . for the pair of reciprocal tetraploids, although calli and regenerants of nn/ <dig>  also showed higher frequencies of alteration than those of 99/nn , the difference is much smaller in magnitude than that between the reciprocal hybrids, and the alterations are also predominantly of the loss-type . across all six genotypes, it appears that the f <dig> hybrid n/ <dig> showed the highest frequencies of genetic alteration , followed by pure-line 93– <dig> , while all the rest four genotypes showed much lower frequencies of alterations. however, it is notable that although the pair of tetraploids  showed similarly lower genetic alteration frequencies  as the two pure-lines, they are of distinct types, i.e., predominantly band loss in tetraploids vs. band gain in pure-lines .

to further test if the appeared genotypic differences in generating the genetic alterations as a result of tissue culture are statistically significant, we performed anova and lsd-based multiple comparisons by including all regenerants for each of the six genotypes. we found that n/ <dig> is indeed significantly different from all the rest five genotypes, while differences in all the rest pairwise comparisons of the five genotypes did not reach a statistically significant level , verifying that n/ <dig> is uniquely prone to generating genetic alterations under the tissue culture condition.

epigenetic alteration in calli and regenerants of rice pure-lines, their reciprocal f <dig> hybrids, and tetraploids
msap is a modified version of aflp by substituting the msei enzyme with a pair of cytosine methylation-sensitive isoschizomers, hpaii and mspi. this pair of enzymes recognize the same tetranucleotide restriction site  but have differential sensitivity to methylation states of the two cytosines: hpaii will not cut if either of the cytosines in the double-strand is methylated, whereas mspi will not cut if the external cytosine is fully- or hemi-  methylated
 <cit> . thus, for a given dna sample, the internal cytosine methylation in double-strand, or external cytosine methylation in single-strand, at the assayed 5’-ccgg sites, can be unequivocally identified by the msap marker
 <cit> . for clarity, we hereby refer to these two types of patterns as cg methylation and chg methylation, respectively.

using  <dig> pairs of selective ecori + hpaii/mspi primer combinations ,  <dig> , <dig> , <dig> , <dig>  and  <dig>  clear and reproducible msap bands  were scored for the three kinds of samples  of each of the six genotypes, as for aflp. first, by tabulating the number of bands representing the two major methylation types, cg- and chg-methylation, at the 5’-ccgg sites, we calculated the cg, chg and total or collective  methylation levels in calli and regenerants . clear fluctuations of both cg- and chg-, and hence, total methylation levels at the assayed 5’-ccgg sites are clear across the six genotypes; in contrast, the methylation levels are largely constant among the three kinds of samples  within a given genotype . indeed, anova and lsd-based statistical analysis indicates that  <dig> out of the  <dig> possible genotypic pairwise comparisons  showed significant difference in terms of the collective methylation levels .
 <dig>   diagrammatic illustration of the genotypic differences between the pairwise comparisons for “total methylation level” shown in . ,  and  alteration in four major types methylation patterns, cg hyper and chg hyper, cg hypo and chg hypo, and collective alteration  at randomly sampled 5’-ccgg sites by methylation-sensitive amplification polymorphism  in each of the six rice genotypes as in figure
 <dig>   diagrammatic illustration of the genotypic differences between the pairwise comparisons for “total hypermethylation alteration” shown in .  diagrammatic illustration of the genotypic differences between the pairwise comparisons for “total hypomethylation alteration” shown in . in all cases, solid and dashed lines indicate statistically significant  and insignificant  differences, respectively, based on one-way anova test .

next, we tabulated the alteration frequencies for further defined methylation patterns in calli and/or regenerants compared with their corresponding seed-plant controls of each genotype. each of the cg and chg methylation patterns can be further divided into two subtypes, i.e., hyper- and hypomethylation. compared with their corresponding seed-plants, it is evident that calli and regenerants of all six genotypes showed both hyper- and hypomethylation alterations, which, in descending order, are cg hypo, chg hypo, cg hyper, and chg hyper . although difference clearly exists across the six genotypes, no distinct signatures are recognizable with regard to the three types of genotypes, i.e., pure-lines, f <dig> hybrids and tetraploids , which is in contrast with the genetic alterations . notably, taken all four subtypes of methylation patterns together, the alteration frequencies  are markedly lower than those of the genetic alterations revealed by aflp . this reveals an important observation of this study, that is, in rice the major component of somaclonal variation is genetic rather than epigenetic. this contrasts with other studied plant species by the same methodologies, for examples, sorghum
 <cit>  and maize
 <cit> , in which the two types of alterations were found to occur at similar frequencies. strikingly, calli and regenerants of hybrid n/ <dig>  which showed the highest frequencies of genetic alteration  is among those showing the lowest frequencies of methylation alteration , suggesting that tissue culture-induced genetic and epigenetic alterations in rice are uncoupled, and hence, likely controlled by distinct mechanisms, as also corroborated by the expression analysis of relevant genes, detailed in subsequent sections.

anova and lsd-based statistical analysis was also conducted to test for significance of genotypic differences in the frequencies of tissue culture-induced hyper- and hypomethylation alterations. results showed that  for frequencies of hypermethylation alteration, seven of the  <dig> pairwise comparisons  showed statistically significant difference  ;  for frequencies of hypomethylation alteration, nine of the  <dig> pairwise comparisons  showed statistically significant difference .

chromosomal distribution and functional relevance of the genomic loci underlying tissue culture-induced genetic and epigenetic alterations
to have a glimpse into the properties of the loci underwent genetic and methylation alterations as a result of tissue culture, we isolated, cloned and sequenced  <dig> and  <dig> variant bands from the aflp and msap profiles, respectively. based on the rice whole-genome reference sequence ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  variant bands were mapped to unique loci across the rice chromosomes , indicating majority of these loci are single- or low-copy. to further test the random or nonrandom distribution of these variable loci among the rice chromosomes, the chi-squared t-test  against the null hypothesis of random distribution was performed by comparing the theoretically expected  and experimentally observed  values. the difference was insignificant between the expected and observed values  , indicating that both genetic and epigenetic alterations induced by tissue culture are randomly distributed among the rice chromosomes.
 <dig> 

to explore whether the variant aflp and msap loci might bear functional relevance, we performed a blastx analysis for the  <dig> variant aflp bands and  <dig> variant msap bands, respectively, at the ncbi website . we found that two variant aflp bands and one msap band showed significant homology to known-function genes,  <dig> aflp bands and  <dig> msap bands were related to putative protein-coding genes, seven bands  showed homology to low-copy transposable elements ,  <dig> aflp bands and  <dig> msap bands showed no homology to the current rice database . the three known-function aflp and msap bands are acetyltransferase nsi, mitogen activated protein kinase and ubiquitin-conjugating enzyme, respectively. this suggests that both the genetic and epigenetic alterations induced by tissue culture in rice are likely impacting biochemistry and physiology of the calli and regenerants, and hence, might be manifested as somaclonal variation at the phenotypic level.

altered transcript abundance by tissue culture of genes encoding for enzymes involved in dna repair and dna methylation
it has been suggested that a major cause for tissue culture-induced genetic and epigenetic alterations can be attributed to the breakdown of normal cellular controls for genetic and epigenetic fidelity
 <cit> . it is known that three major repair pathways play essential roles in maintaining genetic fidelity under normal conditions, namely, somatic homologous recombination , mismatch repair  and cell-cycle checkpoint 
 <cit> . thus, it is conceivable that genetic alterations induced by tissue culture are probably related to perturbed- or mis-expression of the genes encoding for enzymes of these pathways under the condition. similarly, the level and pattern of cytosine methylation are established and maintained in plants by interlaced actions of at least three categories of enzymes, i.e., cytosine methyltransferases, active demethylases and several argonaute proteins  related to biogenesis of a specific type of  <dig> nt small interference  rnas
 <cit> . accumulating evidence also indicates that the at least the active demethylating process by the demethylases  also involves nucleotide excision repairs
 <cit> , while it has been established that methylated and unmethylated cytosines have different propensities for single nucleotide transversion mutations via deamination
 <cit> . together, it is conceivable that tissue culture-induced alterations in dna sequence and methylation may result from changed expression and/or activity of one or more of all the aforementioned enzymes under the condition. in addition, it also can be envisioned that some or all these cellular machineries would intrinsically interact, and produce the collective results of both genetic and epigenetic instabilities.

to assay possible perturbed expression by tissue culture of the aforementioned genes, we measured the steady-state transcript abundance for representative members in each of these four cellular pathways involved in dna repair and dna methylation in calli and regenerants relative to their corresponding seed-plant controls, for each of the six genotypes, by quantitative real-time rt-pcr  analysis . the analyzed genes include  <dig> of shr,  <dig> of mmr, eight of checkpoint and  <dig> of dna methylation. fold changes  of the transcript abundance of these genes in calli and regenerants relative to their corresponding seed-plant controls were tabulated based on three replications  and summarized  . the following observations can be generalized.  compared with their corresponding seed-plant controls, both calli and regenerants showed significantly altered expression for most of the analyzed genes of each pathway .  while both up- and down-regulations are similarly prominent in calli, predominantly down-regulation was observed in regenerants .  although the difference among pathways is not clear-cut, difference among individual genes is conspicuous, and which is largely concordant across the genotypes .  most strikingly, the difference in the expression of many of these genes between a pair of reciprocal f <dig> hybrids  and tetraploid  is also as great as that between the two pure-lines  in both calli and regenerants , mirroring the results of genetic alterations . to explore whether this striking parent-of-origin difference in the altered expression of these genes is due to the effect of tissue culture or already pre-existing in seed-plants, we compared the expression of all these genes in the leaf-tissue of seed-plants from these six genotypes. we found that the parent-of-origin difference also exists among the seed-plants, but to a much lesser extent . this suggests that expression of these genes of the four pathways entailed to maintain genetic and epigenetic stability are intrinsically sensitive to parent-of-origin effects even under normal conditions, but tissue culture-induced mis-expression substantially augments the preexisting parent-of-origin effect.

correlations between tissue culture-induced genetic/epigenetic alterations and altered transcript abundance of genes encoding for enzymes involved in dna repair and dna methylation
although non-concordance was apparent between the tissue culture-induced genetic/epigenetic alterations  and the altered transcript abundance of genes encoding for enzymes involved in dna repair and dna methylation , it remains an intriguing possibility that some cryptic correlations might still exist between them, for example as specific types of genetic/epigenetic alterations and altered expression of specific genes or some sorts of collectivity thereof. to probe this, we conducted pearson correlation analysis for all possible pairwise relationships. this analysis reveals that, first, there indeed exist significant correlations between the tissue culture-induced genetic/epigenetic alterations as specific types and altered expression of some of the analyzed genes encoding for enzymes involved in dna repair and dna methylation . second, more of the analyzed genes  showed statistically significant correlations with the tissue culture-induced genetic/epigenetic alterations in calli than in regenerants  . third, only three genes  showed correlations with specific genetic and/or epigenetic alterations in both calli and regenerants, while correlations for the rest genes  are confined to either calli or regenerants but not to to both . finally, none of the genetic alterations showed correlation with any of the gene expressions in regenerants, while most of the epigenetic alteration patterns showed even more correlations with altered expression of the genes in regenerants than in calli . the last result makes sense because all the genetic alterations detected in the regenerants should have occurred at the callus stage while the occurrence of epigenetic alterations is not confined to the callus phase but also in the regeneration process, due to developmental dynamics of dna methylation patterns in plants
 <cit> .
 <dig>  the blue and black lines refer to significant correlations at levels of p <  <dig>  and p <  <dig> , respectively.

discussion
although the molecular basis underlying the phenomenon of somaclonal variation remains to be fully understood, an array of recent investigations have provided substantive evidence that both genetic and epigenetic mechanisms are involved
 <cit> . this is consistent with the earlier insights perceived by phillips and colleagues that plant tissue culture-induced variation is a self-imposed mutagenesis as a consequence of disrupted normal cellular controls
 <cit> . for example, a detailed investigation in arabidopsis showed that expression of a large number of genes involved in chromatin regulation was preferentially altered  in cell suspension cultures relative to the seedling plants, and which was found to be concomitant with a shift in profiles of the two size-groups of sirnas  that play distinct regulatory roles
 <cit> . it was suggested that the mis-regulation of chromatin genes and hence loss of epigenetic targeting  under the tissue culture condition is largely responsible for the occurrence of genomic instability in the cell suspension cultures
 <cit> . in parallel, genome re-sequencing analysis indicated that nucleotide changes, including single base substitutions  and small insertion/deletions  with distinctive molecular spectra from those of spontaneously accumulated natural mutations, have occurred extensively in regenerants of both arabidopsis <cit>  and rice
 <cit> . interestingly, although reactivation of transposable elements  by tissue culture has been considered a general phenomenon associated with plant tissue culture
 <cit> , especially well-documented in rice
 <cit> , this was found totally absent in arabidopsis <cit> , pointing to fundamental differences in the nature of molecular underpinnings of somaclonal variations in different plant taxa.

from an evolutionary point of view, merging of two divergent genomes  and doubling of an existing genome, either of one genome  or a hybrid genome  represent revolutionary events often with cardinal biological effects, as they may lead to rapid organismal diversification and even stasipatric speciation
 <cit> . a hallmark of nascent hybrid and polyploid genomes compared with that of a pure-line is their liability to change, which may confer enhanced evolvability compared to that of a pure-line
 <cit> . thus, the issue of whether and to what extent a nascent or established homoploid hybrid or polyploid genome would differ from that of a pure-line under various environmental conditions has drawn much attention in recent years
 <cit> . this is because, apart from apparent evolutionary significance, the issue bears applied implications given that many important agricultural crops are hybrids or polyploids or their derivatives
 <cit> . given the unique attributes of plant tissue culture
 <cit> , it is of clear interest to explore the possible differences in response to this process between the distinct genomes of pure-lines, hybrids, and polyploids.

we recently found in sorghum that there exists a dramatic difference in frequencies of both genetic and epigenetic alterations induced by tissue culture between f <dig> hybrids and their parental pure lines, with the former being significantly more stable than the later
 <cit> . in contrast, a set of maize inbred lines and their f <dig> hybrids did not show distinct differences in tissue culture-induced genetic and epigenetic alterations based on the same analytic tools
 <cit> , underscoring, again, differences in different plant taxa responding to tissue culture. the discrepancy also calls for more investigations using additional plant taxa for the purpose of unraveling possible generalities. here, using six genotypes of rice which included two pure-line cultivars representing the japonica and indica subspecies of oryza sativa l., a pair of reciprocal f <dig> hybrids parented by the two pure-lines, and a pair of reciprocal tetraploids resulted from the pair of f <dig> hybrids, we have further explored the issue, and extended the earlier study scope by including also polyploids. several novel observations were made:  both genetic and dna methylation alterations were detected in calli and regenerants from all six genotypes, but genetic alterations are more prevalent than epigenetic alterations;  significant genotypic difference was observed in frequencies of both types of alterations, but only genetic alteration showed distinctive features among the three types of genomes, with one hybrid  showing an exceptionally high frequency of alteration;  most surprisingly, difference in genetic alteration frequencies between the pair of reciprocal f <dig> hybrids is much greater than that between the two pure-line subspecies, and this strong parent-of-origin effect was significantly attenuated in the pair of reciprocal tetraploids;  the steady-state transcript abundance of genes involved in dna repair and dna methylation was significantly altered in both calli and regenerants, and some of which were correlated with the genetic and/or epigenetic alterations. we caution that although our results are based on molecular marker analysis of relatively lager numbers of randomly sampled loci , they are certainly pale compared with whole genome sequencing-based approaches. nonetheless, our results have provided fresh testable entries for future more in-depth investigations on the molecular mechanisms of plant somaclonal variation by using systems biology approaches including whole genome re-sequencing, transcriptome profiling, methylome analysis.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown in this study that although molecular level somaclonal variation occurred in all three kinds of distinct rice genotypes, i.e., pure-lines, f <dig> hybrids and tetraploids, there exist fundamental differences among them in their propensities of generating both genetic and epigenetic alterations under the tissue culture condition. genetic alteration is the major constituent of somaclonal variation in rice, and which is concomitant with epigenetic alteration in the form of cytosine dna methylation patterns. in addition, parent-of-origin effect plays a major role in the genetic alteration frequencies of the pair of reciprocal hybrids, thus further implicating partitioning of epigenetic mechanisms in somaclonal variation, although which can be manifested as mainly genetic alterations. this intricate genetic and epigenetic interlacing is further corroborated by the strong association of perturbed expression of genes encoding for enzymes involved in dna repair and dna methylation with both genetic and epigenetic alterations.

