BACKGROUND
recent technological advances have made the application of high throughput assays, such as microarrays, common practice. the ability to simultaneously measure the expression level of a large number of genes, makes it possible to take a system-wide view of the cell.

developing reliable data analysis methods that infer the complex network of interactions between the various constituents of a living system based on high throughput data, is a major issue in current bioinformatics research  <cit> . because data on transcriptional regulation are most accessible, much effort goes to the develoment of algorithms that infer the structure of transcriptional regulatory networks  from this data  <cit> .

gaining statistical knowledge about the performance of these algorithms requires repeatedly testing them on large, high-quality data sets obtained from many experimental conditions and derived from different well-characterized networks. unfortunately, experimental data sets of the appropriate size and design are usually not available. moreover, knowledge about the underlying biological trn is often incomplete or unavailable.

as a consequence, validation strategies applied to experimentally obtained data are often limited to confirming previously known interactions in the reconstructed network. however, using such an approach, false positive interactions are for example not penalized. indeed, assessing the relevance of predicted interactions that have not been experimentally confirmed, is infeasible. secondly, the algorithm can usually only be applied to data from a single network, which complicates algorithm design and validation.

due to these limitations of real experimental data, the use of simulated data for benchmarking structure learning algorithms is gaining interest. the term network generator is used to denote a system that generates synthetic networks and simulated gene expression data derived from these networks. a synthetic network consists of a topology that determines the structure of the network and a model for each of the interactions between the genes.

different approaches have been used to create network topologies. the generation of small networks is often based on detailed handcrafted topologies  <cit> . for producing topologies of large networks comprising thousands of nodes, random graph models have been used  <cit> . the latter models create graphs that share one or more statistical properties, such as scale-free  <cit>  and small-world  <cit>  properties, with known regulatory networks, in an attempt to approximate biological reality.

for simulation of the regulatory network, the interactions between the genes need to be quantitatively modeled. several models have been proposed for this purpose, including boolean  <cit> , continuous  <cit>  and probabilistic  <cit>  approaches. most current network simulators  <cit>  use a set of ordinary differential equations . the choice of a numerical solution method, which depends on the desired precision and the specific form of the set of ode's, can lead to scalability problems. the time complexity of numerically solving a set of ode's for a given time period, in function of the number of genes, varies between linear and cubic complexity, which makes simulation of large networks computationally difficult.

we propose a network generator that copes with some of the limitations of previous implementations. instead of using random graph models, topologies are generated based on previously described source networks, allowing better approximation of the statistical properties of biological networks. the computational performance of our simulation procedure is linear in function of the number of genes, making simulation of large networks possible.

the tool, called syntren , has been implemented in java and is available for download as additional file 3: syntren.zip.

RESULTS
overview
the network generator produces synthetic transcriptional regulatory networks  and corresponding microarray data sets. in these networks, the nodes represent the genes and the edges correspond to the regulatory interactions at transcriptional level between the genes. figure  <dig> shows the flow of the data generation process comprising three essential steps. in a first step, a network topology is selected from a known source network using either of two selection strategies. in a second step, transition functions and their parameters are assigned to the edges in the network. in the third step, mrna expression levels for the genes in the network are simulated under different conditions. after optionally adding noise, a data set representing normalized and scaled microarray measurements is obtained. a more detailed explanation is given in section methods.

to evaluate to what extent our approach compares to previous approaches in generating networks with topological characteristics of true trns, we used well established deterministic and informative measures that can be subdivided in two distinct categories, each of which addresses different aspects of the network structure: high-level  measures and low-level  measures.

the high-level measures like average clustering coefficient and average path length, depend on knowledge of the complete network structure while the low level measures are derived from local network properties such as for instance the marginal degree distributions  <cit> . rigorous definitions are given in additional file 1: addendum.pdf.

biological trns have specific common structural properties: the small world property  <cit> , indicating a short average path length between any two nodes and the scale-free property  <cit> , indicating the degree distribution of the nodes of the network follows a power law. true biological trns also contain specific structural motifs that are statistically overrepresented as compared to random graphs of the same in- and outdegree  <cit>  . synthetic trns have been generated using different types of random graph models  <cit> , such as erdös-rényi  <cit> , albert-barabási  <cit>  and watts-strogatz  <cit>  models. these models generate graphs with one or more topological properties observed in biological trns. unlike previous approaches, we generate network topologies by selecting subgraphs from a previously described biological source network .

random network models
to validate our approach, a series of synthetic networks is generated both by using different types of random graph models , watts-strogatz or small-world , albert-barabási  and directed scale free  random graph models) and by selecting subgraphs according to the methods described in section network topology. to obtain representative sets of networks for the given models, a sweep was done across a large range of possible parameter settings for the tested models. the topological properties of each of these networks are compared to these of the complete e. coli and s. cerevisiae networks.

in figure  <dig> and figure  <dig>  the average indegree is plotted versus the average directed path length to illustrate the different characteristics of the random graph models, the previously described trns and the selected subnetworks.

from figure  <dig>  a similar conclusion can be drawn for sw networks. they can resemble biological networks for a single topological measure, but not for several measures simultaneously. dsf graphs  <cit>  can however resemble biological networks with respect to both average directed path length and average indegree for well-chosen parameter settings. again, similar results are obtained for other topological characteristics .

subnetwork selection methods
to evaluate the change in topological characteristics in function of the number of nodes in the subnetwork, networks of different sizes were selected using both methods .

the neighbor addition method shows more variation for the median indegree compared to the cluster addition method. this is not surprising since adding a node and all of its children, as is done in the cluster addition method, better preserves the median indegree than adding a single node, as done in the neighbor addition method.

simulated expression data
three input genes were defined  for which setting the expression values corresponds to changing external conditions in a microarray experiment. distinct external conditions were thus mimicked by randomly choosing the expression values between  <dig> and  <dig> for each experiment.

in figure  <dig>  part of the simulation results of the example network are shown. the selected part of the example network  is shown in . figure  <dig>  and  <dig> show how each of the input genes affects its direct children. e.g. g <dig> has a strong effect on both g <dig> and g <dig>  but a less pronounced effect on the expression level of g <dig>  since g <dig> has a repressor feedback loop and is also stimulated by another input gene g <dig>  in figure  <dig>  the expression levels of g <dig> are also added to illustrate the relation between two independent genes like g <dig> and g <dig> 

discussion
because of the urgent need for well characterized datasets to benchmark network inference methodologies, the use of simulated data has become essential. therefore, we have developed a generator that produces simulated gene expression data that resembles biological data, but at the same time is computationally tractable for large networks. to more closely approximate the topological characteristics of biological networks, we propose a novel way of generating topologies, i.e. by selecting subnetworks from described biological networks.

subnetwork selection results in networks that resemble previously described networks across a range of tested topological characteristics. in this respect, the cluster addition method performs better than the neighbor addition method. moreover, our selection strategy outperforms several alternative approaches based on random graph models. our results show that the properties of synthetic topologies created by random graph models depend largely on the input parameters used. properties of such random graphs generally differ from those of known biological networks in at least one topological measure. only with the more sophisticated models, such as the directed scale free graph model  <cit> , and given a specific set of input parameters, were we able to generate topologies that resemble previously described trns for the complete set of evaluated characteristics.

our method offers a valid alternative over generating networks using random graph models. however, using previously characterized trns as a source of synthetic network topologies implies a dependency on available knowledge about these networks. obviously, not all interactions are known and some described interactions might be false positives. moreover, previously described networks might be biased towards well studied pathways. the more accurate these characterized networks will become, the higher the quality of the selected topologies will be.

while dsf networks seem very similar to biological networks under specific parameter settings, it should be noted that finding the optimal set of parameters for the dsf model to create graphs that resemble biological networks is not trivial. moreover, it is possible that some subtle characteristics of real networks, such as network motifs  <cit>  or joint degree distributions  <cit> , are not captured in the measured properties. also, as knowledge about true transcriptional networks improves, there is no guarantee that adequate parameters for the dsf networks will still exist. in these cases, selecting subnetworks from known biological networks ensures that the generated topologies will still sufficiently resemble their biological source networks.

the choice of equations based on michaelis-menten and hill kinetic equations to model regulatory interactions, allows a variety of interaction types likely to occur in real biological systems  <cit> , ranging from a nearly linear behavior to very steep interactions. although in genuine networks all dynamic interactions are coupled, we assumed that the steady-state kinetics of the complete network of uncoupled equations are comparable to those of the coupled set of equations. also, all individual transcription rates are assumed to be in a steady-state regime. in contrast to alternative simulators that solve coupled differential equations, introducing these simplifications made simulating large networks comprising thousands of genes computationally tractable.

several parameters controlling the gene network generation and sampling process are user-definable in order to generate data sets of increasing level of difficulty. this allows thorough benchmarking of inference algorithms, while low level parameters  are automatically chosen from predefined distributions.

the tool can be further improved in a number of different aspects. firstly, the topologies of the source networks are a key aspect of the performance of the generator. the availability of more accurate data for the gene regulatory networks of e. coli and s. cerevisiae, will result in more accurate network topologies. the availability of large regulatory networks for organisms of which the network topology differs significantly from that of e. coli or s. cerevisiae will definitely increase the reliability of our generator for organisms other than e. coli and s. cerevisiae. secondly, as more empirical data becomes available, a better estimate of the transition functions and their parameters can be given  <cit> .

our system can be extended in natural way with additional data sources . this data could be sampled from real biological data sets in a way similar to the procedure that was described for the topology selection.

CONCLUSIONS
our results show that it is quite difficult to create synthetically generated networks that are topologically similar to the biological networks derived for e. coli and s. cerevisiae, using random graph models. the characteristics of the generated networks were assessed using a set of topological measures and were shown to be very dependent on the input parameters of the random graph model. only more sophisticated models, such as the dsf graph model  <cit>  are capable of generating networks that resemble the known trns for the set of evaluated characteristics, and only given a specific set of input parameters.

the strategy of selecting connected substructures from a source network produced graphs that quite closely resemble the characteristics of a real trn, provided the subgraphs are sufficiently large. the cluster addition method performed better than the neighbour addition method in this respect.

the generation of gene expression data scales linearly as a function of the number of nodes and therefore allows fast simulation of large networks comprising thousands of genes.

in this study we focused on the construction of a generator of transcriptional networks and corresponding normalized microarray data. its primary goal is to offer benchmark datasets for testing and optimizing network inference methods. both a reasonable approximation of biology and scalability to large networks were major design considerations. by selecting topologies from known networks, modeling interactions by kinetic equations and introducing some major simplifications, we developed a flexible framework that generates benchmark datasets of varying levels of complexity.

