BACKGROUND
the rts  gene, a member of the enolase family, was initially identified in homo sapiens by the discovery of an rna with extensive complementarity to the mrna for the dna biosynthetic enzyme thymidylate synthase <cit> . the rts gene was later shown to code for two proteins  through alternative rna splicing  <cit> . the mrna for rtsα is complementary to thymidylate synthase mrna, while the mrna for rtsβ is not  <cit> . the rtsβ protein is the major protein product of the rts gene and its expression is associated with the down-regulation of thymidylate synthase protein as cultured cells enter growth arrest  <cit> . expression of rtsβ correlates with the production of small molecules that appear to mediate the down-regulation of thymidylate synthase protein by a novel intercellular signaling mechanism  <cit> . overproduction of rtsβ occurs in some cells resistant to inhibitors of thymidylate synthase or dihydrofolate reductase, indicating a role for the rts gene in folate and nucleotide metabolism, as well as anticancer drug resistance  <cit> .

while the specific function of the rts gene products are currently under investigation, we now report a new rts protein isoform and its association with mitochondria. the existence of this new isoform, rtsγ, was first predicted using a computational comparative genomic sequence analysis approach and was then verified experimentally. this unexpected observation suggests that rts may have functions in addition to intercellular signaling.

RESULTS
a conserved extended protein n-terminus can be deduced from all available rts genes
comprehensive analysis of all available database sequences revealed that rts genes demonstrate an atypical phylogenetic distribution. rts exists only in a few groups of eubacteria, two fungal lineages , and most animal species from insects to mammals. among bacterial rts orthologous genes, several were annotated with a longer n-terminus based on a start codon located further upstream. these proteins include np_ <dig>  , np_ <dig> , np_ <dig>  , np_ <dig>  , np_ <dig>  , cad <dig>  , and zp_ <dig>  , while many other proteins, including np_ <dig>  , np_ <dig>  , np_ <dig>  , np_ <dig>  , zp_ <dig>  , zp_ <dig>  , aam <dig>  , and yp_ <dig>  were annotated with an n-terminus equivalent to that of human rtsβ. therefore, we determined whether an equivalent extended n-terminus could be predicted in the human rts gene. previously, all available human rts genomic sequences appeared to contain a sequence gap immediately upstream of the start codon of rtsβ, and the published 5'-end of the rts mrnas was originally determined by race  analysis of cloned sequences  <cit> . thus, a longer n-terminal was not predicted initially, and not expected based upon the existing experimental evidence. however, at the time we started this analysis, one bac clone, rp11-778p <dig> , was found to contain the sequence covering an extended exon region as well as the rest of the gene, although its sequence was in a status of unordered fragments. in addition, a genbank entry for the human rts gene by dolnick and su  contains the complete 5'-end upstream sequence. analysis of this sequence by genscan  <cit>  predicts a start codon upstream of the start codon for rtsβ, yielding an extended n-terminal that is  <dig> amino acids longer than rtsβ . a sequence comparison between the extended human rts protein region and the bacterial rts proteins possessing a longer n-terminus revealed a high level of sequence similarity in the extended region. therefore, we reasoned that a longer n-terminus may exist in all rts orthologous genes, and this was confirmed by the presence of a possible equivalent extension of the n-terminus in all available rts genomic sequences . we named this potential new isoform rtsγ to distinguish it from rtsβ and rtsα. during our preparation of this manuscript, ncbi released a new refgene entry for human rtsβ . this entry, dated dec-20- <dig>  predicted a different n-terminus and was subsequently replaced by another entry  on 02-march- <dig>  which has a deduced protein product identical to that described in this report. while all available animal rts genes, including those from human, three fish species , the basal chordate, ciona intestinalis, and the invertebrate anopheles gambiae, share the same intron/exon boundary position at least for the first exon/intron junction , the fungal rts genes seem to vary in gene structure making them different from the animal genes, as well as from each other .

in addition to the genomic sequences, est sequences for rts genes containing sufficient 5'-end sequences were also identified for a few more animal species, including cow, rat, frog, multiple bony fish species, sea squirt, beetles and mites. multiple sequence alignment analysis revealed that the extended n-termini of rts genes are conserved from bacteria to human . therefore, we believe that the extended n-terminal region represents an ancestral form of the rts gene products.

the extended n-terminus contributes a mitochondrial signal in human rtsγ protein
during our search for potential new motifs and/or functions contributed by the extended n-terminal region of rts, we found that this extended sequence was predicted to contain a mitochondrial signal. as shown in table  <dig>  all available programs predict a strong mitochondrial signal for rtsγ, but not for rtsβ, suggesting that the mitochondrial signal is conferred by the extended n-terminal sequence.

rtsγ protein exists and is associated with mitochondria in human cells
we addressed the existence of the rtsγ isoform and its possible association with mitochondria experimentally. initially, a cytosolic fraction and an organellar pellet  were prepared from ccrf-cem human cells, and their proteins were resolved by electrophoresis and analyzed for rts protein expression . the results indicate that two rts proteins with apparent molecular mass of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  kda  are present. there was a preferential distribution of the higher molecular mass species in the organellar fraction as compared to the cytosolic fraction. the presence in the organellar fraction of both lysosomal  and mitochondrial  marker proteins, however, did not allow us to conclude that rts proteins are present in the mitochondria, rather than in the lysosomes. to resolve this, we partially separated lysosomes from mitochondria using a 5–20% iodixanol gradient  <cit> . the protein profile of the iodixanol gradient shows a peak centered on fractions 14– <dig> with a pronounced shoulder in fractions 10– <dig>  gdh activity appears in fractions 12– <dig> with a peak at fraction  <dig>  indicating the presence of mitochondria in these fractions. the shoulder in the protein profile  that lacks gdh activity suggests the presence of non-mitochondrial organelles, including lysosomes. this suggestion was confirmed by western blotting of the gradient fractions for mnsod and lamp- <dig> markers . analysis of the distribution of rtsβ in the gradient indicates that both the rtsβ and γ species co-localize with mnsod, but not lamp- <dig>  conclusively demonstrating their presence in mitochondria, but not lysosomes.

discussion
functional implications for the rts gene based on its mitochondrial location
it has recently been determined that rtsβ is an enzyme responsible for the synthesis of small signaling molecules involved with the down-regulation of thymidylate synthase as cells enter growth arrest in vitro  <cit> . the signaling associated with rtsβ was also shown to act intercellularly  <cit> . sequence analysis of the rts gene suggested the presence of a mitochondrial leader sequence that would be expected to increase the length of rtsβ from  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids in rtsγ with an expected change in molecular mass from  <dig>  to  <dig>  da. based upon the prediction of a mitochondrial leader sequence, we evaluated whether there is a mitochondrial form of the rts protein. the results shown in fig.  <dig> indicate that this is the case, with two species being present in the mitochondria. these two protein species have apparent molecular masses of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  kda. the smaller species corresponds well to the predicted size expected for rtsβ with the mitochondrial leader sequence cleaved off, while the larger species differs by  <dig> kda from the predicted molecular mass for the isoform with the leader sequence. the amounts of rtsγ and rtsβ in the combined cytoplasmic and mitochondrial fractions differ from that expected to result from combining equal amounts of each fraction. the increased abundance of rtsβ, relative to rtsγ in the combined fraction may be the result of in situ cleavage of the rtsγ mitochondrial leader sequence by cytosolic proteases, which has been observed to occur in yeast cytosol  <cit> , although transfer of protein may also contribute to the change in signal strength as the mnsod signal is weaker in the lane with the combined fractions than in the lane loaded with just the organelle protein. although the migration of proteins in sds-page gives only approximate estimation of molecular masses, there is a possibility that other post-translational modifications may contribute to this discrepancy. the co-localization of rtsβ and rtsγ with gdh and mnsod after subcellular fractionation strongly suggests that the extended n-terminal sequence serves as the leader sequence for mitochondrial location of the protein and that it is likely this is partially cleaved to generate the β isoform, once rtsγ is transported into the mitochondria. the presence of the rtsβ protein in mitochondria raises the question of what role this enzyme and the rts signaling pathway may play there. mitochondria are a major site for folate metabolism in mammalian cells  <cit> . thymidylate synthase is also found within mitochondria  <cit> , despite the absence of a canonical mitochondrial leader sequence, and the relationship of rts signaling to thymidylate synthase and folate metabolism may ultimately provide the explanation for this phenomenon. recent evidence indicates that treatment of cells with an rtsβ signaling mimic can affect the cytoskeleton and cause down-regulation of tyms  <cit> . the co-localization of rts and thymidylate synthase in the mitochondria may indicate that rtsβ, in addition to its role in intercellular signaling, also provides intracellular signals that regulate thymidylate synthase levels in the mitochondria.

since the extended n-termini of rts are conserved from bacteria to human, we believe that the rtsγ form of the rts gene represents the ancestral form of this gene, while rtsβ, which seems to be the predominantly expressed form in the cytosol, represents an isoform that appeared later during evolution and came to co-exist with the ancestral isoform, at least in homo sapiens. based on a recent study which shows that suboptimal aug codons can support translation via leaky scanning and reinitiation  <cit> , the co-existence of protein products translated using different aug codons in the same reading frame may not be a rare phenomena. in fact, the starting aug codons for rtsγ and rtsβ are both qualified as optimal start codons according to recent studies of translation initiation in mammalian and plant genes  <cit> , providing an explanation for the co-existence of rtsγ and rtsβ. a recent study suggests that many alternative splicing forms cause differential subcellular localization, especially in targeting either peroxisomes or mitochondria  <cit> , and our data serves as evidence supporting such a notion. an interesting subject for future studies will be to determine when the shorter rtsβ isoform appeared during evolution.

phylogenetic distribution and origin of rts gene
rts is highly conserved, being found in a variety of species, ranging from bacteria to human. unlike other enolase genes with a wider phylogenetic distribution, or the thymidylate synthase  gene, which is ubiquitous in organisms from all three kingdoms and is highly conserved, rts demonstrates an unusual phylogenetic distribution. as shown in fig.  <dig>  the presence of rts is limited to a few groups of eubacteria including α-, β-, and γ-proteobacteria, actinobacteria, some fungi, and animal species spanning the phylogenetic range from insects to mammals. among the vertebrate species for which draft genome sequences and/or a large number of est sequences are available, we were able to identify rts sequences from all species with the exception of chicken and mouse . furthermore, we observed in all vertebrate species with sufficient genome sequences including human, chimpanzee, rat, and fugu fish, that the tyms-rts gene pair is part of a large conserved gene synteny among vertebrates . while the absence of rts sequence in chicken may be due to the insufficiency of available genome sequences or ests, we were puzzled by the failure to retrieve any rts sequences in mouse, considering the fact that the mouse genome sequence is now fairly complete and its est data is quite comprehensive. however, we recently obtained preliminary data showing expression of mouse rts protein and mrna . another unusual observation is that the rts gene does not seem to be present in e. coli while the rts gene is present in another enterobacterium,yersinia pestis. similarly, although the rts gene is present in anopheles gambiae and several other insect species, but is not found in drosophila. so far, no rts gene has been identified in any plant or yeast species despite the fact that complete genome sequences and comprehensive est sequences are available for a number of species in these lineages. we also find no rts sequences from caenorhabditis elegans or other worm genome sequences. the same is true for all archaebacteria and many eubacteria lineages. these observations suggest that the rts gene originated as a bacterial gene which was either horizontally transferred into certain animal and fungal lineages, or alternatively, was lost in all the lineages that do not contain rts genes. an interesting observation is that, while the rts branches for the animal lineage and the fungal lineage show a topology that agrees well with commonly accepted tree of life for these species, the branches for the bacterial lineages conflict with the commonly accepted tree for the bacterial lineages . the latter is demonstrated by the fact that species from the same lineage do not always group together, while species from different bacterial lineages do cluster together in many cases . for example, one β-proteobactial rts sequence  is grouped with α-proteobacterial sequences, while the other two β-proteobacterial sequences cluster with a γ-proteobacterial sequence and the three rts sequences from the high g+c gram positive bacteria are located on three different branches, which all consist of sequences from multiple groups . although not all nodes for the bacterial groups are supported by a high bootstrap value, many nodes are supported with high confidence. this type of unexpected phylotree shown by the rts sequences suggests the possibility of horizontal gene transfer among the bacteria species, which is common  <cit> . the fact that most of the bacteria and fungi that have a rts gene are human and/or animal pathogens , plant pathogens , or in one instance a plant symbiont , adds weight to the hypothesis of horizontal gene transfer events. in the case of plant pathogens, the plants can serve as a mediator between a bacterial donor and an animal acceptor. this may also suggest that the rts gene is required to create and/or maintain a certain type of host-pathogen relationship. therefore, a better understanding of the biological function of the rts gene may provide new insights for disease control related to these bacterial pathogens.

in addition to the discovery of this novel mitochondrial isoform of rts, our report also represents a good illustration of the use of comparative genomic analysis for identifying novel protein isoforms of genes and for improving existing gene predictions. through this study, we have made a comprehensive collection of rts orthologous sequences and have made a list of suggested modifications to the existing gene annotation . in addition, by searching all annotated human genes, we identified a few other genes in which evolutionarily conserved alternative upstream aug codons exist . these genes include sell , spcs <dig> , nt5c <dig> , and sdn <dig>  .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, through comparative genomic analyses we revealed an unusual phylogenetic distribution of the rts gene and identified a novel mitochondria isoform of this gene and verified it experimentally. a mitochondrial location of rts protein and phylogenetic distribution of this gene provide us with new information that will assist in elucidating its function.

