BACKGROUND
genetical genomics is currently a very active area of research, promising to improve dramatically our knowledge on the genetic architecture of complex traits, including disease susceptibility. its goal is to identify the polymorphisms responsible for the variation in gene expression levels and thus to improve our understanding of how gene networks are organised in an organism. thus far, genetical genomics experiments have been analysed considering each expression level one at a time and using fairly simple statistical models, correcting only, e.g., by sex. as a consequence, the results are a collection of successive quantitative trait loci analysis , where each gene expression level is analysed independently. it is surprising that much effort has been dedicated to issues like data normalization  <cit>  or computing efficiency  <cit>  whereas modelling the trait itself  has been severely neglected.

based on two rather reasonable assertions  a good modelling strategy should consider all available variables as potential effects in the model, and  gene expressions are highly interconnected, we suggest that an eqtl model for a given gene should consider the rest of expression levels as potential regressors as well as the markers to identify regulatory polymorphisms. the current models are rather naive, which may lead to spurious results, whereas high intercorrelation between transcript levels can make qtl signals difficult to interpret. for instance, it may not be possible to disentangle between a direct effect of the marker on the gene or an indirect  effect caused by an intermediate gene in the same or co-regulated metabolic route. here we propose a new analysis paradigm, depicted in figure  <dig>  whereby for each trait , all remaining cdna levels are potential regressors that can be included in the model.

the proposed approach provides new insight into genetical genomics data, as we argue later, but first the researcher should be aware of the interpretation of the different strategies. in the usual modelling strategy, when only markers are fitted to explain the expression level, one is interested in picking up markers associated to the trait regardless of other effects. if markers and additional correlated expression levels are included in the model, one will select only those markers that are conditionally associated to the phenotype of interest, that is, after removing the direct effect of external expression levels on the phenotype. the rationale for this is to avoid confounding and improve power by reducing environmental noise. in practice, the issue of what covariables to include can be a difficult choice. suppose that we are analyzing the effect of some polymorphisms on a phenotype in human populations. suppose also that this phenotype is affected by sex. if one includes height as well as sex in the model, and because height and sex are correlated, it might be that a 'true' marker effect is attenuated. here, fitting the marker within each sex class  could improve model performance.

a relevant question in our approach is: what is the relative importance of each set of variables, discrete  vs. continuous . this question is equivalent to disentangling the relevance of genetics vs. environment because transcript levels are part of the 'environment'. there are two broad approaches in the literature to measure the relevance of variables based, respectively, on statistical and on artificial intelligence techniques. the former is based on fitting two competing models, with and without the variable of interest; a typical measure of variable importance is the p-value obtained in, say, a likelihood ratio test. the p-value measures essentially the probability of having obtained the data when the null model is true, the smaller this probability is, the less likely the null model holds. in contrast to statistical methodologies, artificial intelligence techniques are not too popular in genetics yet. among the pleiade of artificial intelligence techniques, support vector machines  have emerged as one of the most reliable and efficient methodologies. svm are a powerful family of algorithms for learning classification and regression tasks  <cit> . they are based on the minimization of the structural risk of errors by means of well-known and well-founded techniques of quadratic programming. using the so-called kernel trick, svm can learn linear and nonlinear functions from either continuous or discrete variables. an important feature of svm is that they can successfully handle datasets with a small number of observations and thousands of independent variables, the so called 'large p small n paradigm', which make them an attractive tool for microarray data  <cit>  or for information retrieval where each document is described by a vector with as many indexes as possible words  <cit> . importantly, svm can be endowed with algorithms  <cit>  that provide an ordered list of variables according to their relevance in a prediction task. however, and in contrast to classical statistical methods, the relevance of each individual variable can not be quantified with these algorithms.

in this work we explore the consequences of model choice in eqtl studies reanalyzing public data with maximum likelihood and svm techniques. we show that, in fact, most of the variation observed in gene expression is largely explained by external expression levels, while the influence of polymorphic markers  is limited. we show that this can have a dramatic influence on the results obtained. figure  <dig> illustrates the point made in this article.

RESULTS
variable relevance
throughout this work, we compared the results for eqtl scan with two models, a first model  where the only effects are a general mean and the marker, and a second model  where external cdna levels were also included as covariate . chesler et al.  <cit>  listed a series of ~ <dig> highly significant eqtl  using a model  <dig> type strategy. one of the most significant qtl affected the expression of the gene peroxiredoxin  <dig> , which plays a major role in protecting against oxidative stress. figure  <dig>  shows the results with model , i.e., the classical approach. as expected, we found a highly significant qtl , in agreement with published results. however, when we scanned for association not only the  <dig> markers genotyped but also the rest of cdna levels, the most associated variable was actually the transcript level of gene psma <dig> . interestingly, this gene is involved in regulating the hypoxia-inducible factor-1alpha, a transcription factor important for cellular responses to oxygen tension. next, we included psma <dig> level as covariate in the eqtl model for prdx <dig> and we reanalysed the data with model , testing as before for the associated significance of each marker in turn. the results are also in figure  <dig> . although the profile is similar, the qtl is now far more significant . this observation strongly suggests that psma <dig> plays an important role in modifying the expression of prdx <dig>  but also that its influence is purely environmental and probably under different genetic control; as a result, including psma <dig> in the model removes a large part of the residual variation.

the opposite phenomenon was observed with the transcript level of lin7c, one of the most highly connected gene in the brain  <cit> . in this case, the original eqtl had a nominal p-value ~10- <dig> with the usual model . this significance decreased when sacm1l expression level was included using model  . sacm1l transcript level was the most significant factor associated with lin7c expression , i.e., much more significant than any marker. it should also be noted that the position of the maximum statistics was shifted, from marker d12mit <dig> in chromosome  <dig> to d6mit <dig> in chromosome  <dig>  interestingly, the expression level of sacm1l had an eqtl also in the neighborhood of marker d12mit <dig> with model  <dig>  this likely occurs because both traits are highly correlated . schadt et al.  <cit>  proposed to compare likelihoods p and p, where x <dig> and x <dig> are cdna measures and m, marker genotypes, in order to disentangle whether m or x <dig> are causal to x <dig>  here, we compared p vs. p but they were almost identical and thus we cannot resolve whether one gene is causal to the other by using only statistical evidence, whereas p was slightly more significant  than p, p = 10- <dig>  all this hints that lin7c and sacm1l are mediated through the same causal effects but that it seems that their association with d12mit <dig> could be actually a false positive because it is far less significant than other eqtl found in this same study.

the above considerations should not imply that the most significant variable is always an external cdna level for all genes, and thus that model  is to be preferred over model . we observed that usual model  was to be preferred in about 25% of the most significant qtl listed by chesler et al <cit> . in table  <dig>  the most significant variable was a marker rather than a transcript level in four out of ten genes . we investigated whether modeling can nevertheless be improved in these cases. to do that, we searched the next most significant effect among all external cdnas and the rest of markers, computing its p-value after fitting the qtl. we observed that the next most significant variable was a transcript which in turn was highly significant . note that this is surely an underestimation of the influence because we were considering those expression levels for which a marker  is the most significant effect. the conclusion that we can draw, again, is that external cdnas are likely to be very important factors to be considered in genetical genomics studies.

reanalyzing hotspots
the observation of eqtl hotspots, i.e., genome regions that seem to harbour a much higher number of qtl than expected by chance has been largely debated in the literature  <cit> . this is a remarkable observation and is tempting to look for a functional significance to these regions. it suggests the presence of key regulatory, polymorphic motifs in the genome that can have a profound influence on the genome transcription activity. in a previous simulation study we observed that qtl hotspots appeared even when genotypes and microarrays were shuffled, simply as a consequence of the high correlation that exists between many expression levels  <cit> . it is important to notice, though, that we can use the correlation between cdna levels to our advantage in order to improve eqtl modelling dramatically.

to investigate the nature of eqtl hotspots and the influence of model choice, we chose nine genes that were reported by chesler et al.  <cit>  as influenced by the largest trans regulatory qtl hotspot, i.e., that close to marker d6mit <dig> on murine chromosome  <dig>  the nine genes chosen were reln, chrng, slc6a <dig>  calm <dig>  mapk <dig>  adra2b, mapk <dig>  gad <dig>  and htr <dig>  as before, we fitted models  and . in all analyses with model , we found that the most significant marker was d6mit <dig>  the closest marker to d6mit <dig> and also in chromosome  <dig>  thus in agreement with published results. the p-values of the qtl with model  are in table  <dig>  they are in the order of 10- <dig> – 10- <dig>  next, we scanned all transcript levels for each of the nine genes, the most significant ones for each gene are also listed in the table. note that the p-values are much smaller than the qtl , which clearly shows that the nine expression levels studied are much more influenced by external transcript levels than by any of the polymorphisms genotyped. we also performed a qtl scan for these selected external transcripts and we found that they mapped to regions distinct from chromosome  <dig>  and thus that they were not members of the qtl hotspot . finally, we included the relevant transcript as covariate for each of the nine genes and we repeated the qtl analysis . results are also in table  <dig> .

two aspects are important. first, the qtl were more significant now than with model ; sometimes significance increased dramatically, e.g., p-value changed from 10- <dig> to 10- <dig> for gene reln. this is a clear evidence that expression levels included in the model remove noise and thus may increase power for qtl detection, as we observed previously . we did not always observe this, in other instances we found that adjusting for transcript levels decreased qtl significance . in these latter cases we can conclude that the qtl found with the simple model is an artefact and that the qtl was truly affecting other gene expression level. the second noticeable aspect in table  <dig> is that the qtl location was shifted for some transcripts . although we did not systematically search for all cdna levels affected by this qtl, it is clear that the number of the genes in the hotspot has been reduced by ~50%. this is a challenging result and calls for revisiting the significance of eqtl hotspots, as they are highly dependent on the model used. from a purely statistical – rational – point of view, a model that includes a highly correlated transcript level is to be preferred over one that includes only the marker: p-values in the order of 10- <dig> to 10- <dig> vs. ~10- <dig> 

CONCLUSIONS
including external expression levels in the model can improve statistical inference, decreasing the rate of false positives and increasing power . this is a consequence of the biological fact that regulation of gene expression is highly interconnected, resulting in the complex intercorrelations that exist in microarray data. seemingly, a high fraction of this correlation is purely environmental. in fact, as figure  <dig> suggests, expression levels are far more important than markers in explaining the observed variability. in other words, the variation in a given expression level is more likely to be affected by the expression levels of related genes than directly caused by marker polymorphisms. thus, we can argue that expression levels behave as noisy environmental factors, very much like say age, sex or batch in a regular statistical analysis. but in all likelihood, each expression level will behave differently and thus we will require specific models for each expression level. thus, automated and efficient modeling strategies are badly needed if we are to exploit all information contained in genetical genomics studies.

in conclusion, model choice is a critical yet neglected issue in genetical genomics studies. although we are far from having a general strategy for model choice in this area, we can at least propose that any transcript level is scanned not only for the markers genotyped but also for the rest of gene expression levels. some sort of stepwise regression strategy can be used to select the final model. this will illuminate what a qtl hotspot is really made of and will improve our ability to reconstruct genetic networks from genetical genomics experiments.

