BACKGROUND
a variety of clinical and pathologic evidence indicates that tumors can stimulate immune responses, such as the presence of mononuclear cell infiltrates, composed of t-cells <cit> , nk cells <cit> , and macrophages <cit>  in many different tumors.

in the past few decades, a number of studies have established correlations between prognosis and the degree of leukocyte  infiltration in a variety of cancers. however, in all of these studies, specific staining was performed on relatively thin tissue sections. in addition, labeled leukocytes were manually counted in one or more random areas of each tumor section. since the leukocytes are distributed in a three-dimensional volume of tissue, manual counting on thin tissue sections may not be truly representative of the actual numbers and spatial distribution of cells within the tissue.

several microscopy and image analysis techniques have been developed for the in vitro and in vivo three-dimensional quantification of antigens in tissues, including deconvolution microscopy <cit> , stereomicroscopy <cit>   for thicker tissue sections <cit> ), or clsm <cit> .

in deconvolution microscopy light from all planes of focus is collected, usually via a digital or video camera, and image slices are recorded onto a computer. since light is collected from the whole depth of the specimen at each focal plane, each image appears blurred, or convolved. before image analysis can be performed, the images need to be deblurred, or deconvolved to render a sharp image. depending on the thickness of the specimen this process can be very time consuming.

stereomicroscopy, a technique mainly used for dissection and tissue manipulation has experienced a resurgence in recent years for the 3-d analysis of many proteins and gene structures in tissues <cit> . stereomicroscopes have a long working distance and, using a dual light path, can generate 3d images over a large depth of field. however, for thicker specimens, stereomicroscopy is often coupled with deconvolution or clsm to improve image clarity.

in terms of speed of data acquisition, clsm is probably the most advantageous microscope technology for the production and analysis of 3d samples. clsm refocuses fluorescent light onto a pinhole which excludes up to 95% of light from outside of the focal plane, producing clear images, even in tissue up to  <dig> μm thick. one apparent major disadvantage of clsm is the initial equipment cost. however, in laboratories with a high sample throughput, this cost may be offset by its efficiency over time. this is especially important in pathology, where many specimens are analyzed and the data is required for diagnosis and prognostic determination as quickly as possible.

therefore, this study sought to design an image based method for the calculation of leukocyte numbers in thick tissue sections  using three-dimensional laser scanning confocal microscopy.

RESULTS
indirect immunofluorescence staining for leukocyte markers
indirect single immunofluorescence staining for four leukocyte markers: cd <dig> ; cd <dig> ; cd <dig>  and cd <dig> , was performed. figure  <dig>  shows representative look-through projections  for each antigen. in some tissue sections cells could be easily distinguished because of their separation and even distribution in the tissue. however, in many tissue sections, clumps of cells were observed, which increased in size and distribution with increasing cell infiltration.

effect of threshold value on cell count
in order to calculate the volume of tumor occupied by a fluorescent antigen, a threshold was applied to the image stack to include only antigen-specific fluorescent signal. in addition to background  removal, a threshold can be used to remove any residual noise resulting from setting the pmt to just include control fluorescence. the higher the threshold is set, the more fluorescence data are lost. to determine the effect of threshold setting on cell counts, three image stacks containing low, moderate or high numbers of cells were taken and the cell numbers calculated at ten threshold levels. figure  <dig>  shows a representative high cell infiltration  image  at three of the ten thresholds examined. at a threshold of  <dig>  background noise can still be clearly seen in the image, but is not present in subsequent images. at a threshold of  <dig>  background noise was minimized, whereas at threshold  <dig> significant data loss was apparent.

at any particular threshold, the cell number was determined by division of the total antigen volume by mean cell volume. to determine the mean cell volume, ten cells from each image stack were seeded to calculate the volume of all contiguous fluorescence  above the chosen threshold. figure  <dig>  shows representative projections of low, medium and high cell distributions indicating  the ten cells chosen. each cell was checked to be separate from other cells, and to be entirely within the volume scanned.

tables  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> show the calculated volumes  for image stacks containing low, medium, and high leukocyte infiltration respectively. the mean cell antigen volume  for the  <dig> cells is shown at each threshold, as well as the standard deviation of the cell antigen volume , the number of cells calculated for the image stack at each threshold, and the total antigen volume  in the image stack at the corresponding threshold value are also shown. at all levels of cell infiltration the cell count remained relatively constant, because the same threshold was used to calculate the total antigen volume and the individual cell volume. at higher cell infiltration, a larger variation in calculated cell number was observed, but was still considerably lower than the variation from manual counting. the relatively constant relationship between threshold and calculated cell number is further illustrated in figure  <dig>  which shows the effect of threshold  on the resulting cell counts  and sd  for the high cell infiltration image stack. since total antigen volume and mean cell volume were both similarly affected by changes in threshold, their ratio  also remained relatively constant at all thresholds tested. however, an increase in calculated cell number was observed in the high image stack at thresholds above seven, and was reflected in a larger standard deviation. it was not considered that the lower or higher threshold values would be selected by an operator for calculation, since obvious noise or data loss are apparent in the image stacks. to test this further, we asked  <dig> laboratory personnel  to threshold the three image stacks at a threshold level which they considered best maximized noise reduction, and minimized data loss. all personnel chose thresholds between  <dig> and  <dig> .

there was considerable variability in the cell counts performed by the laboratory personnel for the low , medium  and high  projections .

comparison between calculated and manual leukocyte counts in tumors
the number of cells in each of the four leukocyte subsets in twelve tumor samples was analyzed. approximately five image stacks per tumor were quantified for cell number: in some cases an image stack was rejected because it did not meet the criteria for inclusion . the number of image stacks  quantified for each antigen from the twelve tumors was, thus: cd <dig> , cd <dig> , cd <dig>  and cd <dig> . the number of cells in each image stack was determined directly by the computed method  and 3-d look-through projections were made for manual counts. statistically significant  correlations were observed in all cases.

comparison of leukocyte counts between tumor and non-malignant tissue
leukocytes expressing each of the four antigens were counted in seven tumors and donor matched non-malignant tissues, and their infiltration into these tissues compared . all of the non-malignant tissues showed low levels of infiltration of all leukocyte subtypes tested. in contrast, significantly increased  infiltration of all leukocyte subtypes was observed in corresponding tumor tissues.

discussion
we have designed a method for the enumeration of leukocytes in three dimensions using confocal laser scanning microscopy and image analysis software. the method has several advantages over visual assessment of leukocytes in hematoxylin and eosin stained tissue sections. specific immunostaining for the leukocyte subtypes in thick tissue sections enables the assessment of the relative numbers of several leukocytes subtypes within a single specimen. furthermore, refinement of the method by multiple immunostaining using different fluorophore tagged secondary antibodies would show the relative distribution of leukocytes within the same three dimensional volume of tissue. thick  cryosections are less difficult to cut than thin tissue sections  typically used for histological analysis. using thick tissue sections, clsm can optically image thin slices at different focal planes within the tissue, which can be reconstructed to generate a three-dimensional stack. enumeration of leukocytes in three-dimensional volumes is likely to be more representative of the true distribution of cells in the tissue, since their distribution may vary between image planes. a thin tissue section only represents one image plane for the pathologist.

image thresholding removes voxels representing background  and low level non-specific staining. by choosing an appropriate threshold, the volume of tissue occupied by specific antigen can be calculated and expressed as a percentage of the total volume scanned <cit> . manual threshold selection is subjective and the results may vary if too much or too little threshold is applied. however, in the present application, the mean cell volume is also calculated at the same threshold as the total fluorescence volume. thus, the calculated number of cells in each image stack remains relatively constant over a number of possible threshold choices . in fact, ten people who had not performed thresholding before chose thresholds between three and seven. when calculated between these thresholds, this represented a variation of only  <dig> cells  in the image stack with high cd <dig> cell infiltration. this variation was considerably lower than the  <dig> cell difference obtained when ten personnel manually counted the cells in a projection generated from the same image stack . although the two methods of counting were not significantly different , there appeared to be a tendency for manual overestimation of cell numbers, which became statistically significant when the calculated results were adjusted between three and seven . these results demonstrated a tendency to manually overestimate the number of cells at higher densities in the tissues. at lower levels of cell infiltration the manual counts compared much better. for the twelve tumor samples tested, the two methods were highly correlated for all four antigens tested .

using the calculated method, we then compared the leukocyte numbers in seven tumors with matched peripheral "non-malignant" tissue resected by the pathologist from the periphery of the tumor. it should be noted that although these tissues were assessed by the pathologist to be non-malignant, they may not necessarily be normal because of their proximity to the respective tumors. all non-malignant tissue sections showed minimal leukocyte numbers indicating a low level of infiltration . a larger variation in leukocyte numbers was observed for all cell types tested in the malignant tissues, but all tumors showed considerably increased leukocyte infiltration compared to their associated non-malignant tissue. the large variability in leukocyte infiltration into tumors may have been due to differences in the type and stage of disease in each case. since the main purpose of this work was to compare methods of leukocyte enumeration, these factors were not taken into account.

this methodology is not restricted to the image analysis package we used to obtain the data reported in the present work. for example, we have recently adapted the method to imagepro plus  with its plugin 3d constructor. many other commercially available and free packages such as nih image and image j are available which will adequately perform thresholding, seeding and volume calculations without the need for special programming. in addition, three-dimensional image stacks can also be obtained from less expensive deconvolution or stereoscopic based microscopy systems which, although more time consuming, may be better suited to the budget of smaller pathology units.

CONCLUSIONS
these data clearly demonstrate that enumeration of leukocytes using image analysis is a robust and rapid methodology which can be performed by relatively inexperienced laboratory staff. in addition, three dimensional image analysis overcomes the tendency to overestimate the number of cells in tumors with a high degree of leukocyte infiltration. data obtained from clinical samples may help clinicians to establish the extent and type of immune response ongoing in the tumor, and thereby assist in both diagnosis and therapeutic strategy for individual patients.

