BACKGROUND
flowering plants have developed from a common ancestor with mosses, liverworts, ferns, and gymnosperms over the last  <dig> million years  <cit> . most recent angiosperms do not closely resemble their ancestors, as known from the fossil record. quite a few gymnosperms  still resemble the plants known from the fossil record, and this is even more true for "lower" land plants, namely mosses, liverworts and ferns  <cit> . in addition, mosses seem to evolve with a slow molecular clock  <cit> . so, if these plants appear to be more ancient than modern flowering plants as measured by morphological means and mutation rate, does this also hold true for how they employ their genetic system?

a lot of comparative studies on protein encoding genes have already been carried out within and between the two major groups of flowering plants, mono- and dicotyledons, with rice  and arabidopsis thaliana as the most prominent examples. currently more than two million liliopsida  est are publicly available, the corresponding number for the magnoliophyta  even exceeds four million sequences. however, sequence information for other plant phyla is still scarce. there are only about  <dig>  est sequences available of both coniferophyta  and chlorophyta ,  <dig>  from bryophyta  and  <dig>  from filicophyta  . for the moss physcomitrella patens, more than  <dig>  nucleic acid sequences  are publicly available to date. this "ancient" land plant therefore is an ideal candidate to unravel some details about how simple plants encode proteins and whether they do so in a different manner from "modern" plants, as represented by the monocotyledon rice and the dicotyledon arabidopsis in this study.

physcomitrella is increasingly being used as a model plant because of its unrivalled capability among plants to include ectopic dna into its genome by means of homologous recombination , thus enabling gene replacement in a straight forward manner. as in all mosses, the haploid gametophyte is the dominant generation in the heteromorphic life cycle. in this respect the moss is different from seed plants , in which the polyploid sporophyte dominates the life cycle. it has been argued before  <cit>  that the set of genes of the respective dominant generation is equivalent, while a large proportion of moss transcripts cannot currently be assigned a putative function. these "orphan" genes might encode functions that are specific to mosses and are not present in other taxonomic groups. besides species-specific orphan genes, mosses might also possess retained genes, that have been lost in seed plants during evolution. both types of genes are candidates to encode functions that make mosses unique in terms of physiology and metabolism. for example, physcomitrella exhibits increased tolerance towards abiotic stresses  <cit> , uses proteins derived from the same gene in different cellular compartments by dual targeting  <cit>  and displays secondary metabolite pathways not known in seed plants  <cit> . in this study, following up on the initial analyses by nishiyama et al.  <cit> , we aimed to increase our knowledge of the moss transcriptome.

RESULTS
comparative blast searches
around 30% of the physcomitrella orf have homologs in both rice and arabidopsis transcriptome whereas 80% of the arabidopsis genes have a homolog in rice and 40% of the rice genes in arabidopsis . although these numbers are lower than the actual amount of sequence homologs because of filtering , they demonstrate that physcomitrella contains a lot of as yet unknown protein encoding genes that might be specific for mosses. a homology search against the taxprot dataset  reveals that  <dig> % of the predicted moss orf find a query in plants , after rigorous filtering  <dig> % remain and  <dig> % are non-redundant, i.e. do not match multiple subject sequences. the rigorous filtering  for true homologs thus necessarily decreases the set of available sequences, so that false conclusions are not made based on comparison of non-homologous sequences.

1genbank amino acid sequences as of 2004–04– <dig>  ncbi taxon ids are shown under "txid", all taxonomic crown groups with at least  <dig> sequence members were used; 2cercozoa  <cit> , cryptophyta  <cit> , euglenozoa  <cit> , glaucocystophyceae  <cit> , haptophyceae  <cit> , rhodophyta  <cit> , stramenopiles  <cit> ; 3acanthamoebidae  <cit> , alveolata  <cit> , diplomonadida  <cit> , entamoebidae  <cit> , heterolobosea  <cit> , jakobidae  <cit> , mycetozoa  <cit> , parabasalidea  <cit> 

full-length transcripts
the total number of clusters after est clustering do not equal the number of protein encoding genes. this is mainly due to partial  transcripts, i.e. a single gene is represented by more than one sequence because they do not overlap. how many of the clustered public  transcripts represent full-length coding sequences? of those sequences that yield a filtered hit against plant mrnas,  <dig> % are putatively full-length. of those,  <dig> % start with methionine, of the latter,  <dig> % contain no x .

orthologs, paralogs and mapping
the filtered hits against the arabidopsis transcriptome  were divided into non-redundant orthologs  and paralogs . as arabidopsis orthologs, we defined all those sequences for which the initial subject matches the query in the reverse search . paralogs were defined as those sequences for which this rule does not apply. this method of detecting potential orthologs has been used previously for cross-species comparisons . the three sequence sets were mapped against the arabidopsis chromosomes using blast . the distribution pattern clearly reveals the centromeric regions but otherwise does not display significant differences. although there are some chromosome and sequence set-specific differences in the rate of hits per mbp, these are not significant as measured by absolute average deviation.

taxonomic distribution and retained genes
the highest total number of non-redundant, filtered blast hits is  derived from the plant subset of the taxprot dataset , followed by the animal and fungi subsets. when looking at the hits as percentage of the search space size , it becomes evident that quite a proportion of the sequence space of lower eukaryotes  is covered. the comparatively high coverage of this "ancient" gene space suggests that mosses share many specialized genes with unicellular organisms.

 <dig> physcomitrella orf have their best blast hit not among plants . consequently, these are candidates for horizontal gene transfer or, more likely, retained genes that were lost in seed plants during evolution. we had a closer look at those  <dig> transcripts which are specific to a single taxonomic group, namely bacteria, cyanobacteria, animals or fungi . for  <dig> of those, a putative function could be assigned manually . the broad functional categories of these taxon-specific retained genes are to some extent unevenly distributed. whereas transport associated proteins are found solely among fungi, signal transduction gene products are found in both bacteria and animals. transport and metabolism associated gene products support the wealth of secondary pathways found in moss , whereas the signal transduction genes also separate the moss from seed plants in this regard. of special interest are two other functional categories among these candidate retained genes: cytotoxicity and nucleic acid modification. a broad range of cytotoxic abilities might explain why mosses can survive in moist environments mainly unplagued by microbial parasites, without the protection of a cuticula. furthermore, it is, up until now, puzzling why physcomitrella is able to integrate ectopic dna into the genome by homologous recombination with an extraordinarily high rate  <cit>  so far only found in bacteria and yeast, but in no other plant or any animal. hints to unravel this mystery might be found in the presence of genes involved in dna repair, binding and modification, as we discovered during this research.

gene structure and splice sites
the average rate of introns per gene  is the same in physcomitrella, arabidopsis and human  <cit> . the average physcomitrella intron  is longer than those of arabidopsis  and shorter than the typical human intron . furthermore, the physcomitrella intron is longer than the exon, whereas in arabidopsis it is the other way round. while the size distribution of arabidopsis introns is centered around  <dig> bp, the longer moss introns are mainly clustered around  <dig> bp . this fits the weak correlation of intron length and genome size generally found in eukaryotic organisms  <cit> . intron positions of close homologs between physcomitrella and arabidopsis are generally conserved .

the physcomitrella g/c content of 40% in the intron and 50% in the exon differs significantly from that of arabidopsis; 33% and 44%, respectively. generally, physcomitrella introns contain more thymine  than the exons. in terms of mononucleotide composition, t is overrepresented in the intron and c is underrepresented in the exon. in terms of dinucleotides, there is a significant overrepresentation of tt in the introns. outstanding trinucleotide usage are the overrepresented ttt in the intron and the stop codon tga in the exon, while the other two stop codons taa and tag are underrepresented in the moss.

a visualisation of the physcomitrella donor and acceptor sites is shown in figure 5a. comparison of the arabidopsis-trained netplantgene  <cit>  and the physcomitrella-trained svmsplice  reveals a better overall performance of the support vector machine. although netplantgene exhibits a high recall, precision is low, which is due to the large amount of false positive predictions. svmsplice predicts a lower rate of true positives , however, precision is much better. the mean values of recall and precision for both donor and acceptor site are higher for svmsplice and thus make it the method of choice for accurate prediction of physcomitrella splice sites.

composition of coding sequences and codon usage
significant differences in codon fraction usage for the three above mentioned sequence subsets  when compared with the averaged codon usage in physcomitrella and arabidopsis are shown in fig. 6a. the average g/c content of the arabidopsis cds is ~43%, whereas it is ~50% for physcomitrella . it might be argued that the est-based estimation of g/c content in physcomitrella is too high because of potential decay of at-rich sequences  <cit> . however, when calculating the g/c content for all available  <dig> full-length cds from genbank, the percentage value is also ~50% . this rate is also found in the retained genes and the arabidopsis paralogs , whereas the ortholog fraction has a significantly lower g/c content of ~49%, i.e. towards the arabidopsis nucleotide composition. codon bias in physcomitrella is positively correlated with gene expression level and g/c content of the cds  <cit> . it was argued that weak natural selection for translational efficiency is the driving force behind codon bias in the moss rather than mutational bias. given the g/c rate of 50% in the cds, a mutational bias indeed seems unlikely.

the predicted physcomitrella orf were used as background to check for significant changes in percentage codon fraction usage in the orthologs, paralogs and retained genes . in case of significant deviation  from the total set, the direction of the change relative to the arabidopsis codon usage was checked. significant deviations are shown enlarged, at = arabidopsis thaliana, pp = physcomitrella patens.

in retained genes, phenylalanine codons are underrepresented, in the orthologs this is the case for proline codons. as can also be seen from the g/c content drift mentioned above, the majority of deviating codons in the orthologs changed in the direction of the arabidopsis percentage usage. for retained genes, it is the direct opposite: the significantly deviating codons in these genes point away from the arabidopsis codon fraction usage. orthologs are thought to be functionally equivalent across taxonomic groups. the common ancestor of land plants might have had a g/c content similar to mosses, i.e. around 50%. in order to preserve efficient functioning of orthologs it might have been necessary to evolve a slightly different codon usage for these genes in mosses, as is e.g. the case in arabidopsis. the retained genes, on the other hand, are not found in seed plants and do not reflect the codon usage found there.

the average number of synonymous codons that is used in physcomitrella and arabidopsis cds is not significantly different . however, the percentage distribution of synonymous codon usage, as measured by the effective number of codons , is surprisingly dissimilar . most arabidopsis coding sequences use a lot of synonymous codons , whereas physcomitrella displays a linear percentage increase from low to high values. interestingly, around 15% of the moss genes contain no codon bias at all .

CONCLUSIONS
the genome of the ancient land plant physcomitrella patens, a moss, harbours genes of which at least 30% have a detectable homolog in seed plants. est clustering yielded a database that covers a large proportion of the transcriptome, approximately 8% of the virtual transcripts contain full-length cds.

transcripts that are clear homologs of arabidopsis genes were mapped against the arabidopsis chromosomes, along with the set of paralogs and orthologs between the two organisms. all three sequence sets could be mapped evenly across the chromosomes, revealing neither hot nor cold spots  nor differences in gene density.

while moss genes resemble those of arabidopsis, there are significant differences. introns are larger than those of the seed plant and are also longer than exons within moss, which is not the case in arabidopsis. the g/c content of exons equals the a/t content. this might reflect a certain tenacity of the mosses' genetic system and its slow mutational rate. these might be necessary characteristics, as due to haploidy in the dominant gametophyte, the chance for the propagation of a disadvantageous change is higher than in a polyploid organism.

whereas orthologs display a codon fraction usage drift towards arabidopsis, the contrary is the case for retained genes. thus, evolution of codon usage seems to be correlated with evolutionary history of protein genes. mutational bias does not seem to play a role in the evolution of moss coding sequences. while the majority of physcomitrella cds displays codon bias, there is a significant fraction  of genes that is not biased at all, possibly representing a more ancient nucleotide composition than oberved in arabidopsis. splice sites in the moss resemble those in arabidopsis, however, species-specific prediction models, like the one presented here, are necessary in order to avoid false positives. the same is true for the prediction of orf based on est data.

a high proportion of the sequence space of unicellular eukaryotes is covered by moss homologs, which apparently have not been lost since the days of the last common ancestor. the majority of moss genes find their best scoring homolog in plants. however, there are  <dig> putative retained genes that have their best blast hit among other taxonomic groups. of those,  <dig> genes are specific to a single taxonomic group, putative functional annotation could be carried out for  <dig> of these proteins. the functional annotation revealed deviations in the taxonomic distributions: certain sets of genes seem to be shared with specific taxonomic groups, for example, transport proteins with fungi or signal transduction genes with bacteria and animals. of special interest are genes that are possibly involved in cytotoxicity, metabolism and nucleic acid repair. these genes might be the reasons for some of the extraordinary capabilities of mosses, namely resistance against microbial pathogens, additional secondary pathways  and a high rate of homologous recombination.

