BACKGROUND
arsenic  is ubiquitous in the earth's crust and has widely been known as an acute poison and carcinogen  <cit> . chronic as ingestion from contaminated food supplies and drinking water is strongly associated with an increased risk of liver, kidney, skin, and lung cancer  <cit> . inorganic forms of arsenic, pentavalent arsenate  and trivalent arsenite , are more toxic than the organic forms and are highly abundant in the environment. high levels of as in soil and drinking water have been reported around the world including bangladesh, india, usa, and south america, where as in drinking water exceeds  <dig> ppb, the permissible limit established by the world health organization  <cit> . industrial and agricultural practices, including the use of as in pesticides and herbicides  <cit> , wood preservatives  <cit> , and irrigation with contaminated groundwater  <cit> , have significantly increased as levels in agricultural soils. several studies indicated that food crops such as rice and vegetables grown on as contaminated soil can accumulate high levels of as in roots, shoots and seeds  <cit> . thus as uptake by crop plants plays an important role in transfer of this toxic element into the food chain. additionally, inorganic as species are phytotoxic and the elevated concentration of as in the soil causes a significant reduction in crop yield  <cit> . therefore, developing strategies for remediation of as contaminated agricultural soil and water and decreasing the as contents in the food crops for preventing as contamination of the food chain are highly desirable. furthermore, the phytotoxic effects suffered by crops grown in soil with as residues could be overcome by developing crops resistant to as. progress towards developing such genetics-based strategies, however, has been hindered by the lack of a basic understanding of the molecular and biochemical mechanisms of as uptake and detoxification in higher plants.

recently, plants have been engineered to detoxify and accumulate as in the aboveground tissues. dhankher et al  <cit>  engineered arabidopsis with bacterial arsenate reductase, arsc, and γ-glutamylecysteine synthatase, γ-ecs, thereby increasing the as accumulation and tolerance. this innovative study showed that the pathways for as metabolism could be engineered in plants either for hyperacumulation and tolerance or preventing the uptake of as in the food chain once we better understand the details of as metabolism in plants. while the molecular mechanism of as detoxification and tolerance has yet to be fully determined in plants, it has been shown that plants detoxify as by reducing asv to asiii, which is subsequently detoxified via forming complexes with thiol-reactive peptides such as γ-glutamylcysteine , glutathione , and phytochelatins   <cit> . the asiii-thiol complexes are suggested to be sequestered into vacuoles by glutathione-conjugating pumps, gcps, although this still remains to be proven.

recently, an arsenate reductase in arabidopsis , which is a cdc <dig> phosphatase homologue, has been isolated and characterized  <cit> . the rnai-mediated silencing of atacr <dig> increased the sensitivity of arabidopsis to asv but not to asiii, and the acr2-deficient arabidopsis plants translocated significantly higher amount of as in the aboveground tissues as compared to wild type plants  <cit> . arsenate reductases have also been isolated from p. vitatta and rice that complemented the asv sensitivity of yeast mutants deficient in arsenate reductase, acr <dig>  <cit> . in addition, a glutaredoxin, pvgrx <dig>  has been reported to have a role in regulating the intracellular levels of asiii in p. vittata  <cit> .

a comparative transcriptome analysis of asv and asiii stress in rice seedlings showed differential expression of a wide array of transcripts encoding transporters, regulatory genes, and genes involved in various stress responses  <cit> . recently, two silicon transporters, lsii and lsiii, which belong to the nodulin 26-like intrinsic proteins  subfamily of the plant aquaporins, have been shown to co-transport asiii and thus playing a major role in the entry of asiii into rice roots  <cit> . other members of nip subfamily from arabidopsis, rice, and lotus have been shown to facilitate the bidirectional transport of asiii in yeast lacking the endogenous aquaglyceroporin transporter, fps <dig>  <cit> .

several plant species, especially members of brassicaseae and pteridophytes such as p. vittata, have been identified as promising candidates for phytoremediation  <cit> . in spite of all the recent as-related studies, we are still far from a comprehensive understanding of as uptake, detoxification, and sequestration in plants including p. vittata. therefore, a better understanding of the molecular and biochemical mechanism of as uptake and detoxification in plants is needed to develop cost-effective strategies for phytoremediation as well as for engineering of as resistant food crops with reduced as accumulation. c. abyssinica, a member of brassicaceae commonly known as 'abyssinian mustard', is a non-food, high biomass crop with short life cycle that holds potential for efficient phytoremediation of arsenic contaminated soils and sediments. c. abysinnica, referred to here as crambe, can be grown wherever oilseed rape is grown and it does not out-cross with canola or any other agriculture crop  <cit> . moreover, crambe is highly resistant to as and other heavy metals, and accumulates significantly higher levels of as as compared to other brassica species  <cit> . for these reasons, we selected crambe to study the molecular mechanism of as accumulation and detoxification and identify genes that are differentially regulated by asv exposure. in this study, we isolated differentially expressed cdnas from crambe exposed to asv employing the pcr-select suppression subtraction hybridization  approach. we report here many uncharacterized novel transcripts as well as those participating in known biochemical pathways that are differentially expressed due to arsenate exposure.

RESULTS
arsenic accumulation and tolerance in crambe
in order to select a plant suitable for studying as tolerance, we compared as accumulation in crambe plants to that of five other brassica family members, namely brassica napus, b. compestris cv turkey, b. compestris cv yellow sarson, b. oleracea and b. rapa. crambe plants were more tolerant to as than the various brassica species examined and accumulated significantly higher amounts of as in aboveground shoot tissues followed by b. compestris and b. rapa . similar results have been shown for uptake of as and cd in crambe  <cit> . this suggests that crambe has an inherent capacity to accumulate as and other toxic metals at higher levels than other brassica species. thus, crambe plants are highly suitable for examining asv stress response. to determine the optimum concentration of asv required for inducing plant response, we treated  <dig> days old crambe seedlings with varying concentrations of sodium arsenate  for seven days. the fresh weight of plants decreased moderately at  <dig> and  <dig> μm sodium arsenate concentrations with no symptoms of severe cellular damage . at higher concentrations , however, asv was toxic to plants as they were severely stunted with highly reduced biomass and had visible injury symptoms on leaves. low levels of asv  have little effect on fresh weight or plant morphology. therefore, an effective concentration of  <dig> μm sodium arsenate was selected to treat crambe seedlings to induce asv stress.

differentially expressed crambe transcripts in response to arsenate stress
we used a pcr-select ssh approach to isolate the differentially expressed transcripts from crambe in response to asv exposure. as the ratio of driver to tester affects the stringency of the subtraction, two parallel subtractions were performed varying the driver/tester ratio and thus a total of  <dig> subtracted cdna clones were obtained. a differential screening procedure finally identified  <dig> clones containing the differentially expressed mrna sequences eliminating a large number of false positives as visible on the blots . we subjected all  <dig> subtracted cdna sequences to homology search against the ncbi nucleotide database and found that they represented  <dig> different coding transcripts . these crambe cdna sequences were highly similar to that of arabidopsis, as both species belong to the brassicaceae family. a number of transcripts in our subtracted cdna library were homologous to well characterized proteins, however several transcripts encode uncharacterized proteins that could be involved in novel pathways of as metabolism in plants.

the identity of the subtracted cdnas suggested that asv stress significantly affects pathways related to oxidative stress, defense, ion transport, sulfur assimilation, signal transduction, and photosynthesis and metabolism. among the subtracted cdna sequences , glutathione-s-transferase  was represented by the maximum number of clones  followed by the heat shock proteins , various reductases , and proteins in the ubiquitin pathway  indicating the significance of asv as an acute cytotoxin. an iron-binding oxidoreductase  that participates in phenylpropanoid metabolism and has a functional domain similar to that of anthocyanidin synthase  <cit>  represented 12% of cdna clones in the library. most of the remaining sequences encode proteins involved in various metabolic pathways including sulfate assimilation, carbohydrate and nitrogen metabolism, and amino acid synthesis. asv stress also induced several general stress and defense-related proteins. transcripts that code for a cation transporter associated protein, chac, and a secondary multidrug and toxin extrusion pump  along with many proteins of unknown function were also present in the library.

an arsenic-induced transcription profile has recently been reported in arabidopsis  <cit>  and rice  <cit>  and identified gsts as highly represented proteins in response to asv exposure, followed by antioxidant synthesis and proteins involved in sulfur transport and metabolism. our results for the transcriptional response of crambe to asv support this consensus. in addition, our library contained the transcripts encoding glucanases, rna binding proteins, proteins involved in amino acid biosynthesis as reported in arabidopsis  <cit> , as well as hsps, mate, glucosidases, jasmonic acid synthesis, and glyceraldehyde 3-phosphate dehydrogenase  as reported in rice  <cit> . however, almost 50% of the sequences identified in our subtraction library have not been reported in as related expression studies in other plant species. important among them, were the serine palmitoyl transferase , adenylyl phosphosulfokinase , chac, mate, pathogenesis and defense related proteins , transport protein particle component bet3p like  involved in vesicular trafficking and the proteins with unknown functions. based on the sequence identity and their functions in various metabolic pathways, we clustered the transcripts into different functional groups as discussed below.

oxidative stress and antioxidants
proteins involved in oxidative stress were highly represented in our subtracted cdna library. there were four transcripts with 75% identity to the known aldo/keto reductases  and five transcripts similar to peptide methionine sulfoxide reductases . akr and pmsr have established roles in mitigating oxidative protein damage. arabidopsis plants over-expressing pmsr <dig> were tolerant to methyl viologen, ozone, and metals such as zn and mn, illustrating its role as a vital antioxidant  <cit> . recently, members of the nadph dependent akr family have been portrayed as antioxidants as well as cellular detoxification enzymes  <cit> . arsenic has been shown to interact with phospholipid bilayers and thus modifying the properties of biomembranes by altering membrane fluidity  <cit> . serine palmitoyl transferase , which catalyses the initial step of sphingolipid biosynthesis was present in our library, and was upregulated by asv  and ozone treatments . the lethal phenotype of spt knockouts and reduced growth of arabidopsis lines with rnai downregulated spt, illustrates the vital role of these molecules in membrane integrity  <cit> .

the jasmonic acid signaling pathway is thought to mediate biotic as well as abiotic stress signaling. the 12-oxophytodienoate  with structural resemblance to jasmonate is the first metabolic intermediate in the jasmonate synthesis pathway. it has been shown that the opda was capable of inducing the opr, several gsts and genes containing xenobiotic responsive elements  <cit> . our subtracted library contains multiple copies of opda reductase , which was upregulated both in arsenate  and ozone treatment . recently, members of the opr family  have been shown to reduce the xenobiotic  <dig> ,6-trinitrotoluene  in arabidopsis  <cit> . these studies and the upregulation of opr in response to asv exposure in crambe suggest the significance of oprs in signaling and detoxification of toxic pollutants.

glutathione-s-transferases and sulfate assimilation
transcripts belonging to the glutathione-s-transferases  form the largest group in the subtracted cdna library. most of these transcripts  fall in the tau subfamily , while the remaining sequences  are similar to the phi subfamily. gsts are considered to be involved in detoxification of both endogenous and xenobiotic compounds with electrophilic centers by the nucleophilic addition of glutathione  <cit> . members of the abc transporter family, human multidrug resistant proteins  and yeast cadmium factor <dig> , were found to export glutathione conjugated asiii out of the cytoplasm  <cit> . however, gst mediated conjugation of glutathione with inorganic ions has not been proven. gsts might be mitigating oxidative stress by other means as ectopic expression of tomato gst significantly improved the tolerance of yeast to h2o <dig> induced oxidative stress  <cit> .

another sequence present in our library, monodehydroascorbate reductase  participates in the glutathione-ascorbate redox cycle that is responsible for the active oxygen species  scavenging process  <cit> . ascorbate reacts with aos and produces an unstable compound, monodehydroascorbate  that dissociates into ascorbate and dehydroascorbate . the later is eventually reduced to ascorbate by dha reductase using reduced glutathione as the source of electrons  <cit> . however, the increased regeneration of ascorbate directly from mdha due to higher levels of mdar could decrease the demand for glutathione  <cit> . it has been shown that tobacco seedlings overexpressing a tobacco gst exhibited a concomitant increase in the expression of mdar, possibly due to a lower amount of reduced glutathione  <cit> . surprisingly, both the gst-tau and mdar in our subtracted library displayed identical time-dependent expression patterns in response to arsenate , which is in agreement with a possible role of diminishing cellular concentration of gsh on induction of mdar.

our library also contains genes related to biosynthesis of cysteine, a precursor of glutathione biosynthesis, thus emphasizing the role of gsh in arsenic detoxification. cysteine biosynthesis represents the reductive sulfate assimilation pathway. this is initiated by adenylylation of sulfate by sulfate adenylyl transferase or adenosine phosphosulfurylase  followed by its reduction to sulfite by aps reductase  and then to sulfide by sulfite reductase . the sulfide is incorporated into o-acetyl serine by cysteine synthase  <cit> . considering the occurrence of elevated levels of gsh in plants overexpressing cysteine synthase  <cit> , the presence of highly upregulated sir and aps in our library prompted us to speculate that there is an overall increase in glutathione synthesis under asv stress. further studies are needed to establish a clear role for these enzymes in as metabolism.

ubiquitin-proteasome pathway
genes involved in the proteasomal degradation system constitutes 8% of the subtracted cdnas in our library. this includes the proteolytic beta-subunit of the 20s particle, polyubiquitin  <dig>  and an ubiquitin-associated protein. the elevated expression of 20s proteasome subunits and ubq <dig> indicated that, most likely, the oxidized or the arsenite bound proteins in asv stressed plant cells were ubiquitinated for proteasome-mediated degradation. besides, the ubiquitin-associated protein present in our subtraction library contained a zinc ion-binding domain, which could be a crambe homologue of an ubrp <dig> type of ubiquitin ligase  that transfers the activated ubiquitin to target proteins  <cit> . therefore, we suggest that the proteasome-mediated protein degradation machinery is vital to counteract the toxicity induced by as. however, further studies are needed to elucidate the exact roles of the genes involved in the proteasomal degradation system in as metabolism and detoxification.

transporters
two membrane transporters, a multidrug and toxin extrusion pump  and a putative cation transporter associated protein , were also found in the pool of our subtracted cdna clones. mate belongs to a large family of secondary transporters with  <dig> orfs in the a. thaliana genome. an arabidopsis mate transporter, atdtx <dig>  was reported to transport alkaloids, antibiotics and other toxic compounds  <cit> . in addition, ectopic expression of atdtx <dig> conferred cd resistance to bacterial cells and two members of this family were upregulated in as treated rice seedlings  <cit> . in prokaryotes, the putative transporter regulatory protein chac is thought to be associated with a ca2+/h+ cation transporter, chaa. a chac homologue from rice, osarp, conferred salt tolerance when overexpressed in tobacco  <cit> , suggesting a role for chac in abiotic stress tolerance. these transporters have not yet been characterized in plants and further studies are needed to understand their role in arsenic metabolism.

unknown novel proteins
there were five subtracted cdna sequences that did not match to any of the characterized proteins in the database. however, they have homologs in arabidopsis with very high sequence similarity, but with unknown function, and these transcripts were named as uk  with their colony id. for example, uk <dig>  one of the novel sequences, has a methyl transferase and a suppressor of variegation-enhancer of zeste-trithorax  domains for transferring a methyl group to its substrates from s-adenosyl methionine. previously characterized arsenic methyl transferases in rabbit liver demonstrated a gsh-dependent transfer of methyl group from s-adenosyl methionine to as  <cit> . further characterization of these unknown novel sequences will shed light on their role in as metabolism.

validation of pcr-select subtraction data by rt-pcr
in order to confirm the upregulation of the subtracted cdna clones in response to asv exposure, a semi-quantitative rt-pcr was performed for each gene present in the subtracted cdna library. nearly 85% of the transcripts present in our library responded within  <dig> hrs after the asv treatment . both akr and pmsr proteins were upregulated within  <dig> hrs after the as treatment and showed a similar expression pattern up to  <dig> hrs. mdar and opr responded within  <dig> hrs of asv treatment and transcripts of mdar continued to increase several folds higher at  <dig> hrs . a similar pattern of transcriptional response was observed in the case of spt, known to participate in the ros response. transcripts of both subfamilies of gsts were upregulated within  <dig> hrs of asv treatment and the mrna levels remained high throughout the period of as treatment.

among the enzymes in sulfate assimilation, sir showed strong induction throughout the duration of asv treatments. the transcripts level of apsk increased consistently, however, aps was upregulated only at  <dig> hrs and then decreased after  <dig> hrs. since the energetics of the activation of sulfate favors the reverse reaction  <cit> , a delay in the induction of aps was expected as compared to the downstream enzymes in sulfate assimilation. the ubq <dig> and 20s beta-subunit were significantly upregulated at  <dig> hrs and this higher expression level remained unaltered at all the time points tested. the expression pattern of the ubiquitin-associated protein was noticeably different, however, with a sharp increase in mrna levels at  <dig> hrs and then decreased at the following time intervals. the secondary transporter, mate, was induced in as treated seedlings only after  <dig> hrs of exposure to asv, whereas, chac was induced at  <dig> hrs and continued the higher level of expression at  <dig> and  <dig> hrs. the unknown sequences, uk <dig> and uk <dig> were consistently upregulated at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> hrs after asv treatment, whereas, uk <dig> and uk <dig> showed maximum mrna levels at  <dig> hrs and then decreased steadily over time. the unknown protein with a domain similar to the luminal binding protein  was upregulated only after  <dig> hrs with further increase in expression at  <dig> hrs.

the expression levels of the sequences corresponding to the glycoprotein edgp, febox, hsp <dig>  β-tubulin, and trapp beta <dig> were upregulated and maintained many fold higher expression level at  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hrs after asv treatment. a similar pattern but at lower expression levels was observed in case of thioglucosidase, tryptophan synthase, cysteine proteinase, and aldose epimerase. contrary to this trend, both trypsin inhibitor and defense related proteins were strongly induced only after  <dig> hrs of asv exposure. the differential regulation of most of these subtracted cdna suggests their role in as metabolism and detoxification processes.

comparison with phosphate and ozone stress
a comparison of the expression of the homologous transcripts in arabidopsis in response to phosphate deficiency and ozone-induced oxidative stress revealed an overlapping effect of these related stress conditions . expression levels of one third of the sequences in the subtracted cdna library were affected by varying phosphate level in the media and strikingly, all of them were found to have higher mrna levels in phosphorus deficiency. this trend was verified in crambe by semi-quantitative rt-pcr in seedlings grown with or without phosphate for  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hrs as short-term and  <dig> and  <dig> days as long-term exposure. in crambe, only a few transcripts such as cysteine proteinase, thioglucosidase, aldose epimerase, and pmsr showed increased transcription within  <dig> hrs of phosphate deficiency . however, the transcripts encoding edgp, akr, trypsin inhibitor, fbpa, gsts, uk <dig>  tryptophan synthase, defense related protein, uk-lum, and uk <dig> were upregulated after  <dig> days of phosphorus deficiency.

lp = low phosphate ns = non significant ** significant at p =  <dig>  *significant at p =  <dig> 

ozone is known to induce oxidative stress and transcripts encoding enzyme with antioxidant property were upregulated in response to ozone stress. one-third of the transcripts related to the subtracted cdnas in our library showed elevated expression levels when arabidopsis seedlings were subjected to oxidative stress by ozone . this supported the previously reported observations of as-induced ros resulting in lipid peroxidation and higher sod activity in holcus lanatus  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
present study proves that crambe plants have the potential for as phytoremediation because they are highly tolerant to as and in addition can accumulate high levels of this toxic metal in the above ground parts. moreover, our study identifies several genes that are highly upregulated in response to asv stress and that encode novel proteins and proteins involved in various vital metabolic pathways. these arsenate-induced proteins may play a crucial role in as metabolism in plants. by further characterizing these differentially expressed genes, we may be able to acquire knowledge essential for developing novel strategies for efficient phytoremediation as well as engineering as tolerant crop plants with reduced translocation of this deadly metalloid to the edible parts of plants.

