BACKGROUND
the circular genome of e. coli is still an object of intense scientific research . it is a rich source of information on the organization of gene regulation, the interplay of different types of control exerted on gene expression, a model system for analyzing dna topology, the model for which the most detailed electronically accessible transcriptional regulatory network has been compiled.

many processes, acting on a broad range of scales, contribute to the evolution of bacterial chromosomes. genes are organized in operons, i.e., groups of genes sharing a regulatory domain. the genome is shaped by point mutations, large-scale rearrangements, strand breaks and inversions during replication. the gene inventory is modified by gene duplications or deletions and lateral or horizontal transfer of genes. it is striking that an ever closer look at statistical properties of data reveals ever more systematic information, shaped by evolution, on an ever broader range of length scales.

starting from the work by de martelaere and van gool   <cit>  and jurka and savageau   <cit>  the gene density along the circular chromosome of e. coli has been discussed as a potential source of information on the evolutionary shaping of the system and in particular as a means of using dna topology  for regulatory purposes .

the papers by warren and ten wolde   <cit>  and képès   <cit>  focus on distances between genes or operons. both are studies of the specific patterns in the distributions of distances between regulatory pairs . warren and ten wolde   <cit>  find a substantially reduced distance between operons in such regulatory pairs, suggesting an evolutionary pressure to reduce such distances for efficient regulation. for obtaining this, they use classical characteristics of point process statistics, namely partial pair correlation functions and nearest neighbor distance probability density functions.

képès   <cit>  observe a periodicity in the distances between regulator and target, where the period length is in the same order of magnitude as known loop domains in the 3d organization of the e. coli chromosome.

more recently, hermsen et al.   <cit>  observed that genes with opposite orientation have a bias towards larger distances, when oriented away from each other  compared to those oriented towards each other . they argue that this bias is due to the larger size of the upstream control region compared to the downstream control region.

darling et al.   <cit>  discuss biases in genomic inversions with respect to the replichores and other patterns of genome rearrangement in bacterial chromosomes. another important factor influencing gene-gene distance statistics on a very general level is gene clustering. the origin of observed gene clustering is attributed to gene duplication and divergence, an evolutionary advantage of clustering, as it might increase a gene's chance for horizontal gene transfer or, lastly, selective advantage of gene clusters due to functional coupling and the efficient organization of transcription . from the systems perspective, mainly the regulatory control mediated by direct binding of transcription factors has been investigated. the compilation of these interactions for e. coli into a database  <cit>  allows the construction of a transcriptional regulatory network   <cit> . this view yields deep topological insights into the hierarchical organization of trns  and their composition out of specific network motifs . the trn has been used for the interpretation of expression patterns , revealing both the potential and the limitations of this perspective. in particular, recently it became obvious that other effects with very different regulatory mechanism have to be taken into account, like alterations of the dna structure on a small  <cit>  and larger  <cit>  scale. thus, understanding the organizational logic of gene regulation necessitates a clear distinction of the different control types in the first place, as a prerequisite for the assessment of their impact in regulation.

another link between these two research areas, gene distribution and trn, comes from the observation that gene neighborhood explains some features of observed gene expression patterns . in particular, marr et al.   <cit>  analyze the interplay between two types of control in gene expression profiles in e. coli, one network-mediated and the other mediated by dna topology.

these two control types have been termed digital  and analog , respectively  <cit> .

the statistical properties of gene distributions and gene spacings have been studied to detect deviations from randomness and interpret these deviations in a suitable evolutionary context. to a large extent, these investigations differ  predominantly in the categories of genes analyzed. in the present paper we show results for two analysis steps, where the first analysis distinguishes between two classes. analysis i discusses genes involved in regulation  and genes not involved in regulation mediated by transcription factors . analysis ii consists of pairs of genes regulated by a common transcription factor. distances between the genes in such a pair will be contrasted to the distances between arbitrary genes.

the biological hypothesis behind these categories is that different means of gene regulation essentially have different length scales. the novel feature of our approach lies in two points:  the distribution of regulated/regulating genes vs.  isolated genes has not been studied before. our finding here, a pronounced deviation from randomness for the isolated genes, fits to the hypothesis stemming from previous investigations of control types in gene expression patterns ;  in order to detect deviations from randomness we employ different non-classical types of correlation functions. our hypothesis, based on the findings from marr et al.   <cit> , is that the existence of distinct logical types of control  has a systematic impact on the statistical features of gene distributions. in particular, distances between isolated genes and all others should be smaller than average distances between genes, as isolated genes tend to be co-regulated by spatial neighborhood via the 3d structure of the genome.

results are in the following presented both on the level of individual genes and on the level of operons.

RESULTS
first we present the gene distance distributions for the two gene classes, . then we discuss pair correlation functions g, partial pair correlation functions gij, mark connection functions pij, connectivity correlation functions c, and control correlation functions k <dig> .

thus we are confronted with problems of point process statistics , where the genes or operons are the points. they are marked by  <dig> or  <dig>  corresponding to the classes above, 1: involved in regulation, 2: isolated.

after the discussion of the nearest neighbor distances we report now on the correlation functions. first we discuss the pair correlation functions g, see figure  <dig>  they indicate the well-known fact that the positions both of the genes and operons are not completely randomly distributed, i. e. according to a poisson process, where g =  <dig>  in contrast, they are more regularly distributed, probably simply due to the finite size of the objects, as is shown by the values of g smaller than  <dig> for small s.

typical gene sizes range from a few hundred bp to several thousand bp with the mean size centered around  <dig> kpb.

there is even a maximum for distances of  <dig> and  <dig> kbp, while for larger values the curves approach fast the value  <dig>  which corresponds to absence of location correlation. the range of correlation is for the operons somewhat longer than for the genes, it goes until  <dig> kbp.

a suitable tool for analyzing the relative contributions of the different categories to these correlations is the partial pair correlation function gij with ij =  <dig> , ij =  <dig>  and ij =  <dig> , respectively.

the curves for g <dig>  however, are new and, to a certain extent, unexpected: the distances between isolated and regulatory genes do not show a peak at intermediate distances. obviously, the repulsion between isolated and regulatory genes is stronger and longer than that of genes of the same type, namely  <dig> kbp. in contrast, for operons it is shorter, only  <dig> kbp.

the term "repulsion" is used here in a simplifying sense, in order to say that there is a tendency that the distances between isolated and regulatory genes are larger than between genes of the same type. this may be a result of real repulsion as well as of relative "attraction" of the members of one class towards itself. we interpret this repulsion as an unmixing of genes predominantly regulated by transcription factors  and genes predominantly regulated by the 3d structure of the genome . for the first type  distance correlations should be less important than for the second type  where regulation is mediated  by the neighborhood of genes on the genome.

it should be noted that the partial pair correlation functions gij compared to the mark connection functions pij are individually normalized. in contrast to pii we see maxima of gii around  <dig> kbp. comparison between the types  <dig> and  <dig> shows that regulatory genes are more regularly distributed than isolated genes ). we would also like to point out that the estimates of the partial pair correlation function and mark connection function depend continuously on the proportions of class  <dig> and class  <dig> genes in this analysis . we thus expect that small fluctuations in the data will leave the main results of our analysis intact.

both, in the partial pair correlation functions g <dig> and in the mark connection function p <dig> one can see that the two classes  repel each other. on the level of the operons this repulsion is less clearly visible ; in general, operons are more irregularly spaced than the genes. in all these cases, this can be explained by the elimination of many short  distances from consideration, when passing from the gene level of description to the operon level.

the second group of correlation functions describes distances between points  under common regulation. first we look at the probability for two regulatory  points at a distance s that there is a regulation relationship between them. this is expressed in terms of the connectivity correlation function c, which is given in figure  <dig>  the curves show that there is a critical distance s <dig> between  <dig> and  <dig> kbp such that for s larger than s <dig> the probability that the two points regulate another decreases continuously. the numerical values for the operons are clearly larger than those for the genes, indicating a higher systematic .

finally, figure  <dig> shows the curves for the control correlation functions k <dig>  now only passive points are considered, a subset of the regulatory points. the probability of interest is that the two points considered are regulated by the same  other point. since the basic point processes for c and k <dig> are different, namely 1-points and passive points, no simple inequality between both functions must hold true. the function k <dig> thus indicates that the three objects involved  are preferentially close together.

how do the two categories, regulatory genes  and isolated genes , compare with experimental information on gene regulation? we used a list of supercoiling-sensitive genes from  <cit>  and compared it with the two categories of genes discussed in our manuscript . figure  <dig> shows the ratio of isolated and regulatory genes for both experimental classes , normalized by the number of genes in the two categories; for clarity, a value of one  has been subtracted. the first value in figure  <dig> is thus   - 1). if we assume that supercoiling-sensitive genes are genes, for which analog control is systematically more important than digital control, we expect a larger percentage of isolated genes to be in this group. even though this test can only provide very indirect evidence, the effect is clearly visible in figure  <dig>  as the first value deviates the strongest from zero. for non-sensitive genes, as well as for all random samplings the values are close to zero. it should be pointed out, however, that the statistical significance is not high enough to form a solid basis for interpretation. the more sophisticated techniques, which lead to the previous figures, are indeed necessary for this.

our statement that short distances and analog control are qualitatively related can also be checked on the level of this data set. while it should be noted that our key result is a statistical signal emerging from the collective ensemble of genes , we again resort to the data from  <cit>  and compare a histogram of inter-gene distances obtained from supercoiling-sensitive genes with a histogram obtained from a random selection of genes. the trend towards smaller distances is clearly seen. this figure is included as supplementary information .

the second data set is taken from  <cit> , where the protein occupancy landscape  has been measured. the authors distinguish between transcriptionally silenced extensive protein occupancy domains  and highly expressed extensive protein occupancy domains . figure  <dig> shows the distance of isolated genes and regulatory genes from these domains in a cumulative plot. while no substantial difference between the isolated and regulatory genes is seen for the heepods , the distances of isolated genes to tsepods are clearly shorter than those of regulatory genes , pointing again towards a biological significance of this distinction between isolated and regulatory genes and also towards a stronger importance of analog control  for isolated genes.

the inset in figure 10b summarizes the two parts of figure  <dig> by showing the difference between the isolated gene curve and the regulatory gene curve from figure 10a  and from figure 10b , respectively. a particular interesting feature seen in the inset is that at short distances the full curve goes up and the dotted curve goes down, i.e. there are  far more isolated genes in the vicinity of transcriptionally silenced epods and more regulatory genes in the vicinity of highly expressed epods.

lastly, we looked at pairs  =  of genes, taking into account the orientation of genes on the respective strand. figure  <dig> distinguishes between i - r and r - i and shows the cumulative distances for these two cases . we find strong differences between these cases, again suggesting that "isolated" and "regulatory" are meaningful categories for our analysis. additionally, these differences could indicate that the larger size of the regulatory regions in the r category is a contributor to the repulsion we observe between the two categories.

CONCLUSIONS
patterns  in the genome of e. coli have been studied on many different scales.

here we analyzed another facet of this topic by distinguishing between genes involved and not involved in regulation based on transcription factors. our key finding is that these two classes, regulatory and isolated genes display a statistical repulsion. furthermore, the  partial pair correlation function has a peak at shorter distances for isolated genes than for regulatory genes. this preference of shorter distances for isolated genes is also visible in the mark connection function and is supportive of our hypothesis that analog control is more important for this class of genes than for the regulatory genes, for which digital control is a longer-ranging alternative.

whether the statistical properties of inter-gene distances discussed here originate from the need to organize gene regulation or from the dynamics of genome rearrangement cannot be ultimately decided based on the data at hand.

minimal models of genome arrangement dynamics and its impact on gene expression could be a useful tool for deciding whether the distance pattern between genes is indirectly shaped  by these dynamics, rather than being evolutionarily constraint to contribute more directly to gene regulation.

the statistical differences between isolated and regulatory genes described here suggest that, indeed, the genes currently classified as isolated from the perspective of the available trn are systematically different from the genes involved in regulation. we by no means want to suggest that  these genes are indeed unregulated nor  that the current version of regulondb  is complete. however, when considering the extreme cases of isolated genes being just gaps in the database and, on the other hand, isolated genes being systematically regulated by other means, our results support the latter view.

even though we consider our findings in an evolutionary context  we here do not directly discuss the comparative genomics aspect of it. it would be particularly interesting to analyze the degree of evolutionary conservation as a function of the distance between genes and separately for the two categories of genes. a hypothesis for such an extension of our analysis could be that pairs of genes contributing strongly to the patterns we observe, have a higher degree of evolutionary conservation. this is, indeed, a whole work package we plan to tackle in a future investigation.

eventually one needs to arrive at a more holistic view of the system and explain the interplay between gene arrangement, dna binding site distributions, physical properties of dna binding sites, the architectural properties of the transcriptional regulatory network and the spatial gene expression patterns, in order to understand the binding site code behind global gene expression and to unravel the universal design principles of transcriptional regulation.

