BACKGROUND
it is now a common belief that single nucleotide variations in the human genome are responsible for influencing traits such as differences in drug metabolism and disease risk. these variations are referred to as single nucleotide polymorphisms  and several large-scale technologies have recently been developed for scoring of thousands of snps and approaching whole-genome genotyping  <cit> .

however, for smaller scale projects where potential genes are already known, technologies for genotyping of many samples instead of snps and in addition retain high accuracy and throughput, are more attractive compared to assays that are cost effective per snp. a flexible choice of snps is also important instead of a pre-defined set of snps. there are several technologies already used in academic contexts but the earliest paralleled assays relied upon hybridization of short allele-specific probes to the target dna  <cit> . however, improvements in microarray-based technologies in terms of accuracy have been achieved by enzymatic means  <cit> . one of these technologies involves allele-specific extension  which utilizes the ability of dna polymerase to distinguish matched and mismatched 3'-termini of primers. however, a number of reports have shown that some mismatched 3'-ends can be elongated, giving false positive signals  <cit> . nevertheless, as previously described, by exploiting the fact that the mismatched primers have slower reaction kinetics, the problems associated with ase can be circumvented by including a protease  that degrades the polymerase  <cit> . in the protease-mediated allele-specific extension , the protease constrains the elongation reaction and thus prevents incorrect nucleotide incorporation to mismatched 3'-termini primers.

in this work, an automated prase assay with a tag-microarray detection system has been used and a comprehensive comparison of genotyping results with pyrosequencing  <cit>  has been done. ten polymorphic positions previously studied with pyrosequencing  <cit>  for their suggested association as prothrombotic genetic variations  <cit>  were used . these were analyzed on genomic dna from unrelated dna samples of caucasian/scandinavian origin from a cohort of patients presenting with symptoms of acute chest pain  <cit> . a total of  <dig> genotypes were scored by each method and accordingly this study offers a thorough characterization of a microarray-based technique in terms of accuracy, robustness and variability.

RESULTS
the prase assay employed for parallel genotyping of snps is outlined in figure  <dig> with some minor modifications to the original protocol  <cit> , see methods for details. extracted genomic dna is amplified in a nested pcr to achieve high specificity as well as to avoid extensive optimization of the multiplex amplification. amplicons of minimal and similar sizes  were chosen for the inner pcr to minimize the amount of pcr optimizations. the amplification products are immobilized on magnetic beads via biotin-streptavidin binding. by using a solid phase reaction, full automation of  <dig> genotyping reactions in parallel could be facilitated with a magnet-equipped pipetting robot. the washes of the  <dig> robot tips were now optimized to keep contaminations between sample rows undetectable . the genotyping protocol takes approximately  <dig>  hands-off hours and  <dig> minutes of hands-on. this was followed by a one hour microarray detection of the  <dig> samples on one standard slide. in brief, after pcr product immobilization and clean-ups, the allele-specific extension primers are hybridized to ssdna and the multiplex prase reaction is carried out by use of cy <dig> labeled dntps, allowing fluorescence detection. the products of the prase reaction are then hybridized to a tag-microarray via unique tag-sequences included in the extension primers. the generic signature tag-arrays allow the genotyping results for the snps to be separated into different spots. a custom made silicone rubber mask was used to divide each slide into  <dig> identical wells , facilitating analysis of  <dig> samples in parallel. the fluorescence signals for each pair of allele-specific primers were counted with an image analysis software. a script automatically visualizes the results as cluster diagrams for each snp and genotypes the samples by calculating allelic fractions . afs are set to be the intensity from allele  <dig>  divided by the sum of intensities from both alleles. the afs are then plotted for each snp against the logarithm of the sum of both signals. an example of a raw data image of an entire slide and the corresponding cluster diagrams for the  <dig> samples on the slide is shown in figure  <dig>  the boundaries for the individual clusters are set as ±  <dig> sd from the mean af within each cluster. this control was used to increase stringency and thus data points that fall outside clusters are classified as "no call".

to investigate the variability between tag sequences, each allele-specific extension primer was designed with two alternative tag sequences. the cluster diagrams for each of the primer pair combinations were compared  and all combinations gave similar clusters as compared to the diagrams presented in figure  <dig>  indicating that the cluster distributions were mainly related to the extension rather than the hybridization properties of the tag sequence. however, for itgb <dig> the clusters were shifted towards the left but functional when using one of the primer pairs. this can be due to either differences in hybridization efficiency or failure in the primer synthesis.

in addition, in order to investigate the effect of protease on genotyping calls, eight samples were genotyped in the presence and absence of protease. without protease , correct clustering could be obtained for  <dig> out of the  <dig> snps whereas with protease  correct clustering was obtained for all snps. the snps that did not render  <dig> distinguishable clusters by ase are located in the itgb <dig> and fgb genes . in these cases, the mismatch primer was mistakenly extended for one of the homozygous types, making these samples appear as heterozygotes. the pyrosequencing assay was employed on these snps, confirming the prase results. in addition, in the remaining  <dig> snps, the inclusion of protease renders complete partitioning of the clusters by increasing the distance between clusters, indicating the higher robustness of prase. these findings are consistent with previous reports indicating lack of specificity of the ase assay  <cit> .

genotyping of  <dig> samples  was performed side-by-side with prase and pyrosequencing to investigate the accuracy of the methods. all loci were amplified in an outer 10-plex pcr followed by an inner 10-plex pcr for genotyping with prase and also  <dig> inner simplex pcr reactions for genotyping with pyrosequencing. pyrosequencing was performed as previously described  <cit> . a  <dig>  % concordance was achieved between the two assays. eight discordant genotypes were observed and these results were evenly distributed among all snps and pcr-plates . five of the ambiguities were settled with sanger dna sequencing as a third independent method, unfortunately there were no remaining genomic dna of the last three samples. prase was correct in four of the cases and pyrosequencing in one case.

the robustness of the prase technology could be demonstrated by examining the genotyping data for all  <dig> samples in the same cluster diagrams . each snp gave a distinct individual pattern that is very reproducible between runs . no traces of significant contamination is visible, in such a case the clusters would be indistinguishable. in fact, as seen in early results, before good conditions for the silicone rubber mask that divides the slide into  <dig> wells was found, a contamination in a sample is obvious in its placement between clusters for several snps. this is a clear advantage of a multiplex detection system as opposed to the singleplex of pyrosequencing where a contamination is not always as obvious. furthermore, as indicators of contaminations five negative and one positive controls were included in each 96-well pcr plate. the negative controls typically gave lower signal intensities than positives and positioned themselves between clusters.

in fact, all  <dig> snps can be combined into a single plot of  <dig> genotypes  and still form three distinct clusters. nevertheless, the obvious differences in cluster patterns between different snps can be explained by variations in sequence context , affecting hybridization of extension primers to the target molecules and to the spotted signature tags. the variation in mmp <dig> is a 5t/6t insertion/deletion that may be difficult to analyze due to 3'-terminus instability of hybridized probes to this locus. in fact, mmp <dig> works very well considering that one of the allele-specific primers ends with six deoxythymidines and the other one ends with five deoxythymidines and a deoxycytidine theoretically giving the primers very different duplex stabilities at the 3'-terminus.

in addition to accuracy and robustness, the reproducibility of the method was investigated by analyzing  <dig> samples. the investigated samples were all derived from the same pcr reactions and divided into two prase reactions followed by hybridization to one microarray slide. standard deviations  were calculated between the two allelic fractions for each sample. the mean sd was  <dig>  for all snps while for the individual snps, the mean sd ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig> . furthermore,  <dig> samples were assayed twice on separate dates . a mean sd of  <dig>  was obtained for the two separate runs and for the individual snps the sd ranged between  <dig>  and  <dig> . the results here show that there is very little inter and intra chip variability proving the reproducibility of the assay. in addition, low sds reflects tightly held clusters .

CONCLUSIONS
as a complement to whole-genome snp typing technologies, where a large number of snps are examined in each sample, there is an important niche for technologies that accurately can type a large number of samples in not as many snps. in this work, genotyping of ten polymorphisms associated with thrombosis formation was performed with prase and  <dig> % concordance was met when data was compared to pyrosequencing. however, the prase assay proved to be considerably less labor intensive due to its multiplexing capability in both pcr amplification and genotyping. yet, the number of investigated snps per sample may be further increased by design and addition of more signature tags on the arrays.

there is a plentitude of genotyping technologies with similar multiplexing and sample capabilities as prase. some have been commercialized and are available in with specialized instruments and kits which naturally reduce the complexity for the user but at the same time increases costs and reduces the degrees of freedom for the researcher. some such as prase have only been described academically and it is therefore difficult to get a simple price quote but in this particular case running costs is in the range of  <dig>  usd per snp.

some other techniques in the same applicaton niche as prase are limited in multiplexing capacity by the technique itself, such as pyrosequencing and various real time pcr assays , whereas others are limited by the amplification method, such as single-base extension   <cit>  with microarray  <cit>  or maldi-tof ms  <cit>  detection and prase. with ms detection, sbe has been limited to 30-plex detection due to a limited number of mass tags available or the resolution of the system  <cit> . the similar microarray platforms used for sbe and prase would most likely be of similar multiplexing levels except that prase uses the double amount of primers  and thus uses double the amount of spots on the microarray whereas sbe instead uses a two or four color detection hence a more expensive scanner. the multiplexing level for prase or conventional allele-specific extension  and sbe seems to be much larger than previously anticipated; the same researchers have compared  <dig> snps with ase and sbe  <cit>  and both methods are scalable to hundreds of thousands of snps in a single reaction  <cit> . the premises upon which these were chosen are not clear and it is our belief that prase technology can offer significant improvements in terms of accuracy and robustness and thereof increase the number of typeable snps, i.e. a more flexible choice in snps. this is especially important since the most common biallelic variations in the human genome is the c-t and the g-a transitions that are also the most difficult polymorphisms to type by allele specific extensions if not the prase technology is employed.

