BACKGROUND
classical bioactive peptides are cleaved from larger precursor proteins that have a signal sequence at their n-terminus  <cit> . as a consequence they are targeted into the secretory pathway and once extra-cellular play a –autocrine, paracrine, or endocrine- signaling role for example by activating g-protein coupled receptors of neighboring or more distant cells. more recently new concepts and different classes of bioactive peptides are described. a first class consists of intracellular peptides having a regulatory effect on cell signaling  <cit> . another recent class  consists of peptides that are not processed in the secretory machinery. one type of this latter class is immediately translated from small open reading frames   <cit> . since they lack an n-terminal signal sequence they are in principle set free in the cytoplasm immediately after translation. from hereon, these are denoted as micropeptides.

although some members of this new category could already be linked to important embryonic and morphogenetic functions in plants as well as in animals  <cit> , micropeptide research is not yet widespread. hundreds of novel sorfs, supported by transcriptional evidence, could be identified in the saccharomyces cerevisiae genome, most of them with sequence similarity to orfs in other organisms. comprehensive analysis of one specific sorf, termed smorf <dig> even shows sequence conservation between yeast and human  <cit> . in arabidopsis thaliana the polaris  polypeptide gene was identified in a promoter trap transgenic line predominantly showing expression in the embryonic basal region and affecting root growth and leaf vascularization  <cit> . next to this already characterized pls peptide, hundreds of other novel possible coding sorfs were identified in intergenic regions of the arabidopsis thaliana genome  <cit> . other plant micropeptides have been examined: the recessive mutation of brick <dig> in maize leads to several morphological defects of leaf epithelia, and enod <dig> is a polycistronic micropeptide translated in soybean playing a distinct role in the control of sucrose use in nodules  <cit> .

in animals, a handful of functional micropeptides have also been discovered. an evolutionary conserved micropeptide was identified in drosophila and referred to as polished rice  or tarsal-less , while the tribolium orthologue is called mille-pattes  <cit> . these tal  peptides  control epidermal differentiation by modifying the transcription factor shavenbaby  <cit> . increasing evidence suggests that these so-called micropeptides are also present in higher animals, including mammals. analyzing the mouse genome using critica  <cit>  confirmed the existence of many short orfs, roughly accounting for 10% of the mouse proteome  <cit> . also, a recent paper by ingolia et al. defines a new class of short polycistronic ribosome-associated coding rnas  encoding small proteins  <cit> . in human cells, slavoff et al. identified  <dig> sorf-encoded polypeptides  of which  <dig> were previously uncharacterized  <cit> .

the past decade has seen considerable advances in both sequencing technology and computing infrastructure, resulting in ever-more annotated genomes already from over a hundred eukaryotic species  <cit> . such efforts are valuable to the discovery of sorfs putatively encoding micropeptides for example by providing us with a high-resolution view of the developmental transcriptome, identifying thousands of newly transcribed regions   <cit>  or a conserved set of long intervening non-coding rnas  and other non-coding rnas   <cit>  in different species. furthermore, new sequencing methodologies emerge. ribosome profiling, a recently described technique, based on deep sequencing of ribosome-protected mrna fragments, enables the high-precision and genome-wide monitoring of translation  <cit> . such ribosome profiling experiments performed on mouse embryonic stem cells   <cit>  and human embryonic kidney  <dig>  cells  <cit> , further strengthen the theory that short un-annotated rna sequences or ribosome footprints can encode micropeptides, especially because the length of orfs in the ntrs is very frequently below  <dig> aas in these studies. of particular interest in recent literature are sorfs within lincrnas as research points to the existence of such rnas expressing different short polypeptides  <cit> . however the debate on the extent of their peptide coding capacities is ongoing  <cit> .

although huge numbers of novel transcripts are documented in every transcriptome sequencing project, gene-prediction is still a challenge, especially when looking for functional sorfs  <cit> . until recently, most gene-prediction tools arbitrarily applied a minimum sequence length cutoff , reducing the likelihood of false positive predictions  <cit> . false negative ratios also increase when trying to discover small coding sequences as they lack splicing signals on either side of the single exon and show a decreasing signal-to-noise ratio as the size of the coding region decreases  <cit> . in an attempt to circumvent these limitations sorffinder, a software package to identify specifically sorfs with high coding potential  <cit>  was devised. sorffinder makes use of the nucleotide composition bias between coding and non-coding sequences to evaluate the coding potential of those functional sorfs  <cit> . however, genome-wide searches for sorfs in higher eukaryotes are still seen as a computational burden: thus no such data exist for any higher eukaryote  <cit> .

to the best of our knowledge, a systematic genome-wide study scanning for sorfs that encode small peptides has not yet been performed for a mammalian. a first genome-wide search for sorfs has been undertaken for saccharomyces cerevisiae. a combination of in silico and experimental approaches proves the existence of at least  <dig> sorfs in the yeast genome, accounting for up to 5% of the protein-coding genes  <cit> . in arabidopsis thaliana, a systematic search for sorfs revealed the potential existence of  <dig>  coding sequences for which evidence for transcription or purifying selection is available  <cit> . a recent study describes a systematic search for putatively functional sorfs in euchromatic regions of drosophila melanogaster, postulating the existence of at least  <dig> sorfs coding for small peptides  <cit> . in this report we combine a genome-wide in silico search strategy and the specific characteristics of ribosome profiling data in a search for sorfs putatively encoding functional micropeptides in the model organism mus musculus.

RESULTS
genome-wide identification of sorfs
the genome-wide search for sorfs with sorffinder resulted in the prediction of  <dig> , <dig> single-exon sorfs with high coding potential, out of a total pool of  <dig> , <dig> sorfs . the strand-specific genomic location, sequence, and coding potential score  were, like all subsequently obtained data, stored in a mysql relational database .

overview of putatively coding sorfs grouped by mus musculus chromosomes, showing the total number and the distribution of sorfs for each chromosome, as well as the number and distribution of sorfs with high coding potential according to sorffinder.

the number of sorfs with a specific length tends to increase with decreasing length . this comes as no surprise since short nucleotide sequences with orf-like qualities may easily appear by chance. including sorfs with a length smaller than  <dig> aas would thus exponentially increase the pool of sorfs under investigation and make further computational analysis much more demanding or even impossible. if we look at the total number of sorfs found by sorffinder, and assume a random and even distribution across the genome, we see that sorfs are distributed evenly in the different autosomes with circa  <dig> sorf every  <dig> bp . there is slightly more variation in distance between adjacent sorfs  when looking only at those with high coding potential, with on average  <dig> sorf every  <dig>  bp. as can be seen in table  <dig>  the sex chromosomes tend to deviate from these averages with sparser  sorf appearances.

all resulting sorfs from sorffinder were overlapped with the genome-wide ensembl annotation . as can be seen in figure 1b and associated table  <dig>  most of the sorfs are located in intergenic regions as these take up most of the genome. although many sorfs are located in intronic regions, this is less then would be expected  . in the same way, almost double the number of sorfs were found in exonic regions as would be expected under an even distribution  <cit> . these observations indicate that sorffinder succeeds in making a good distinction between coding and non-coding sorfs.

number of sorfs divided per genomic region and for which certain in silico and/or expression evidence can be found. included are total number of sofs with high coding potential , number of sorfs having scores above certain thresholds , number of sorfs which show ribosome profiling expression and number of sorfs for which in silico coding as well as expression evidence is available.

a total number of sorfs with high coding potential according to sorffinder.

b total number of sorfs classified as coding by svmlight.

c pcod is the coding probability score as predicted by svmlight.

d sorfs with mapped ribosome profiles, attaining sequence read coverage > 75% of the total orf , and ribosome profile hits at the orf start site .

e ribo sorfs  classified as coding by svmlight.

peptide conservation based on ucsc multiple species alignment
to assess their peptide-coding potential, all sorfs were analyzed using a multi-species alignment of  <dig> vertebrate species . for each sorf a number of basic peptide conservation characteristics were deduced and gathered . each overview contains the dna and aa sorf alignment for all conserved species. each pair-wise alignment for all conserved species is further analyzed to obtain the specific coding potential characteristics. in this way, we obtained the number of species in which the orf length as well as the start and stop codons are conserved. furthermore all mutations between the alignments are analyzed for their synonymous or non-synonymous nature, permitting the calculation of synonymous and non-synonymous substitution rates . in a last step, ka/ks values for each pair-wise alignment were calculated. all obtained characteristics and positional info regarding all the sorfs are stored in a data matrix and are available via additional file  <dig> 

classification and ranking
we used an svm approach to classify the sorfs into a coding and non-coding group based on all aforementioned characteristics. after training the svm on 4/5th of the data and testing the svm on the remainder, we reached a correct classification for up to 93% of the test subjects, with a false positive rate not exceeding 4% . classification via svmlight was also verified by running the same analysis using a second svm package . the outcome of both svm packages shows a very good correlation , proving the robustness of the svm approach.

cross-validation with mesc ribosome profiling data
even with very stringent parameters this genome-wide in silico prediction approach gives rise to hundreds, even thousands of possibly interesting sequences . we reasoned that a combined approach incorporating also biologically relevant data next to the in silico analysis should lead to a more meaningful set of sorfs, at the same time overcoming several approach-specific limitations . therefore we reanalyzed ribosome profiling data obtained from a mouse embryonic stem cells  sample  <cit> . the sequencing reads were uniquely mapped to sorfs located in intergenic or ncrna regions. retaining only those sorfs that overlap with ribosome profiles at their start position in the harringtonine treated sample data and that have a sequence read coverage of at least 75% relative to the untreated sample data, led to a set of  <dig> intergenic sorfs and  <dig> sorfs located in ncrna regions. looking only at lincrna sorfs, as data points to their expression in these regions  <cit> , further decreases the sample size to  <dig> sorfs. an overlap of the aforementioned intergenic and ncrna sorfs with the svm training data can be seen in figures 2c and 3b, respectively. in combination with the conservation characteristics from the in silico prediction, this gives rise to a set of sorfs that  show a high coding probability score based on the aforementioned svm approach and  overlap with biologically relevant ribosomal profiles . the expression of the ncrna and intergenic sorfs with coverage > 75% and harringtonine treated ribosome profile occupancy was also compared with the chx treated embryoid body sample data  <cit>  . further research on a case-by-case basis will be necessary to evaluate and interpret the differential expression between different developmental stages.

visualization
all sorfs are mapped on the reference genome and made accessible through an in-house developed h2g <dig> genome browser, . next to the sorf information, static visualization tracks are added depicting genomic annotation from ensembl, phastcons conservation scores and other relevant information. experimental ribosomal profiling data are incorporated using individual tracks for every analysis on the different samples . together with the ucsc multi-species alignment such visual representation of all available information makes interpretation of the results far easier. for example, figures  <dig> and  <dig> depict some newly discovered sorfs  within the h2g <dig> genome browser.

discussion
it is generally accepted that looking for conservation across species is one of the best strategies for finding functional sequences. in this study, the phastcons conservation score in combination with specific peptide conservation characteristics derived from the ucsc multi-species alignment  <cit>  is used to predict the coding probability of sorfs. we reasoned that the in silico method in combination with experimental translational evidence would lead to an even more robust, stringent, and more importantly, in vivo validated prediction. we therefore combined the in silico approach with information from a reanalyzed ribosome profiling study on mescs. ribosome profiling is an experimental method to monitor in vivo translation by deep sequencing of ribosome-protected mrna fragments  <cit>  thus reflecting ribosomal occupancy.

in this report, we show that the combination of both the in silico prediction and the in vivo data leads to the discovery of many new putatively coding sorfs in the mouse genome . the identified sorfs have a high aa conservation in multiple species, show orf translation  and moreover exhibit a ribosome profile peak at their start codon . when analyzing the overlapping data, we specifically investigated sorfs within ncrna and intergenic regions. although we are convinced that sorfs overlapping other regions constitute interesting study objects, we concentrated on the aforementioned regions in this study for the following reasons.

the first eukaryotic micropeptide, tarsal-less or pri, was discovered in a ncrna-annotated region  <cit> . since orfs shorter than  <dig> aas have long been disregarded in the past, it is possible that other ncrnas are in fact coding for small peptides, making this set of sorfs especially interesting  <cit> . more recent studies also point to the expression of specific small peptides encoded within lincrnas in mammals  <cit> . the described results  strengthen the idea that some ncrna regions actually contain putatively coding sorfs. investigating the sorfs within annotated lincrna regions still yields very well-conserved and expressed sorfs . further analysis of the conservation of the sorf presented in figure  <dig>  overlapping a lincrna  was done by means of a blast search against the human genome. this resulted in the identification of  <dig> region within the second and biggest exon of lincrna linc <dig>  part of the gencode annotation  <cit> , further confirming the significance of our findings . the fact that lincrna expression in mescs tend to be low  <cit> , lincrna are rarely translated in different cell lines  <cit>  and that known micropeptides have a very narrow expression window in time as well as in space  <cit> , suggests that many putatively coding sorfs remain to be detected.

next to the aforementioned ncrna sorfs, the set of sorfs located in intergenic regions was also investigated, revealing dozens of highly conserved sorfs with ribosome profiling experimental validation. one of the more striking things we see in our results on intergenic sorfs is that a lot of the high-scoring and expressed intergenic sorfs are located close to known protein-coding genes . most of these can be found between  <dig> kb and  <dig> bp upstream of the 5′ untranslated region . several explanations can be formulated for this phenomenon, one of the more obvious ones of course being misannotation of the known gene close to the sorf. first, one could argue the existence of additional exons, upstream of the already annotated ones, which have been overlooked so far. this could give an explanation for some of the identified sorfs, especially those showing low conservation at, and around, the stop codon . secondly, sorfs are sometimes located within 1– <dig> bp from each other, mostly only measuring  <dig> –  <dig> aas in length, but with high stop codon conservation. the likeliness of multiple splice sites within these very short, and highly conserved, sorfs seems at least debatable. misannotation is not unique to aforementioned exonic regions, as it could also have happened at the level of the 5′ utr, giving rise to sorfs possible being uorfs . however, keeping in mind all characteristics of the identified sorfs, it cannot be ruled out that some sorfs in the proximity of known genes could give rise to a new class of functional peptides playing a  role that still has to be explored. in plants, increasing data indicate that sorfs play diverse roles in regulating expression and in this way participate in various cellular processes  <cit> . also, research from  <cit>  points to the existence of thousands of previously unknown bovine ncrnas in the proximity of known genes, possibly encoding sorfs. their set-up specifically removed ncrna sequences with orfs longer than  <dig> aas; so small putatively translated orfs could still be present. they also performed a correlation analysis on expression levels between these intergenic ncrnas and protein coding genes, revealing significant correlation for many transcripts, supporting the hypothesis that these ncrna sorfs could have a regulatory function.

the in silico generated prediction score, as outlined in the results and methods sections, also has its limitations. using sorffinder as a first filtering step introduces false positive as well as false negative sorfs  <cit> . although we are working on ways to eliminate the use of this tool, for the moment, this initial step is still indispensable  to get the total number of sorfs down in a sensible way, based on the coding index. the prediction furthermore greatly depends on the correctness of the multiple species sequence alignments. in cases where a sorf has no, or very few aligned sequences , the svm assesses the coding probability mainly on the phastcons conservation score. this score, reflecting dna conservation, already has a considerable impact on the overall prediction as can be seen in additional file 1: figure s <dig>  distinct peaks of prediction scores can be observed solely based on the phastcons score . these scoring peaks can be filtered out by setting a threshold on the minimum number of sequences present in the multi-species alignment . this can be explained by high dna conservation in species not included in our study  or just high dna conservation not preserved on the aa level. another reason could be the incompleteness of the multi-species alignment itself. furthermore false negatives due to highly divergent or quickly diverging sorfs cannot be ruled out. addressing these limitations extends well beyond the scope of this paper. for the time being it merely limits the power of the in silico prediction strategy leading to an underestimation of putatively coding sorfs.

ribosome profiling, an experimental approach to monitor in vivo translation by estimating the rate of protein synthesis from the density of ribosome footprints cannot be proposed as a fool-proof method to distinguish between coding and non-coding transcripts. for example, the ncrna h <dig> shows ribosomal occupancy and hence also ribosome profiles, but is nonetheless a non-coding sequence  <cit> . in addition, one has to keep in mind that spurious association of ribosomes could lead to translational noise and as such most of the transcripts suggested to encode small peptides seem to lack conservation of their proposed coding regions  <cit> . recently, guttmann et al. proposed a new metric to distinguish between protein-coding and all classes of non-coding transcripts showing ribosome occupancy  <cit> . on the other hand, the ribosome profiling technique greatly outperforms mass spectrometry, the commonly applied technique for protein product identification, with regard to dynamic range and comprehensiveness. presumably, coding sorfs are translated at low levels  <cit> , thus making these properties very important.

our combinatorial pipeline, as outlined in the workflow , overcomes most of these aforementioned shortcomings. we do not merely identify in silico predicted sorfs with high conservation, prone to false positives, or sorfs with translational evidence, for which it is sometimes hard to differentiate between true coding and non-coding. the identification is based on a combination of both measures. hence, the putative micropeptide-encoding sorfs identified in this report are very good candidates for further in vitro and in vivo research as they show high conservation at both dna and  aa level in different mammalian species, as well as translation measured by ribosomal occupancy.

our analysis is certainly no endpoint. as already mentioned, known micropeptides have a very narrow expression window  <cit> . also, the fact that we only used one cell type  in the overlap with our in silico prediction, means that presumably only a small segment of putatively coding sorfs has been identified. this tissue and developmental stage specific expression  leaves a lot of sorfs yet to be identified. the more additional ribosome profiling data will be available in the future, the more sorfs will be picked up as interesting starting points for further analysis, after overlap with our prediction information. next to the advent of more experimental data, the in silico analysis can also further improve in the future. taking into account the computational load to identify all sorfs with an initiator methionine in the mus musculus genome, it would be almost impossible to perform a genome-wide in silico scan for all near-cognate sorfs. following another workflow, whereby we first search for all sorfs showing translation evidence in ribosome profiling studies, and afterwards perform the in silico analysis on these candidates could be an appropriate alternative.

CONCLUSIONS
our combined genome-wide approach towards the identification of sorfs in mus musculus, leads to the prediction of a comprehensive but manageable set of putatively coding sorfs. in this respect, our study is a very important first step towards the identification of a new class of bioactive peptides, called micropeptides. starting from the described results, further in vivo experiments  should be carried out, testing activity and functionality of the identified peptide products.

