BACKGROUND
osteoarthritis  is a common disorder in veterinary medicine, and clinicians are increasingly encountering this condition  <cit> . however, restoration of the diseased articular cartilage in patients with oa is still a challenge for researchers and clinicians. currently, several experimental strategies have investigated whether mesenchymal stem cells , instead of chondrocytes, can be used for the regeneration and maintenance of articular cartilage in oa  <cit> .

autologous stem cell therapy in the field of regenerative veterinary medicine involves harvesting tissue,such as fat or bone marrow  <cit> , from the patient, isolating the stem and regenerative cells, and administering the cells back to the patient  <cit> . the field of adipose-derived msc therapy  is a rapidly growing area of research, and it has been shown that stem cells have an affinity for damaged joint tissue; recent in vivo studies have confirmed that stem cells have the ability to localize and participate in the repair of damaged joint structures, including cruciate ligaments, menisci, and cartilage lesions  <cit> . for these reasons, stem cell therapy is now being used to treat oa.

previous studies evaluating oa therapy in dogs suggest that non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drugs do not often provide complete pain relief  <cit> , perhaps because they rely on a single target receptor or pathway for their action. in contrast to drug therapy, cellular therapies such as admscs play a trophic function by recruiting endogenous cells to the injured site. studies and anecdotal clinical experience demonstrate that autologous admsc therapy is of clinical benefit in horses and dogs with orthopedic conditions  <cit> .

recent investigations have shown that growth factors contained in platelet-rich plasma  act as vehicles and even potentiators of the effect of mscs  <cit> . the purpose of this study was to use force platform kinetic analysis to evaluate the effect of a single intraarticular injection of admscs in  <dig> dogs with oa of hip joints by measuring peak vertical force  and vertical impulse , which represent maximal weight bearing and distribution of forces through time, respectively.

RESULTS
the body weight of enrolled dogs ranged from  <dig> to  <dig> kg , and ages were  <dig> to  <dig> years . the mean  value for walking velocity of both sound  and diseased groups of dogs was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  m/s. no significant difference in walking velocity existed between dogs . pvf and vi mean values are summarized in table  <dig> 

pvf ml: peak vertical force in the more-lame limbs. pvf ll: peak vertical force in the less-lame limbs. vi ml: vertical impulse in the more-lame limbs vi ll: vertical impulse in the less-lame limbs. pvf s: peak vertical force in the control group. vi s: vertical impulse in the control group.

data are shown for each day of observation.

analysis of pvf
more-lame limbs analysis showed that differences in % pvf between d <dig> and d <dig> were significant . between the other periods, differences were of no significance .

compared with the control group, % pvf at d <dig> is significantly less . in comparison, beyond this time differences became non significant .

less-lame limbs analysis showed non significant differences till d <dig> ; beyond d <dig>  differences were significant .

compared with control group, % pvf at d <dig> is significantly greater at d <dig> , d <dig>  and d <dig> . at d <dig> this difference was not significant  .

analysis of vi
more-lame limbs analysis showed that differences in % vi between d <dig> and d <dig> were significant . with the other periods, differences were not significant .

compared with the control group, % vi at d <dig> is significantly less . in comparison, beyond this time differences became not significant .

compared with the control group, no significant differences were also found  .

association between more and less-lame limbs
the fitted linear mixed model shows a negative association between % pvf in less-lame limb and more-lame limb . in % vi there is no association between vi in less and more -lame limb .

the validity of the model fit was assessed by testing normality and homoscedasticity of the residuals. both assumptions could be accepted: the shapiro-wilk test for normality and levene’s test for homoscedasticity were not significant .

discussion
in this trial, the effect of mscs in lame oa dogs was investigated and quantified by means of an objective evaluation with a force platform. the ground reaction forces-related aspects of the gait, such as the pvf and vi, which represent maximal weight bearing and distribution of forces through time, respectively, measured the clinical impact of msc treatment on the function of the limb during the stance phase of walking.

the absence of a direct relationship between radiographic evidence of oa and force platform findings is well known; in any case, in our study, diseased dogs were selected both on the basis of the presence or absence of radiographic evidence of severe oa  and for evident lameness objectively determined by platform gait analysis  <cit> .

voss et al.  <cit>  and evans et al.  <cit>  reported that force platform gait analysis at trot was much more sensitive than at walk for low-grade hindlimb lameness, but not for severe lameness. in our case, lameness of the oa dogs group was evident by direct observation, even at walk.

although each dog had bilateral lameness, we believe that confident data could only be obtained from the more-lame limbs , in order to limit a possible bias caused by inconsistent weight redistribution to the less affected contra-lateral hindlimb. in fact, mean values showed how initially less-lame limbs seemed to be “better” than limbs from the control group.

we observed a substantial improvement both in pvf and vi values through the period of evaluation, with an indicative gaining of limb function. evolution of vi seems to be something controversial since some authors suggest that recordings of improvement in vi may suffer from a delay; their dogs tended to decrease their stance time in comparison with baseline values after non-steroidal anti-inflammatory drug treatment because they were able to improve their performance. however, other authors affirm that stance time did not change or increase when limb function improved  <cit> . in our study we observed independent evolution of both pvf and vi values, we hypothesize that this fact occurs because pvf only depends on the force exerted by the limbs, whilst vi reflects the evolution of the force during the whole support phase. for this reason vi could vary when one or both variables change .

in  <dig> budsberg et al. compared the efficacy of a treatment with a placebo control group and demonstrated a decrease in lameness in the treatment group using force platform analysis. in contrast, the degree of lameness in the dogs receiving the placebo deteriorated during the study period, making the control group unable to provide fixed reference data  <cit> . based on their results, we designed the experimental study using a control group of sound dogs that were able to provide fixed reference data.

different adipose tissue donor sites have been found in revised literature: retroperitoneal adipose tissue  <cit> , lateral thoracic area  <cit> , gluteous fat  <cit>  or inguinal region  <cit> . we preferred this location to others because it is easier to access, abundant quantities of fat, absence of surgical complications and production of a non visible scar.

regarding cartilage healing, murphy et al. published in  <dig> that the use of mscs deposited in a fibrin matrix would be useful  <cit> . however, although a recent equine study demonstrated early benefit, no significant differences were noted when mscs plus fibrin were compared to fibrin alone at  <dig> months  <cit> . based on that work, it is likely that modulation of the matrix or cells will need to be accomplished to observe long-term benefit of mscs for cartilage repair. treatment timing in relation to the degree of pathology could also be a factor contributing to the insignificant results of the equine study. specifically, because mscs appear to have a tropism for damaged cells, including fibrillated articular cartilage, it may be that at day  <dig>  the degree of fibrillation was not enough to allow an msc treatment effect. however, more observation and studies on cases with more advanced fibrillation need to be conducted to answer this question. following those results, our study was designed using animals with severe and chronic oa, where chondral degeneration and fibrillation were clearly present. these criteria could explain why our diseased dogs showed highly significant improvements in limb function.

moreover, our study supports previously published data demonstrating that a single intraarticular administration of admscs associated to prgf-endoret decreases pain and lameness in dogs with oa over at least a 6-month period  <cit> , although our study was conducted in a different joint and our results were supported by objective kinetic data.

a follow up of six months could be considered as a standard for testing the evolution of a medical or surgical treatment, although our dogs always seemed to improve during the first month after treatment. beyond this time lapse not significant changes were statistically detected. recent clinical evaluation of this same treatment in a much larger group of animals with osteoarthritis in hip or/and elbow joints are showing that apparently improvement could be prolonged for about  <dig> month  when dogs seemed to start to worsen. this is a fact that could be contrasted with a biomechanic evaluation of a homogeneous larger group of hip oa dogs of the same breed and should encourage researchers to objectively determine when a new cycle of treatment should be useful to stop a relapse.

regarding statistical analysis, more complex models could have been considered but we chose this one because it offers an adequate compromise between complexity and ability to represent the relationships between the considered variables  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
force platform analysis demonstrated quantitatively that admsc+ prgf-endoret therapy shows significant potential for clinical use in the treatment of lameness associated with oa.

although this study was limited to a small number of dogs with severe oa, msc therapy was found to be an appropriate treatment for hip joints, in terms of its efficacy in objectively improving the dogs’ gait and ability to live a more normal life, and the absence of side effects. in the future, admscs could also become a promising therapeutic strategy in human oa.

