BACKGROUND
despite major progress in pharmacological and surgical approaches, a spinal cord injury still remains a very complex medical and psychological challenge, both for patients and their relatives as well as for involved physicians, with currently no existing curative therapy. next to primary care using surgical osteosynthesis techniques and administration of methylprednisolone  <cit> , further therapeutic approaches are mainly supportive and are focussed on prevention of secondary complications, like urological problems, decubitus, respiratory tract pathology, etc... however, during the past decade, significant progress has been made in animal models of spinal cord injury  <cit> , and more therapeutic strategies are likely to be discovered as the existence of an endogenous neural regenerative mechanism in the central nerve system is now generally accepted  <cit> . in this context, a spinal cord injury should not be seen as a single event, but must be recognized as an evolving process with different stages for which different therapeutic approaches can be developed  <cit> . in general, functional outcome following spinal cord injury will highly depend on the severity of both primary anatomical disruption of nerve tracts  and secondary damage  <cit>  caused by inevitable inflammatory reactions following the initial trauma. in brief, these secondary inflammatory responses mainly consist of an influx of peripheral inflammatory cells  and an activation of resident microglia. this inflammatory reaction will finally result in the formation of a central cavitation at the site of the initial trauma in the spinal cord surrounded by glial scar tissue. the latter is an important physical and chemical barrier for endogenous regeneration of ascending and descending nerve tracts and thereby compromises functional outcome. the development of future curative treatments will therefore need to combine multiple approaches that are able to modulate secondary inflammation and to enhance endogenous regeneration.

currently, a very promising experimental strategy for promoting neuronal survival and endogenous regeneration in injured spinal cord is local delivery of neurotrophic factors. several neurotrophic factors, like brain-derived neurotrophic factor , glial cell-derived neurotrophic factor , neurotrophin  <dig> and nerve growth factor , can stimulate neurogenesis in vitro and in vivo  <cit> , and their importance for the development of the nervous system, for axonal pathfinding and neuronal survival has made them promising targets to augment regeneration in the injured brain and spinal cord  <cit> . several approaches have been reported to deliver these neurotrophic factors into injured spinal cord: direct injection  <cit> , adenoviral vectors  <cit> , osmotic minipumps  <cit> , fibrin glue  <cit> , hydrogels  <cit>  and genetically modified cell transplants  <cit> . safety, efficacy and applicability of these reported methodologies highly differ between the above-referenced and other published reports, implying the need for continuous study, improvement and validation of in vivo delivery systems for neurotrophic factors in spinal cord.

in this study, we investigated the feasibility of a plasmid-based strategy for in vitro genetic modification of human bone marrow-derived stromal cells  with enhanced green fluorescent protein  and nt <dig>  three genetically modified hmsc lines  were established and used to study cell survival and transgene expression following transplantation in rat spinal cord. first, we present a number of optimised and easy to implement techniques for reproducible histological and molecular detection of hmsc cell transplants in rat spinal cord. using these techniques we demonstrate that genetically modified hmsc lines can survive in healthy rat spinal cord when using adequate immune suppression and can serve as vehicles for in vivo transgene expression. however, transgene silencing and tumour formation by hmsc cell transplants in vivo are of utmost importance and should therefore be addressed in priority in future research.

RESULTS
in vitro characterisation of genetically modified hmsc cell transplants
a human bone marrow-derived stromal cell line  was genetically modified with dna plasmids encoding either  enhanced green fluorescent protein  alone,  neurotrophin- <dig>  alone, or  both egfp and nt <dig>  as described in the materials and methods section. all three plasmids used for genetic modification were based on the same backbone vector and are shown in figure 1a. the three genetically modified hmsc lines that were established for use in this study are designated as: hmsc-egfp, hmsc-nt <dig> and hmsc-nt3-egfp. before transplantation experiments were carried out, transgene expression of these genetically modified hmsc lines was characterised at several passages during culture by pcr, real-time pcr, elisa and flow cytometry. figure 1b shows a representative example for the detection of transgenic egfp and nt <dig> dna and mrna by standard pcr and rt-pcr analysis on dna and mrna isolated from the different hmsc lines used in this study. in addition, figure 1c shows a representative example for the detection of transgenic egfp and/or nt <dig> mrna by real-time rt-pcr analysis on mrna isolated from all hmsc lines used in this study. with regard to protein expression, figure 1d shows a representative elisa measurement of nt <dig> secretion by the different hmsc lines used in this study and figure 1e shows a representative flow cytometric analysis of egfp expression by the egfp expressing hmsc lines used in this study.

immunological survival of hmsc-egfp cell transplants in rat spinal cord
several reports  <cit>  ascribe specific immune modulating and immune privileged features to hmsc, suggesting that these cells might serve as a universal off-the-shelf source of cells for use in regenerative medicine and can be transplanted into an allogeneic and xenogeneic host without the need for immune suppressive therapy. in order to investigate whether our established hmsc line has immune modulating properties, two series of transplantation experiments were performed using hmsc genetically modified with the egfp reporter gene . first, hmsc-egfp were transplanted in healthy rat spinal cord without systemic immune suppression. at different time points post-transplantation, animals were sacrificed and extracted spinal cords were analysed by histology for cell transplant survival, egfp transgene expression and macrophage invasion, as presented in figure 2a. although on day  <dig> and week  <dig> post-transplantation hmsc-egfp cell transplants were clearly visible by direct egfp fluorescence and immuno-histochemical staining for egfp, from  <dig> weeks post-transplantation the whole transplantation site was invaded with cd68+ macrophages and neither direct egfp fluorescence nor immuno-histochemical staining for egfp could indicate the immunological survival of transplanted hmsc-egfp cells. interestingly, despite this extensive inflammatory reaction associated with transplant rejection, no negative adverse effects were seen on general health status and locomotion of the cell transplanted animals . next, in order to prevent immunological rejection of hmsc-egfp cell transplants, the same transplantation experiment was performed but with daily subcutaneous administrations of  <dig> mg/kg cyclosporine a starting  <dig> days prior to transplantation. in contrast to the results described above, efficient transplant survival was observed in all cell-transplanted animals at different time points post-transplantation. representative examples of molecular and histological detection of hmsc-egfp cell transplants in spinal cord are shown in figure 2b. following dna and mrna isolation from dissected spinal cord segments, pcr and rt-pcr analysis allowed to detect hmsc-egfp cell transplants  and their transgene expression . in addition, real-time rt-pcr analysis confirmed egfp transgene expression in spinal cord . moreover, this molecular observation of hmsc-egfp cell transplant survival in rat spinal cord and persisting transgene expression at different time points post-transplantation was also proven by histological analysis . in summary, based on the above-described observations, all further transplantation experiments were performed under immune suppression.

transgene expression of hmsc-nt <dig> cell transplants in rat spinal cord
following genetic modification of hmsc with a dna plasmid encoding the egfp reporter gene and successful in vivo transplantation and detection of hmsc-egfp cells, we genetically modified hmsc with a similar dna plasmid-encoding rat nt <dig> . in contrast to the procedures followed for obtaining the presented hmsc-egfp line , obtaining a pure transgene expressing hmsc-nt <dig> line was not possible through cell sorting, due to the lack of a fluorescent marker molecule . therefore, following antibiotics selection, single clones were grown and screened by elisa for highest production of nt <dig> . despite significant production of nt <dig> by the selected hmsc-nt <dig> clone, only very low, but however significant, nt <dig> mrna was produced by these cells . however, due to this low level of nt <dig> mrna produced by transgenic hmsc-nt <dig> cells, nt <dig> transgene expression following transplantation of hmsc-nt <dig> cells in rat spinal cord could not be detected . in summary, based on the above-described observations, cell sorting for an egfp reporter gene needs to be included for further genetic modification experiments in order to obtain a transgenic cell population producing high levels of transgenic mrna.

transgene expression of hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants in rat spinal cord
in a next attempt to genetically modify hmsc to produce the nt <dig> neurothrophic factor, we used a dna plasmid encoding both the nt <dig> and egfp protein . because transcription from this plasmid results in the production of one mrna encoding both proteins, cell sorting for cells expressing high levels of egfp protein was used in order to obtain an hmsc-nt3-egfp line producing high levels of egfp and nt <dig> mrna  and egfp and nt <dig> protein . following transplantation in rat spinal cord under immune suppression, hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants were easily detectable by morphology on he-stained slides . however, while expression of egfp was clearly demonstrated on day  <dig> post-transplantation by direct fluorescence microscopy  and immuno-histochemical staining for egfp, egfp expression on week  <dig> post-transplantation, as demonstrated by immuno-histochemical staining, was strongly decreased and became almost undetectable by week  <dig> post-transplantation . this decrease in egfp expression was not due to lack of cell transplant survival because cell transplants could clearly be visualized on he-stained slides  and staining with an antibody against human mitochondrial antigen confirmed the human nature of the observed cell transplants . in addition, the observed egfp transgene silencing in hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants, but not in hmsc-egfp cell transplants, was further demonstrated by laser capture micro-dissection  experiments. for this, hmsc-egfp and hmsc-nt3-egfp cells were transplanted in rat spinal cord under immune suppression. next, at day  <dig> and day  <dig> post-transplantation, transplanted cell populations were isolated by lcm  and the expression level of egfp mrna was analysed by real-time pcr. as suggested by the results presented in figure 5b, while expression of egfp mrna by an hmsc-egfp cell transplant decreased by 50% at day  <dig> post-transplantation as compared to cultured hmsc-egfp cells, egfp mrna by an hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplant directly decreased by 80% at day  <dig> post-transplantation as compared to cultured hmsc-nt3-egfp cells. however, while egfp mrna expression then remained stable between day  <dig> and day  <dig> post-transplantation for an hmsc-egfp cell transplant, egfp mrna expression further decreased between day  <dig> and day  <dig> post-transplantation for an hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplant. in summary, based on the above-described results, we observed a similar degree of hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplant survival as described above for hmsc-egfp cell transplants, but transgene expression by hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants rapidly declined in vivo.

further investigation of transgene silencing in hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants
since reproducible cell transplantation into spinal cord is a relatively complex procedure, we first investigated whether subcutaneous cell transplantation might provide a valuable alternative in order to study persistence of transgene expression in vivo. for this, hmsc-nt3-egfp cells were transplanted subcutaneously as described in the materials and methods section. unexpectedly and in contrast to the results described above, transgene silencing did not occur in subcutaneous hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants. as demonstrated in figure  <dig>  no decrease in egfp expression was observed by direct egfp fluorescence imaging and immuno-histochemical staining for egfp. the latter might suggest the presence of certain epigenetic regulatory mechanisms controlling transgene expression in vivo in spinal cord. in order to investigate this hypothesis, we assumed that in vivo epigenetic silencing of transgene expression is an irreversible process  <cit> . thus, in case the observed transgene silencing is due to epigenetic changes , a re-established hmsc-nt3-egfp culture from an egfp-negative cell transplant should remain egfp-negative. for this, we re-established hmsc-nt3-egfp cultures following enzymatic disruption of the cellular context of dissected spinal cords  at week  <dig> post-transplantation. when cultures were grown to confluence, the presence and the level of egfp expression of hmsc-nt3-egfp was investigated by facs analysis. figure  <dig> shows a representative facs analysis of an established culture containing both egfp-positive and negative cells . further analysis revealed that the egfp positive cells were indeed hmsc-nt3-egfp cells as they stained positive for antibodies directed against human cd <dig> and cd <dig>  both markers present on parental hmsc-nt3-egfp cells . egfp-negative cells present in the cultures displayed a clearly different morphology  and presumably were rat fibroblast cells as they were not recognized by antibodies directed against human cd <dig> and cd <dig> . based on the above-described results, epigenetic modification is most likely not causing the observed transgene silencing in intraspinally transplanted hmsc-nt3-egfp cells, and a putative mechanism for this observed transgene silencing in hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants in spinal cord , but not subcutaneously , remains unclear.

tumorigenicity of hmsc cell transplants in rat spinal cord
during progress in this study, we observed tumour growth from on week  <dig> post-transplantation for both hmsc-egfp and hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants in spinal cord . because tumour growth is a potential risk in clinical transplantation of autologous, allogeneic and xenogeneic bone marrow-derived stromal cell populations, we investigated whether omitting immune suppressive therapy would be sufficient to prevent further tumour growth and/or destroy malignant cells. as shown in figure  <dig>  tumorigenic growth of xenogeneic hmsc-egfp cell transplants at week  <dig> post-transplantation can efficiently be controlled by the host's immune system. two weeks following arrest of immune suppressive therapy, the whole transplantation site is invaded by macrophages and no viable cell egfp+ transplant could be observed.

discussion
stem cells, both embryonic and adult, are attractive targets in the development of cell and gene therapy approaches in a variety of diseases and injuries. while embryonic stem cells have gained much interest due to their pluripotent differentiation capacity, the potential clinical use of multipotent adult stem cell populations in regenerative medicine seems to be more realistic taking into account certain immunological, practical and ethical advantages. currently, our research is focussing on the use of adult bone marrow derived stromal cells  as a cellular minipump for neurotrophic factors in injured spinal cord in order to promote neural regeneration. in this context, the aim of this study was to investigate the feasibility of a plasmid-based strategy for genetic modification of human msc with enhanced green fluorescent protein  and/or neurotrophin  <dig>  and to study in vivo cell survival and transgene expression of genetically modified hmsc following transplantation in rat spinal cord.

in the first part of this study, we investigated survival of hmsc-egfp cell transplants in rat spinal cord in immune competent and immune suppressed rats. survival of hmsc-egfp in normal spinal cord of immune competent rats was significantly compromised from an early time point  and resulted in total graft eradication from on week  <dig> post-transplantation . however, suppressing the immune system with cyclosporine a resulted in successful long-term in vivo graft survival . the observed immunological rejection of msc in the absence of systemic immune suppression is in contrast to a large amount of literature suggesting potential in vivo immune modulation and immune privileged properties of msc  <cit> . however, we believe that there is a common misunderstanding regarding the immune privileged nature of msc. while these cells have shown immune suppressive effects on graft-versus-host disease when given intravenously as shown in several publications, currently, as also demonstrated by the presented results, there is no strong evidence that these cells are of such an immune tolerant nature that they can be transplanted in allogeneic and xenogeneic hosts without giving proper immune suppression. the latter was recently also suggested by eliopoulos et al. <cit> , who clearly demonstrated that mice implanted with mhc-mismatched msc-expressing murine erythropoietin, in contrast to mice implanted with syngeneic msc-expressing erythropoietin, failed in causing a sustained rise in hematocrit level. in addition, swanger et al. <cit>  demonstrated improved survival of transplanted bone marrow stromal cells in spinal cord when using high-dose cyclosporine a, indicating not only the importance of immune suppression, but also a link between cell survival and level of immune suppression. therefore, based on these published reports and supported by our findings, we conclude that xenogeneic hmsc cell transplantation in rat is feasible and long-term transplant survival can be achieved under appropriate immune suppression.

in the second part of this study, we investigated the stability of egfp or nt <dig> transgene expression by hmsc-egfp, hmsc-nt <dig> and hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants in rat spinal cord. while in vivo egfp expression of transplanted hmsc-egfp cells was readily detectable at different time points post-transplantation , in vivo transgene expression by hmsc-nt <dig> and hmsc-nt3-egfp cells was, respectively, undetectable  or declined rapidly between day  <dig> and  <dig> post-transplantation . in vivo transgene silencing is frequently reported and is currently considered as a major obstacle in the development of ex vivo gene therapy protocols using stem cells. one possible explanation for this transgene silencing might be epigenetic modification of introduced transgenic dna sequences. transgene silencing can be initiated and sustained by:  methylation of cpg-rich dna sequences which inhibits rna transcription, or  deacetylation of histones which allows dna condensation and makes dna inaccessible for rna transcription  <cit> . in our study, we used an internal ribosome entry site -based construct for simultaneous expression of egfp and nt <dig> protein starting from a single messenger rna. others previously reported similar transgene silencing when using ires-based constructs, however in vivo transgene silencing could be reversed when animals were treated with 5-azacytidine, a methyltransferase inhibitor  <cit> . in addition, also deacetylase inhibitors  have demonstrated a capacity to prevent transgene silencing in vitro and in vivo  <cit> . however, in a first trial experiment, neither in vitro treatment of hmsc-nt3-egfp cells, nor in vivo treatment of cell-transplanted rats, with 5-aza-2-deoxycytidine , trichostatin a or valproic acid could reverse the observed transgene silencing in vivo in spinal cord . next, further analysis towards a putative explanation for the observed transgene silencing indicated:  that transgene silencing did not occur in subcutaneously transplanted hmsc-nt3-egfp cells , and  that silenced transgene expression was reactivated upon re-establishment of hmsc-nt3-egfp cultures out of cell-transplanted spinal cords . based on these observations, we conclude that the observed transgene silencing in our hmsc-nt3-egfp cell transplants is not due to epigenetic changes, but is most likely due to a natural site-dependent adaptation of transgene expression in vivo. therefore, in order to use msc or fibroblast cell transplants as cellular minipumps, genetic modification needs to result in sufficiently high transgene expression able to persist even when cellular activity might be reduced in spinal cord  <cit> .

in the third part of this study, because we observed a slowly progressing tumour growth following transplantation of all our hmsc cell transplants, we investigated whether omitting immune suppressive therapy is sufficient to prevent further tumour growth and to eradicate malignant xenogeneic cell transplants. despite some tumorigenic characteristics of our hmsc cell transplants ), total regression was seen over a 2-week period after cessation of systemic immune suppression. in addition, despite the extent of the resulting inflammatory infiltration in the spinal cord, we did not observe any influence on functional behaviour of the animals . of note, the observed tumour formation was not totally unexpected given the fact that prolonged in vitro stem cell culture might favour growth of msc clones which potentially can become tumorigenic in vivo as reported by several investigators  <cit> . this in vitro culture-based selection of potentially tumorigenic msc clones might indeed be a serious problem when aiming transplantation of gene-marked autologous or allogeneic msc populations under immune suppression, where the immune system will not be able to control tumorigenicity. however, this does not mean that all hmsc cultures will behave this way. additional experiments that were performed with non-modified early passage hmsc cultures indicated excellent cell survival with no signs of tumour formation upon transplantation into healthy spinal cord . the absence of in vivo tumour formation for early passage msc cultures has also been reported by other investigators  <cit> . therefore, based on these and other published reports/reviews about mesenchymal stromal cells  <cit>  and supported by our findings, we conclude that new techniques need to be developed in order to safely culture and genetically modify hmsc cell transplants for research, and eventually clinical applications.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study, we demonstrate that genetically modified hmsc lines can survive in healthy rat spinal cord over at least  <dig> weeks by using adequate immune suppression and can serve as vehicles for transgene expression. however, before genetically modified hmsc can potentially be used in a clinical setting to treat spinal cord injury, more research on standardisation of hmsc culture and genetic modification needs to be done in order to prevent tumour formation and transgene silencing in vivo.

