BACKGROUND
there is a growing need for quick and highly parallel approaches to microorganism detection and identification worldwide. in this paper we present a molecular diagnostics method that combines isothermal amplification of target tmrna molecule with microarray-based detection. nucleic acid sequence based amplification  is a sensitive isothermal rna amplification technology  <cit>  that offers several advantages over the more commonly used pcr-based methods: it requires simplified equipment, is less sensitive to genomic dna contamination and therefore more suitable for applications where microbial viability is important  <cit> . in microbial diagnostics, nasba has been successfully combined with electrochemiluminescent   <cit>  elisa  <cit>  labeled dendrimer  <cit>  and molecular beacon-based  <cit>  methods to detect and identify viral and bacterial pathogens. dna microarrays have recently shown great potential in microbial diagnostics; in investigation of microbial diversity, composition and species identification from environmental and medical samples  <cit> . in microarray experiments amplified nucleic acid sequences of interest are usually labeled prior to the hybridization experiment. use of fluorescent labeling protocols for different amplification methods have previously been described  <cit> , but to our knowledge no method has been published for direct labeling of nasba amplified products. previously published nasba product labeling methods like nasba-elisa  <cit>  and naima  <cit>  all require additional secondary enzymatic steps to complete the protocol. introduction of microarray based detection to nasba offer the new potential for rapid simultaneous identification of many different amplification products and/or pathogens. delicate and precise reaction conditions have to be present for nasba amplification of target rna with high efficiency, as the method requires simultaneous cooperation and balance between three different enzymes  and their respective buffers. any further modifications to the gold standard nasba protocol  for microarray purposes, require cautious approach and carefully conducted experiments in order to maintain adequate rna amplification yield. the objective of our work is to present a method that combines simple one-step fluorescent labeling of nasba amplified tmrna product with microarray hybridization and detection. tmrna products of bacterial ssra genes were used as markers because they contain regions of sequence heterogenecity that have previously been successfully applied for microbial diagnostics  <cit> . aminoallyl modified utps  were incorporated into nascent rnas in the nasba reaction. following the amplification process, aautp modified rnas were labeled with aminoreactive fluorescent marker cy <dig>  fluorescently labeled tmrna was then used in microarray hybridization experiments. optimal concentrations for two different aautp-salts in nasba reaction were determined.

RESULTS
addition of aautp to nasba mix resulted in a concentration-dependent effect on the reaction performance. concentrations of up to  <dig>  mm for sodium salt and  <dig> mm for lithium salt did not influence nasba efficiency as seen from the amount of rna produced , whereas higher concentrations did inhibit the amplification efficiency. the exact ratio of aautp to rutp  and its influence on nasba reactions cannot be determined precisely as the manufacturer's protocol do not provide information about the composition of reagent sphere . fig. 1a shows the average amount of rna product generated with amplification reactions comparing aautp sodium salt to the aautp lithium salt. specific amplification of s. pneumoniae tmrna molecules was verified by observing only one peak of predicted size  nucleic acid on rna  <dig> chip electropherogram. respective microarray signal intensities of labeled nasba products are shown on fig. 1b. data for aautp lithium salt concentrations from  <dig>  mm to  <dig> mm and for aautp sodium salt concentrations from  <dig>  mm to  <dig> mm are given, respectively. increased microarray signal intensity was observed in parallel with increasing aminoallyl-utp concentration in nasba reaction up to  <dig> mm for sodium and  <dig> mm for lithium salt. for aautp lithium salt the final concentrations within the range of  <dig> mm and  <dig> mm resulted in the highest average microarray signals, while highest average signals with aautp sodium salt were obtained between  <dig>  mm and  <dig> mm aautp concentration, respectively. the final  <dig> mm concentration of aautp li-salt in nasba reaction resulted in highest microarray signals overall, being twice as high as the strongest signals with  <dig> mm aautp na-salt.

the aim of this work was to improve and expand the potential of a combined nasba-microarray approach by developing a new optimized protocol suitable for further possible use in microbial diagnostics. all together, we have introduced a new method suitable for high-speed parallel detection of rna targets. nasba technology, widely used in various microbiology laboratories all over the world, is for the first time combined with microarray based rna detection technology using simple one-step nasba product labeling method. previous methods described so far for nasba amplicon detection have used additional enzymatic steps after the amplification and secondary labeled probes  <cit> . in our case, the nasba protocol was modified by addition of aminoallyl-utp molecules allowing labeling of the reaction product with aminoreactive fluorescent marker. indirect labeling of rna for microarray purposes via incorporation of aautps was preferred over direct incorporation of fluorescently labeled nucleotides, as it has been proved to be more efficient with t <dig> rna polymerase based methods  <cit> . two different aautp salts were compared and both enabled sufficient fluorophore incorporation providing easily detectable microarray signals. considering that aminoallyl-utps tested in the current report are produced as different salts, this may contribute to the difference in rna quantity in nasba reaction  causing decrease in microarray signal intensities . the aautp na-salt may have more negative impact than the li-salt aautp on the co-operation of the nasba enzymes. different monovalent cations have previously been shown to have unequal impact on similar enzymatic reactions  <cit> . however, as the manufactures do not provide exact composition of aautp storage solution, other unknown components may also contribute to the observed difference in behaviour of used aminoallyl-utps.

CONCLUSIONS
in general we have presented here a new optimized protocol for highly potential microarray based detection of nasba amplified rna products. our method is suitable for further possible diagnostic applications where rapid identification of various rna molecules from bacteria or different microorganisms is needed. the combination of nasba with microarray detection is particularly advantageous in settings where different bacterial species may be present  or in clinical settings where it is necessary to identify one particular infection causing species from a panel of potential pathogens.

