BACKGROUND
catfish is the primary aquaculture species in the united states with an annual yield of over  <dig> million pounds  <cit> . while channel catfish  accounts for the majority of commercial production, the closely related blue catfish  possesses several economically important traits that have led to the production of an interspecific hybrid  recently available for commercial use  <cit> . channel catfish is also an important model species for the study of comparative immunology, reproductive physiology, and toxicology. the channel catfish immune system is among the best characterized of any fish species, with decades of research leading to the establishment of clonal functionally distinct lymphocyte lines, panels of specific monoclonal antibody reagents for detection of catfish immunocytes, and characterization of much of the machinery of teleost adaptive immunity .

genome research requires the development of a number of resources that facilitate the organization of large amounts of genetic information into units that can be easily captured, mapped, and characterized. these resources include linkage maps, physical maps, bacterial artificial chromosome  libraries, and expressed sequence tags . while bac libraries and physical and linkage maps have been developed for catfish  <cit> , large-scale est resources have been lacking. expressed sequence tag  sequencing and analysis is an effective means for rapid gene discovery and annotation  <cit> . large-scale est projects have been carried out in several teleost species to date  <cit> . a successful est project can quickly provide a wealth of genetic information for a species, often considerably shortening the laborious process of gene isolation. large-scale est projects provide the raw material for expression profiling experiments utilizing microarrays based on the transcript sequences. in addition to expression analysis, ests are vitally important to genome research in a given species. they provide a valuable source of gene-linked markers for linkage mapping  <cit> , can be utilized in comparative genome analysis  <cit> , and allow an assessment of gene duplications, a common phenomenon in teleost fish  <cit> . sequencing the ests of two closely-related species such as channel catfish and blue catfish provides further benefits – gene identification is usually additive across the species, while molecular markers and gene orthologues are valuable for mapping and differentiating allelic and gene variants. here we report the generation of  <dig>  est sequences from channel catfish and blue catfish and their potential for the development of molecular tools for mapping, genome analysis and expression profiling.

RESULTS
cdna library construction and sequencing of catfish ests
to obtain baseline information concerning the most abundantly expressed genes in catfish tissues and to capture a wide range of the transcriptome, we constructed cdna libraries from various tissues of channel catfish and blue catfish . these cdna libraries were sequenced to generate the  <dig>  ests reported here. two of these libraries  have been previously reported  <cit> , but were sequenced at greater depths in this project. twelve of the cdna libraries were produced from channel catfish tissues, and five from blue catfish tissues. tissue libraries were produced by pooling tissue from fish experimentally infected with edwardsiella ictaluri and tissue from healthy, control fish, to ensure that libraries included transcripts under both healthy and diseased conditions.

est sequencing was conducted in two phases. in phase i, 200– <dig> clones were sequenced from each library to provide a list of the most abundantly expressed genes. in phase ii, the most abundantly expressed genes  were subtracted from the clones to be sequenced by screening with overgo probes, to provide a higher gene discovery rate under a restricted budget. overgo probes were designed for  <dig> genes, and the probes were used for colony lifting hybridization. subsequently, only negative clones were picked for phase ii sequencing. the number of ests generated from each library is given in table  <dig>  a total of  <dig>  ests were successfully sequenced from channel catfish, and  <dig>  ests were sequenced from blue catfish. these ests have been submitted to ncbi dbest . furthermore, a database, estima: catfish, was established for free public access  <cit> . these ests represent a significant fraction of the est resources from channel catfish and the sole publicly available transcripts from blue catfish.

sequence assembly
a total of  <dig>  clean sequences, with average length of  <dig> bp, were assembled using the cap <dig> program  <cit>  to evaluate the level of sequence redundancy. blue catfish and channel catfish ests were assembled separately. assembling of the  <dig>  channel catfish sequences generated  <dig>  clusters and  <dig>  singletons. the average cluster contained  <dig>  sequences. a total of  <dig>  unique sequences were generated from channel catfish for this project. assembling of the  <dig>  blue catfish ests produced  <dig> clusters and  <dig>  singletons with an average cluster size of  <dig>  sequences. by this measure, sequencing of the blue catfish ests generated  <dig>  unique sequences . for the purpose of practical applications, we also performed clustering analysis by combining the ests from both channel catfish and blue catfish . for instance, the clustering analysis of the ests from both species allowed design of microarrays with a larger set of unique sequences. for the identification of polymorphic microsatellites and snps, we also used ests from both species as our resource families were produced using the interspecific hybrids of channel catfish × blue catfish.

sequence annotation
the putative identities of the sequenced ests were determined using blastx searches against the non-redundant  database in genbank. of the  <dig>  channel catfish ests,  <dig>   had significant hits , while the remaining  <dig>  ests  had no significant similarity to any sequences contained in genbank . similarly, of the  <dig>  blue catfish ests,  <dig>   had significant hits , while the remaining  <dig>  ests  had no significant similarity to any sequences contained in the database. while a significant fraction of ests could not be identified by similarity searches, our results are comparable to other est work in fishes. the unidentified transcripts are still valuable sources of microsatellite markers, and can be furthered sequenced if determined to be important in qtl analysis or expression profiling with microarrays. additionally, many of these currently unknown transcripts will likely be identified when they cluster with additional transcripts produced in the future.

assessment of the sequenced catfish transcriptome
to link these catfish est resources to a comparative genome analysis framework, we conducted systematic tblastn searches on all existing catfish ests using tetraodon chromosome-linked proteins as queries. the tblastn search parameters were set to select the top catfish hit and used a relatively more stringent cutoff e-value of e- <dig>  approximately 50% of annotated tetraodon genes had a significant hit against catfish ests , providing a rough assessment of the percentage of the catfish transcriptome now sequenced. however, blast-based comparisons between sequences of the two species have several shortcomings. first, rapid intraspecific diversification of gene families within catfish and tetraodon has obscured gene homologies between the species. second, short and/or divergent protein sequences would be excluded with the stringent parameters used. altogether,  <dig>  unique catfish ests were returned as the top hit of one or more tetraodon proteins . the factors mentioned above, especially gene family diversification, could also be responsible for the modest number of catfish hits. the majority of these catfish ests  were hit by a single tetraodon query. however, a sizeable proportion  were hit by three or more tetraodon queries . a survey of the catfish ests hit by  <dig> or more tetraodon queries revealed that these represented large gene families often functioning in developmental processes. examples of the families hitting single catfish ests included the protocadherin clusters, notch proteins, zinc fingers, netrin family, and hox proteins. analysis of the chromosomal origins of these repetitive tetraodon queries indicates that many are clustered tightly together and have likely resulted from rapid tandem gene duplication in their local environ  <cit> . high sequence conservation between members of these gene families may obscure their relationships with homologous families in catfish. alternatively, transcripts representing gene family members in catfish may not have yet been sequenced.

potential for comparative genome analysis and directed gene mapping
comparative genome analysis is also an efficient approach for transferring linkage information from map-rich species to map-poor species  <cit> . in catfish, a gene-based genetic map is not yet available. in the absence of such a map, direct comparison of gene organization on chromosomes across species is difficult. however, the premise for comparative mapping is that many chromosome segments should be conserved among fish species. of the  <dig>  chromosome-linked tetraodon proteins with significant hits on catfish ests,  <dig>  hit a single est. this subset should exclude many of the large intraspecific gene families and include genes with more apparent homologies. concentrating on those ests with especially high p-values may further refine the set . associating the catfish ests with chromosome-linked tetraodon proteins allows the development of a set of markers likely to be well-distributed across catfish chromosomes and which can provide anchors for a framework comparative map. previously published analysis of microsatellite content of the ests described here, along with others in genbank at the time of analysis, identified  <dig>  microsatellites from  <dig>  catfish ests. of these,  <dig>  were believed to represent unique genes  <cit> . many of these microsatellites are being utilized for the construction of a gene-based linkage map for catfish. to make these markers more informative, the catfish ests hit by a single chromosome-linked tetraodon query were searched for microsatellites. a total of  <dig> of these catfish ests contain a microsatellite and will aid in comparing the catfish linkage map to tetraodon nigroviridis, providing an early assessment of genomic conservation between the two teleost species.

two species system for identification of ancient and recent gene duplications
gene duplication is a widespread phenomenon in vertebrate species and a particularly important trait of teleost fish. it has been proposed that a whole-genome duplication event occurred in the teleost lineage after its split from the tetrapod lineage, but that only a subset of the duplicated genes has been retained  <cit> . ests are a valuable tool for the identification of duplicated genes in species with and without a sequenced genome. for species with completed genome sequences, a large est collection is invaluable for gene annotation in duplicated regions and facilitates the study of sub-functionalization among duplicated gene copies  <cit> . in species like catfish, where whole-genome sequencing is yet to be initiated, ests are important early indicators of gene copy numbers. however, comparisons of highly similar transcripts often do not allow researchers to differentiate between allelic variants and gene duplications. using a two species system of est sequencing and analysis, such as in channel catfish and blue catfish, can help to distinguish between these two possibilities. we surveyed the catfish est resources for gene duplication events, applying the rationale that allelic variation within the same species should be smaller than the variation present between orthologues from different species  <cit> . using this rationale, two highly similar channel catfish sequences would be considered paralogues if one of them is more closely related to a transcript from blue catfish than related to the other transcript from channel catfish. likely instances of catfish gene duplication that included ests from both species were identified by blastn searches and then reciprocal blastx searches carried out. most identified "duplications" were members of large, previously identified gene families that were the result of ancient gene duplications, i.e. similar members are present in other species such as danio rerio. more informative were cases where all selected catfish ests were highly similar to the same blastx hit and/or gene copy number could not be predicted based on blast results, indicators of more recent gene duplication within catfish. examples of these cases, where allelic variants could not be distinguished from gene paralogues based on the data from a single species alone, were subjected to phylogenetic analysis . the putative blue catfish orthologues provided the context necessary to differentiate between the highly similar channel catfish transcripts. the ability to utilize the ests from the two closely related catfish species for analysis of local gene and genome-based duplications was one of the reasons for continuing est sequencing efforts in catfish conducted by the joint genome institute .

subtraction probes for normalization of cdna libraries
sequencing a large number of cdna libraries widened the range of the catfish transcriptome sequenced while providing information concerning the most abundantly expressed genes in a variety of tissue types. this information is critical to ensure high numbers of unique transcripts can be obtained when sequencing a library to greater depths. to produce a list of most abundantly expressed genes for further subtraction, we conducted cluster analysis of all catfish ests in the dbest database of ncbi. clusters were sorted by size and those containing  <dig> or more transcripts per  <dig>  sequences were selected as subtraction drivers for use during the construction of normalized/subtracted cdna libraries to be used for a large-scale est project . through the community sequencing program, a project for sequencing  <dig>  clones of catfish ests was recently approved by the joint genome institute  of the department of energy . subtraction of highly abundant genes based on information gained through the current project should markedly increase the number of unique transcripts obtained by jgi sequencing, and initial sequencing and quality control determination by jgi of the subtracted cdna libraries we produced using this strategy confirmed this assessment.

CONCLUSIONS
a large number of cdna libraries have been made from both channel catfish and blue catfish, and they should be valuable resource for various molecular studies and for the construction of normalized cdna libraries. this work is the first large-scale est project in catfish. in addition to significant expansion of the channel catfish est resources, and generation of the sole source of the blue catfish est resource, the sequencing of  <dig>  ests from channel catfish and blue catfish has provided the potential for the development of a number of molecular tools valuable for genome research. the est resources will be particularly useful as sources of polymorphic markers including microsatellites and single nucleotide polymorphisms  for gene mapping. in addition, the est resources have aided in the identification and characterization of important genes involved in immune response  <cit> . the generated sequences are currently being utilized as reference points in comparative genome analysis and have been validated as an important tool for the assessment of gene duplications in catfish. additionally, the ests served as a foundation for the creation of normalized, subtracted cdna libraries currently being used for the sequencing of  <dig>  ests from both ends by jgi. the development of microarrays  <cit>  and linkage maps based on the catfish est resources will further extend their applications in research.

