BACKGROUND
the midgut of the female anopheles mosquito is responsible for the digestion of the blood meal and is the entry point and site of extensive interaction with disease-causing pathogens. female mosquitoes are capable of transmitting a variety of pathogens and as such the midgut has become an important focus for studies that aim at understanding the transmission biology of vector-borne diseases  <cit> .

a variety of studies, including microarray-based gene expression analyses, have addressed the effect of infection or blood-meal ingestion on the female mosquito. these studies have established the immune responsive capacity of the midgut and provide detailed information about a variety of biological processes that are regulated upon blood feeding  <cit> . however, these studies have largely focused on the overall mosquito midgut transcriptome, ignoring the spatial specialization of different functions in the various compartments of this tissue .

adult female mosquitoes feed on  both blood and sugar, and the storage and processing of these two foods  are spatially different. the ingested sugar is first stored in the  ventral diverticulum  and then delivered to the midgut. its digestion and absorption occurs within both the anterior and posterior midgut  <cit> . the alpha-glucosidase activity responsible for sugar digestion is detected in both compartments, although regulation does differ between the two; the enzyme activity is constitutively expressed in the anterior midgut, and blood-feeding does not influence its levels  <cit> . in contrast to sugar digestion, the blood meal is exclusively digested and absorbed in the posterior region  <cit> . aminopeptidases and glucosidases are also detected in the posterior region, where their levels rise after blood-feeding. digestion of the protein content of blood is mainly carried out by serine proteases such as trypsins and chymotrypsins that display complex patterns of regulation in relation to blood feeding. trypsin activity is limited to the posterior region of the midgut  <cit> . the majority of the cells in the posterior midgut are digestive epithelial cells, which produce and secrete the enzymes needed for blood-meal digestion  <cit> . regenerative and endocrine cells are also present in the posterior midgut, although their function is currently unknown  <cit> . in addition to their essential  role in blood-meal digestion, trypsins have also been shown to be  required for the activation of an ookinete-secreted chitinase, which  enables the parasite to penetrate the peritrophic matrix of the mosquito  midgut  <cit> . a variety of transporters responsible for maintaining osmotic balance and nutritient uptake are also expressed in the midgut and are regulated upon feeding  <cit> .

the peritrophic matrix of mosquitoes is a semi-permeable chitinous matrix that lines the digestive tract and thereby acts as a barrier to direct contact with the blood meal and to microbial and parasitic infections  <cit> . the peritrophic matrix is synthesized by midgut epithelial cells in direct response to the ingestion of a blood meal. the peritrophic matrix precursors are stored in secretory vesicles of midgut epithelial cells, and the secretion of these proteins is triggered by blood-feeding, releasing the vesicle contents into the lumen of the mosquito midgut  <cit> . the malarial parasite plasmodium has to cross the peritrophic matrix before it can invade the midgut epithelium and, as such, the peritrophic matrix and the genes involved in its formation have therefore become a focus for studies that aim to block parasite transmission  <cit> .

in plasmodium-infected mosquitoes, oocysts are primarily found in the very posterior region of the midgut  <cit> . the reason for this spatial distribution is still unclear. an early suggestion was that the parasites preferentially invade vesicular atpase -overexpressing cells that are located at the very posterior region of the midgut  <cit> . more recently, it has been shown that not all plasmodium species specifically invade this particular type of cell  <cit> .

the close association between transcript abundance and gene function makes it possible to infer biological function and physiological conditions from gene expression profiles. we have performed a global microarray-based gene expression analysis to study the midgut sex- and compartment- specific transcriptomes. in conjunction with this analysis, we have utilized a peptidomic approach to identify putative short secreted peptides that are enriched in the cardia and anterior compartment, where the majority of the mosquito's antimicrobial peptides are found to be produced. the elucidation of these spatial profiles  will provide a broadened basis for understanding the physiological significance and functional attributes of the a. gambiae midgut, and may lead to the identification of components that can be used to develop novel strategies to disrupt pathogen transmission.

RESULTS
the anopheles gambiae sex-specific midgut transcriptomes and the female midgut compartment- specific transcriptomes were characterized using microarrays that represented the entire mosquito transcriptome  <cit> . for the midgut compartment-specific transcription assays, labeled samples made from rna from each compartment were hybridized against a labeled sample made from rna of the entire midgut. genes that exhibited differential expression of 2-fold or greater between the compared samples were considered to be significantly enriched in either one of the samples. expression data generated by the microarray analysis were validated by independently determining the regulation of  <dig> genes with real-time quantitative pcr  .

anopheles gambiae sex-specific midgut transcriptome
the 4-day-old mosquito midgut expressed  <dig> genes in total  . i direct comparison of transcript abundance between the female and male midguts identified  <dig> transcripts that were specifically enriched in the female midgut and  <dig> transcripts that were specifically enriched in the male midgut  . the remaining  <dig> transcripts were present at equal levels in both the male and female midguts, and they represented a variety of functional classes. the most prominent of these classes were replication/transcription/translation , metabolism, and redox/mitochondrial . a total of  <dig> immunity and apoptosis -related transcripts were expressed in both female and male midguts, including three known anti-microbial peptides, gambicin , cecropin cec3/cecb  and cecropin sec2/secc  . thirty transcripts encoding putative pattern recognition receptors were also highly expressed in the midguts of both sexes. these included members of the c-type lectin, ml2-like family , fibrinogen domain immunolectin , galectin, gram-negative bacteria binding protein , peptidoglycan recognition protein , scavenger receptor, leucin rich repeat domain gene family , and thioester containing protein  families . a further eight transcripts are involved in putative immune amplification and signalling pathways: rel <dig> , toll <dig> , two immune-related serine proteases clipd <dig>  and sp22d , and four serpins  .

the female midgut-specific genes displayed a significantly greater functional diversity than did the male midgut-specific genes, which were mostly involved in housekeeping processes. the functional differences between the transcriptomes of the male and female midguts were mainly related to immunity and blood digestion . a total of  <dig> transcripts involved in proteolysis including several blood digestive enzyme genes such as carboxypeptidases , and trypsins  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . a previous report also showed that these members of the trypsin family are constitutively expressed in unfed female mosquitoes while two  are blood-meal-inducible  <cit> . in contrast, the male midgut did not display specific expression of single proteolytic enzyme transcript. two peritrophin  <dig> precursors  were also found to be highly expressed in the female gut . in contrast to the female midgut, the male gut was not enriched in transcripts that are known to play a role in blood digestion .

eight transcripts pertaining to immunity-related functions were enriched in the midguts of female mosquitoes; these included two members of the fbn family , serpin  <dig> , prophenoloxidase  <dig> , a lysozyme , an immunoglobulin-like precursor  and nitric oxide synthase  . in contrast, the male midguts did not exhibit specific expression of any immune genes .

female midgut compartment-specific transcriptomes
to investigate the female midgut compartment-specific transcriptomes, the gene-specific mrna abundance of each compartment  was compared to that of the whole female mosquito midgut . the relatively small number of posterior part-enriched  genes identified in these assays is attributed to the significantly larger number of cells contained in the posterior midgut  and the quite similar cell makeup of the two parts in conjunction with our hybridization strategy that was based on a hybridization between a posterior compartment-specific labeled sample against the whole midgut sample, which also included the same posterior compartment transcripts. for this reason a second set of hybridizations was also performed to directly compare gene expression in the cardia and posterior midgut  . these assays identified a  significantly larger number of posterior midgut-enriched transcripts.

the cardia tissue displayed specific expression of  <dig> transcripts when compared to the whole female mosquito gut  . direct comparison of gene expression between the cardia and the posterior midgut identified  <dig> cardia-specific transcripts, of which  <dig> %  belonged to the immunity class  . all of the known mosquito anti-microbial peptides cecropin cec3/cecb , cecropin cec2/cecc , gambicin , and defensin  <dig>  were all significantly enriched in the cardia when compared to the other compartments . two lysozyme transcripts  were also highly enriched in the cardia. expression of gambicin and defensin has previously been localized to the cardia  <cit> , and both these genes have been shown to be induced in the midgut upon invasion by malarial parasites  <cit> . defensin has been shown to be expressed by the anterior midgut of another hematophagous insect, stomoxys calcitrans  <cit> . the cardia showed highly enriched expression of seven anti-plasmodium factors including tep <dig> , lrrd <dig> , fbn <dig> , fbn <dig> , sp clip <dig>  and gambicin   <cit> .

the anterior compartment, which mainly serves as a tube to allow the blood to enter the posterior section, displayed the smallest number of enriched genes: only  <dig> transcripts of varying functions  . three of these genes encoded proteins involved in immune defense: tep <dig> , tep <dig> , and pgrplb  .

the anterior part of the  posterior midgut displayed enriched expression of  <dig> transcripts with  quite diverse functions . transcripts that play a role in proteolysis, basic metabolism, and immunity represented a significant portion of these transcripts . among  <dig> immunity-related transcripts were  <dig> anti-plasmodium factors, tep <dig> , nos  and fbn <dig>   <cit> . the most posterior compartment, the posterior part of the posterior midgut, was enriched for  <dig> transcripts that had at least a two-fold higher expression in this compartment than in the whole female gut and had a functional class distribution with similar proportions to that of the anterior part of the posterior midgut, while the actual genes are different . only  <dig> transcripts encoding potential immune-related factors were more specifically expressed in this compartment and none of those represented known anti-plasmodium factors, suggesting that the anterior parts of the midgut is potentially more active in anti-plasmodium gene expression .

a direct comparison of gene expression between the cardia and the posterior midgut identified  <dig> differentially expressed genes, of which  <dig> were enriched in the posterior midgut . a major functional group of the posterior midgut was represented by  <dig> transcripts encoding proteolytic enzymes; many of those are know to be involved in blood digestion. . it has previously been shown that several blood digestive proteases are expressed prior to feeding in order to be immediately present upon blood ingestion  <cit> . several of these proteolytic enzymes may be involved in diverse processes such as signal transduction, extracellular matrix processing and immunity. the posterior midgut displayed elevated expression of  <dig> transcripts involved in immunity  . as many as  <dig> of these putative immune genes encoded putative pattern recognition receptors, including two plasmodium protective c-type lectins ctl <dig>  and ctlma <dig>  .

peptidomic analysis of peptides within the cardia and posterior compartments
the transcription analyses indicated the cardia as a major site of antimicrobial gene expression. in order to identify potential  novel antimicrobial peptides, we employed a pepdidomic approach using  2-dimensional liquid chromatography tandem mass spectrometry   to screen for putative secreted short peptides that are enriched in the  cardia compartments of the female mosquito midgut. the selected approach allowed the sample to be fractionated into several reversed-phase runs, giving better coverage by virtue of less complexity in any given fraction. this was, however, not a comprehensive analysis of all the proteins/peptides that are present in the cardia since a protein extraction method that is biased towards short peptides was used.

a total of  <dig> proteins were identified in the cardia peptide extract . the peptidomic analysis was overlaid with the transcriptomic data to identify those gene products that have corresponding data:  <dig> % of the identified peptides had corresponding transcript expression data . the relatively small overlap between transcriptome and peptidome data is most likely attributed to differences between mrna and protein turnover rates and abundance that therefore does not permit detection by either one of the two methods. ten peptides were identified in the cardia that had both a length of less than  <dig> amino acids and a signal peptide, as predicted by signalp  <dig>  server  . seven of these peptides are annotated in ensembl and include three of the known mosquito anti-microbial peptides  . a heat shock protein , a cuticle protein , and a salivary gland transcript of unknown function ce <dig>  were also among these putative short secreted peptides . blast analysis of the ce <dig> amino acid sequence revealed that it has a 52% identity to an anti-thrombin protein found in the salivary gland of anopheles stephensi  <cit> . cuticle proteins have previously been linked to immune defense reactions in female a. gambiae  <cit> . the remaining three putative short secreted peptides  are of unknown function.

three histone proteins  were also present in the cardia ; a protein family that has been previously been linked to immunity  <cit> . two peptides  of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids in length, respectively, had a predicted signal peptide and contained a pyrokinin domain . pyrokinins are insect neurohormones that are involved in signalling pathways and mediate muscle contractile activity  <cit> . the presence of such enzymes in the unfed mosquito midgut is of particular interest since the opisina arenosella pyrokinins have been found to possess inhibitory effect on the digestive enzyme release in the midgut  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in this work we have analyzed the anopheles gambiae sex-specific midgut transcriptome and dissected the female midgut transcriptome into spatially specific compartments.

despite the broad functional differences between the female and male midgut, only a limited degree of differential expression was detected . a similar observation was made in a proteomic study that also found very few differences in protein expression between male and unfed female midguts: ten male and eight female-specific proteins  <cit> . a further ten female-specific proteins were identified after blood-feeding in the same study. the unfed state of the midgut tissues used for our assays is probably responsible for our inability to identify these sex-specific transcripts, which are mainly functionally related to blood digestion and have been described elsewhere  <cit> .

the two major differences in functional class between the transcriptomes of male and female mosquito midguts mainly reflect the exclusive hematophagous nature of the female mosquito that also exposes it to a greater spectrum and level of microbes  <cit> . these gene classes, related largely to blood digestion and immunity, and are highly enriched in the female midgut .

our analysis revealed that the different compartments of the female mosquito midgut display distinctive gene expression patterns that correlate with their specific functions. the posterior compartment is the site of blood-meal digestion; it expressed a variety of digestive enzymes implicated in both sugar and protein digestion, whereas the more anterior compartments appeared to be more specialized in sugar digestion ; differences between the transcriptomes of the posterior and cardia compartments were mainly related to proteolysis/digestion, metabolism, and immunity . interestingly, the anti-plasmodium factors tep <dig> and nitric oxide synthase displayed elevated expression in the anterior part of the posterior midgut  <cit> . this spatial expression pattern, taken together with the highly elevated expression of another seven anti-plasmodium factors in the cardia and anterior compartment, could partly explain the higher plasmodium infection levels in the posterior part of the posterior midgut. interestingly, both plasmodium protective c-type lectins, ctlma <dig> and ctl <dig> were highly expressed in the posterior section  <cit> . additional anti-plasmodium  factors are likely to be expressed in the midgut tissue but not  identified in the present study because of the non-infected state of the  studied mosquitoes. immune gene expression patterns also displayed qualitative differences between the cardia and posterior compartment that were principally related to the exclusive expression of antimicrobial peptide genes and lysozyme precursors in the cardia. the elevated presence of these immune factors in the cardia is likely to serve a mechanism that maintains the sugar rich anterior midgut sterile, and also allow efficient secretion and distribution in the blood meal while it is ingested and passes through the cardia and anterior midgut compartment. antimicrobial peptide sequences have diverged rapidly during evolution and only a few share extensive homologous across species. one common feature of most antimicrobial peptides is their short and secreted nature. based on our findings, the cardia can be expected to produce a variety of novel mosquito-specific antimicrobial peptides and has therefore a potential to serve as a useful source for their identification and further study. four cardia-enriched transcripts  and two peptides identified in the cardia proteome  encode such short and secreted peptides . one of these  has recently been identified as a putative short immune peptide that is strongly induced by p. falciparum invasion of the midgut, although silencing of this gene was found to have no effect on plasmodium development  <cit> .

the anopheles midgut is the major site of contact and interaction with the plasmodium parasite. malaria control strategies based on transgenic expression of anti-plasmodium factors that target the parasite in the mosquito would require both effector genes with plasmodiocidal activity, and tissue- and stage-specific promoters  <cit> . targeting the plasmodium parasite in the midgut would require spatial specificity of anti-plasmodium gene expression depending on the targeted parasite stage. for instance, a cardia specific promoter may be more appropriate to drive expression of an anti-plasmodium factor that target gametocytes, zygotes and ookinetes in the midgut lumen as it potentially would allow the factor to blend into the ingested blood meal. an anti-plasmodium factor that kills ookinete stages in the midgut epithelium would be more effective against the parasite if expressed in the posterior compartment which is invaded. this comprehensive study and other studies have the potential to provide such promoters and anti-plasmodium factors.

