BACKGROUND
the complex regulation of diverse biological processes acting in eukaryotic organisms is only possible through interactions between different components in the cell. proteins, for instance, can be part of extensive complexes, such as transcription factor complexes for the combinatorial control of their target genes or proteasome complexes for protein degradation. it is the specific timing and location of the activity of these protein complexes that defines their role in the cell. several attempts have been made to infer protein-protein interaction maps in diverse model organisms through large-scale experimental methods  <cit> . in yeast  <cit> , human  <cit> , drosophila  <cit>  and c. elegans  <cit> , genome-wide y2h screens and large-scale affinity purification/mass spectrometry studies have been performed. nevertheless, the reliability of the results of these studies is thought to be relatively poor because in general quite a small overlap between datasets of experimentally identified interactions is observed. however, there is growing evidence that this observation is due to the complementarity of different methods  rather than to a high number of false interactions  <cit> . yu et al.  conclude that both y2h and affinity-purification followed by mass spectrometry  data are of equally high quality but of a fundamentally different and complementary nature. these authors show that, compared to interaction maps based on complex purification and identification, the binary interaction map of yeast proteins is enriched for transient signaling interactions and inter-complex connections  <cit> . in any case, assessment of the data quality is necessary, not only to design future experiments but also to construct high confidence datasets  used for the training and evaluation of computational methods  <cit> . several efforts have been made to centralize protein-protein interaction data through the construction of databases such as dip  <cit> , mint  <cit> , biogrid  <cit>  and intact  <cit> .

to make full use of the currently available interaction data, computational methods are being developed to assess the quality of experimentally generated protein-protein interactions and to predict new interactions  <cit> . whereas earlier analyses focused on the relation between gene expression and protein-protein interaction only  <cit> , the integration of several lines of evidence  in the prediction or validation of protein-protein interactions is highly valued in recent studies, as it increases the performance as well as the coverage of the method  <cit> . typically used genomic features encompass  functional features such as gene ontology  annotation of the proteins, co-expression of the encoding genes, coordinated protein abundance and co-essentiality,  structural features such as co-occurrence of protein domains and overrepresented sequence motifs,  comparative genomics-based features such as orthology and, primarily exploited in prokaryotes, phylogenetic profiles, gene neighborhood, co-evolution, and rosetta stone , and  network topology-based features, such as connectivity  <cit> . in principle, two approaches can be discerned in the prediction of protein-protein interactions. the first approach starts from protein pairs that are identified to be orthologous to known interacting proteins in other species . the interolog detection strategy was initially developed to transfer information on protein-protein interactions from yeast to higher organisms  <cit> . this method assumes that protein-protein interactions are conserved between organisms and that pairs of proteins whose orthologs are known to interact in other species probably interact in the species of interest as well. although some shortcomings can be identified, protein complexes do show evolutionary conservation  <cit> . numerous studies have been published in which, mainly human protein-protein interactions are predicted based on interolog detection  <cit> . furthermore, predictions are made through integrative approaches in a probabilistic framework  <cit> . other studies start from all possible protein pairs, often incorporating interolog detection as a genomic feature or do not include interolog detection at all  <cit> . the latter approach has the advantage that interactions do not need to be conserved over long evolutionary distances, but often identify associations between genes rather than protein-protein interactions  <cit> .

for the model plant arabidopsis thaliana, attempts to construct large-scale protein-protein interaction maps as well as the application and critical assessment of computational methods have been rather limited  <cit> . in this study, we aim to predict a reliable set of protein-protein interactions suitable for experimental validation as well as further computational analyses. first of all, we investigate whether the necessary assumptions taken in our approach are valid in the model plant arabidopsis thaliana: namely,   protein-protein interactions in yeast and animals  are conserved in arabidopsis thaliana ,  interacting proteins co-localize,  interacting proteins function in the same biological process, and  genes encoding interacting proteins show similar expression patterns. hereby, the relative contribution of these features to the prediction of protein-protein interactions in arabidopsis thaliana is assessed. the prediction of arabidopsis protein-protein interactions is performed, exploiting the conservation of these interactions between species on the one hand, and utilizing functional association data on the other hand. finally, protein complexes are delineated from the predicted protein-protein interaction network and the function and evolutionary conservation of these protein complexes is studied.

RESULTS
integration of orthology, go annotation and gene expression
the basis of the prediction of protein-protein interactions in arabidopsis thaliana performed in this study resides in the detection of interologs. interologs are defined as protein-protein interactions that are conserved between two species and that can be detected through the identification of the orthologs in the target organism of the proteins known to interact in the source organism . applying this approach, we assume that protein-protein interactions occurring in yeast, c. elegans, drosophila and/or human, are conserved and consequently occur in arabidopsis as well.

when identifying interologs, we need to deal with the high number of duplicated genes in the target organism arabidopsis thaliana . inferring all combinations of co-orthologous proteins can cause a high number of false positive predictions. to augment the confidence in the predicted interactions, we integrate data from several so-called genomic features, namely the go biological process similarity, the go cellular component similarity and the pearson correlation coefficient . accordingly, three main conditions are set up, namely the co-localization of interacting proteins, a similar biological role for interacting proteins and the co-expression of genes encoding interacting proteins. these conditions were verified by comparing these different properties in positive and negative protein pairs . as positives, protein-protein interactions experimentally shown to interact are considered, while a negative set of protein pairs was built by making random combinations between all proteins, which is an approximation of true negative protein pairs . one has to take into account that the size of the positive dataset can be relatively low and as a consequence, caution in the assessment of false positive rates needs to be taken . for each genomic feature, the frequency distributions of positive  and negative  datasets were compared  to choose a threshold value for the genomic features .

number of proteins and interactions with genomic feature information for arabidopsis protein-protein interactions from public databases 

to decide if two proteins co-localize and/or function in the same biological process, both the go cellular component  and the go biological process  annotation of the interacting proteins were evaluated. to measure the similarity between the go annotations of two proteins, we calculated the maximum depth of the common ancestor of all pairs of go terms assigned to both proteins . similarly, the co-expression in positive and negative datasets was investigated by calculating the pearson correlation coefficient, describing the global similarity between expression profiles for interacting and non-interacting proteins . when inspecting the distributions, a smaller difference between positive and negative datasets can be observed for expression correlation than for go annotations. therefore, it is impossible to define a threshold in pearson correlation coefficient that identifies a considerable number of true positives while having few false positives . different genomic features need to be combined to maximize the coverage of the prediction . through this combination of genomic features, thresholds may be decreased while maintaining an acceptable number of false positives . the use of a threshold of  <dig> for the go biological process similarity score in combination with a threshold of  <dig>  for the pearson correlation coefficient is acceptable . through this combination a lower threshold can be chosen for both genomic features. nevertheless, one should keep in mind that the co-expression measure takes into account expression data from  <dig> microarray experiments. it can be expected that the number and type of experiments influences the overall pearson correlation coefficients for all pairs of genes. networks of experimentally identified protein-protein interactions in yeast and human, although containing false positive interactions as well, show an average pearson correlation coefficient of  <dig>  and  <dig>  respectively, supporting our choice of the pearson correlation coefficient threshold  <cit> . in addition, the go biological process similarity score  and go cellular component similarity score  were also used independently. these relatively high thresholds result in inferences based on very detailed go annotations, mostly not inferred based on computational analyses ). the depth of go terms such as ubiquitin-dependent protein catabolic process  or peroxisome  is high, pointing to specific processes or localizations that are mostly assigned based on experimental evidence . systematic assessment of the evidence codes of the go terms used for the interaction filtering  shows that a minority of terms are inferred from sequence or structural similarity  . go terms used in the bp5+pcc <dig>  filter are more often inferred from sequence or structural similarity. however, as in this case the bp score is combined with the pcc, we believe that these iss terms do not affect the quality of our predictions considerably. therefore, we decided to include iss-based go annotations throughout our analysis and only removed ipi, nd, nr, nas and iea-based annotations . finally, we added up the different sets of predicted protein-protein interactions resulting from the application of different thresholds and different source organisms. we opted to add up the different sets rather than to take the intersection. on the one hand, our randomization studies show that the individual filters result in acceptable numbers of false positives. on the other hand, we encompass the relative high amount of missing functional data in cases where, for instance, bp annotation but no cc annotation is available. however, using this approach it is possible that a protein-protein interaction passed the bp <dig> filter, while it does not pass the cc <dig> filter . our systematic assessment shows that this possibility occurs for only a minority of interactions for bp <dig>  while more often for bp <dig> which is used in combination with pcc <dig>  . moreover, only half of these contradictory cc annotations is inferred from experimental evidence .

in summary,  <dig> % of the experimentally identified protein-protein interactions  meet the conditions of the genomic features  , without taking into account orthology .

prediction of protein-protein interactions in arabidopsis thaliana
starting from the protein-protein interactions in the source organisms yeast, c. elegans, drosophila and human, protein-protein interactions were predicted in arabidopsis using the above-mentioned genomic features. we downloaded the orthomcl database containing orthologous groups  of  <dig> species. from this dataset, we extracted the evolutionary relationships between arabidopsis, yeast, c. elegans, drosophila and human genes. the approach taken to build this database has the advantage that in-paralogs  and thus orthologous groups rather than one-to-one orthologs can be identified. employing these orthologous relationships between yeast, c. elegans, drosophila and human genes on the one hand, and arabidopsis genes on the other hand, interologs were detected . the original numbers of interologs are drastically reduced when applying the genomic feature filters . the set of protein-protein interactions that remains after applying the genomic feature filters will further be referred to as the "filtered interactome" and accounts for  <dig>  protein-protein interactions among  <dig> proteins . however, we do not discard all interologs that do not meet the requirements of the genomic features. as we would like to study the idenfied interologs in an evolutionary context, we choose to extend the filtered interactome. for every combination of orthologous groups present in the filtered interactome, we take all other  interactions to build the "predicted interactome" . this predicted interactome accounts for  <dig>  protein-protein interactions among  <dig> proteins . the filtered  and predicted interactome  are provided as supplementary material at .

number of arabidopsis proteins and protein-protein interactions detected using different source organisms and different genomic feature filters 

the protein-protein interactions detected in the filtered and predicted interactome were compared to experimentally shown and previously predicted protein-protein interactions. fig.  <dig> and additional file  <dig> depict the overlap between the different datasets. overall, a small overlap is found between our filtered interactome and the experimentally shown interactions reported by the tair, mint and intact databases . similarly, a small overlap of the experimentally identified interactions with the previously predicted interactions of geisler-lee et al.  <cit>  and cui et al.  <cit>  is observed . similar to our approach, geisler-lee et al.  <cit>  identified interologs using worm, fly, human and yeast as source organisms. in this study, a confidence value is calculated taking into account the number of times a protein-protein interaction is found as interolog and/or supported by genomic features such as co-expression based on the pearson correlation coefficient and localization based on the arabidopsis subcellular database   <cit> . the predicted protein-protein interaction dataset of cui et al.  <cit>  was constructed based on a naive bayesian classifier. this method integrates different predictive data sources such as ortholog information, go biological process, co-expression, gene fusion, gene neighborhood, phylogenetic profiles and domain architecture, to build a model to predict novel protein-protein interactions. a comparison of our filtered and predicted interactome with these two sets of previously predicted protein-protein interactions is shown in additional file  <dig> . although a similar approach was taken by geisler-lee et al.  <cit> , a considerable number of new interactions  as well as experimentally identified interactions  not recovered by geisler-lee et al.  <cit>  is found in our study . differences between the two approaches that may cause the relatively small overlap are most probably the use of different protein-protein interaction databases for the source organisms  and the use of different confidence measures. these observations corroborate previous reports on the low coverage of current protein-protein interaction datasets and detection strategies.

accessibility of the interactome
we have developed an easy-to-use query and visualization system to represent the inferred interactome. the discussed protein clusters as well as the complete predicted interactome can be observed through a web-start version of cytoscape that can be found at . a node and edge attribute system is employed to represent the different types of information. the color of the edge represents the degree of co-expression calculated as the pearson correlation coefficient , while the line width of the edge represents the go biological process similarity score  and the line style of the edge represents the go cellular component similarity score . the color of the nodes corresponds to the protein cluster the protein belongs to . proteins belonging to small or no clusters are colored in grey. tair functional descriptions are shown as node labels. subsets of the interactome that are of interest to the researcher can be visualized easily by querying the interactome for  protein or a functional description.

delineation of protein clusters in the predicted interactome
in an attempt to reveal the functional repertoire of the predicted interactome, we have delineated highly interconnected regions in the protein-protein interaction network . in addition, we tried to assign a function to the identified protein clusters. finally, we investigated the evolutionary conservation of the protein clusters.

identification of protein clusters is performed using the cast clustering algorithm . this clustering procedure employs the connectivity of the proteins. overall,  <dig> proteins taking part in  <dig>  interactions could be identified in protein clusters, accounting for the majority of originally identified interactions . the biological roles of the identified protein clusters were studied through identification of overrepresented go categories  . to judge the validity of the protein clusters, we inspected clusters involved in particular biological processes together. using this approach of clustering and subsequent go enrichment analysis, we can elegantly pinpoint protein complexes, the relationships between them and the encompassing biological processes they are involved in .

as could be expected, well-conserved proteins and functions, such as those involved in transcription, translation, and proteolysis, are overrepresented. typically, proteasome and ribosomal proteins are identified as highly connected . a number of protein-protein interaction networks involved in particular processes such as organelle organization and biogenesis, lipid metabolism, and atp binding as well as the biological processes mentioned below can be viewed through our supplementary data site. in addition, a considerable number of protein-protein interactions with a role in transmembrane transport, membrane receptor activity and vesicle trafficking were detected as previously reported by geisler-lee et al.  <cit>  . for example, a link was found between protein clusters of interacting vamps  and snares  with vacuolar h+ pumping atpases  and cation/h+ exchangers . although not connected to the above-mentioned clusters, a protein cluster containing components of the translocase inner membrane complex  associated with carrier proteins , was retrieved as well. several links between cell cycle control, protein degradation and related processes are captured in the protein clusters enriched for go categories containing 'cell cycle' . whereas ubiquitin-mediated proteolysis regulates the activity of cyclins during the progression through the different phases of the cell cycle, b-type cyclins interact with several microtubule-related components during cytokinesis. similarly, a-type cyclins, dna replication proteins  and rbr/wee proteins are associated during the g1/s transition  <cit>  . overall, we observe a high similarity in expression patterns for the genes encoding proteins in the 'cell cycle' clusters most probably due to the tight regulation of proteins involved in dna replication . moreover, the interactions in these clusters are often supported by the go biological process measure . these two properties occur mainly within protein clusters. in contrast, genes encoding interacting proteins involved in transmembrane activity, described above, show an overall lower similarity in expression patterns, even within protein clusters . this difference in the degree of co-expression is probably due to the more specific expression patterns of transmembrane activity genes resulting in transient interactions that cannot be identified using a global co-expression measure. however, most of the interactions in the transmembrane activity network are supported through the go biological process and/or go cellular component feature and thereby were identified through our approach . reasonably, localization is very important in transmembrane activity-related processes such as ion transmembrane transport and protein excretion through vesicular exocytosis.

more detailed analysis of the 'response to' interaction network identified many proteins functioning in, for instance, response to dna damage or response to oxidative stress caused by the accumulation of reactive oxygen species . proteins active in these stress responses are dnaj heat shock proteins, calcium-dependent and map kinases , dna repair proteins , superoxide dismutases , glutathione peroxidases  and glutathione s-transferases . these proteins are involved in very diverse biological processes, such as response to heat, response to toxins and response to chemical stimulus, which is reflected in the dashed edges in the network . in order to verify that these predicted interactions also reflect actual conserved biological stress responses, we compared the expression patterns of all  <dig> arabidopsis genes in these 'response to' protein clusters using a recently compiled comparative stress response matrix  <cit> . whereas 11% of all stress-induced arabidopsis gene families shows a conserved stress response in human or yeast , the 'response to' set  shows a more than five-fold enrichment for conserved stress response . these findings confirm that several components as well as protein-protein interactions in arabidopsis indeed function in diverse responses and that this response is evolutionary conserved in eukaryotes.

besides interactions functioning in well-conserved biological processes, we could also identify the recruitment of well-conserved proteins and protein-protein interactions in plant-specific processes. in the following examples, the regulatory mechanisms such as chromatin remodeling and actin polymerization are common to different lineages. however, these mechanisms are put into play in highly lineage-specific biological processes, such as seed and trichome development.

in a first example, we predict that the proteins fertilization independent endosperm , curly leaf , swinger , multicopy suppressor of ira <dig> , and medea  interact and that this protein complex functions in flowering and embryonic development . these proteins are homologous to the polycomb , esc, e, p <dig>  and su <dig> genes in animals and take part in the polycomb repressive complex  <dig>   <cit> . this prc <dig> complex mediates the epigenetic control of developmental patterning through chromatin modification. genetic evidence suggests that there are different pcg complexes in plants, regulating different developmental pathways. in arabidopsis, the fertilization independent seed  <dig>  repression complex is described to be involved in seed and flower development and includes fie, mea, msi <dig>  and fis <dig>  the vernalization <dig>  complex consisting of vrn <dig>  fie, clf, and swn is involved in vernalization response. except for vrn <dig>  we have predicted interactions between all these components. in addition, we have uncovered additional, to our knowledge new interactors such as photoperiod-independent early flowering  <dig> , bushy  and splayed , probable subunits of swi/snf chromatin remodeling complexes  <cit> . moreover, we detect interactions with associated proteins such as histone deacytelases and putative homeotic regulators. interesting to note is that we could also identify the interaction of msi <dig> with retinoblastoma related  <dig> , just recently confirmed by biomolecular fluorescence complementation  <cit>  . this complex is overall very well supported by the genomic features used in this study . moreover, several of the identified interactions were already shown experimentally .

in a second example, we have predicted interactions between different actin-related proteins , constituting the arp2/ <dig> complex involved in leaf development . arp <dig> or wurm, arp <dig> or distorted trichomes  <dig>  arpc <dig>  arpc1a, arpc2a or distorted trichomes  <dig>  arpc <dig> and arpc <dig> or crooked, as well as a number of other non-actin-related proteins, were predicted to interact. the arp2/ <dig> complex has been shown to be composed of two actin-related proteins , a seven-bladed beta propeller , and four other subunits . only arpc <dig> is missing from our predictions, which is due to the fact that arpc <dig> is not present in the input dataset of orthologous relationships. in addition to the arp2/ <dig> complex, we could identify a complex of three proteins , involved in leaf development as well. at least two of these proteins of the scar complex are thought to regulate the arp2/ <dig> complex. the arp2/ <dig> complex functions as a central player in the precise regulation of both the initiation of actin polymerization and the organization of the resulting filaments, common to all organisms used in this study. however, disruption of the arp2/ <dig> complex has distinct effects in different organisms, going from growth defects in yeast, defects in eye and axon development in worm and fly, migration of cancer cells in human, and epidermal cell shape determination in arabidopsis . for the arp2/ <dig> protein complex, the power of the co-expression measure was limited. nevertheless, similarity in localization and biological process showed to be very valuable. this observation points to the complementarity of the different genomic features employed in this study.

discussion
in this study, we have predicted protein-protein interactions in the model plant arabidopsis thaliana through interolog detection with yeast, worm, fly and human as source organisms and using genomic features  as filters to increase the confidence in our predictions. as such, a set of highly reliable interactions could be delineated that can be further employed in both computational and experimental studies. in contrast to previous efforts to predict protein-protein interactions in arabidopsis thaliana, we do not only provide a list of all interologs and their associated genomic feature values, but rather focus on the subset of protein-protein interactions that is supported by the different genomic features . the extensive study of the behavior of the genomic features for experimentally identified protein-protein interactions compared to random protein pairs allowed us to validate the protein-protein interactions adequately.

the setup of this study allowed us to rigorously investigate the functional repertoire and evolutionary conservation of the identified protein-protein interactions. we conclude that although this type of protein-protein interaction prediction is highly dependent on the degree of conservation of protein-protein interactions between arabidopsis and yeasts or animals, we were able to predict interactions with roles in diverse biological processes. interestingly, these cover both interactions in evolutionary conserved and plant-specific processes.

future improvements to the prediction of protein-protein interactions are manifold. for instance, it has been shown that not all protein-protein interactions are equally stable. some interactions are permanent while others are transient, meaning that proteins only come together at certain time points or locations possibly resulting in different expression profiles of the encoding genes   <cit> . although we could identify at least some transient interactions , the use of global expression correlation measures such as the pearson correlation coefficient might be replaced by a measure of "partial" expression similarity that is able to capture even less stable protein-protein interactions. recent proteomics profiling  will allow the consideration of protein activity rather than transcript activity. on the other hand, with the large-scale experimental identification of protein-protein interactions in many species, a gold standard positive set of interactions can be built more rigorously. this gold standard positive set will increase the strength of machine learning methods in protein-protein interaction detection. nevertheless, a gold standard negative set of interactions remains problematic.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, this study showed that the integration of orthology with functional association data, such as localization, biological process and co-expression, is adequate to predict protein-protein interactions. in particular, for organisms with limited existing knowledge on protein-protein interactions, such as arabidopsis, our approach is very valuable. on the contrary, sophisticated machine learning approaches perform poorly because of the lack of gold standard sets of interactions. we could predict a high number of new protein-protein interactions, and analysis of the functional repertoire of identified protein clusters supports the significance of these putative interactions. the approach described here can easily be adapted for estimating the reliability of experimentally identified interactions. finally, with the growing availability of expression and gene ontology information, this approach can be applied to the detection of protein-protein interactions in agronomically and economically interesting plants, such as rice, corn and poplar.

