BACKGROUND
mesoamerica is one of the most complex biogeographical areas in the world  <cit> . this complexity reflects the confluence of neotropical and nearctic biotas and a long history of geological activity, stretching from the miocene to the present, during which movements of the cocos, north american, pacific and caribbean plates  <cit>  created barriers and land-bridges that have affected the distribution of freshwater fishes  <cit> . for example, the pliocene  closure of the panama strait has been postulated to be one of the most important causes of faunal interchange between neartic and neotropical regions  <cit> . climatic changes have also been invoked to explain the distribution of mesoamerican fish fauna  <cit> . distinguishing between climatic and geological effects requires information on phylogeny and species boundaries in a diversity of taxa  <cit> .

special attention has been devoted to understanding the number and timing of colonizations of mesoamerica by freshwater fishes from south america: a topic which remains somewhat controversial  <cit> . the most widely accepted theories support two waves of colonization: 1) an ancient episode  through a proto-antillean arc and 2) a more recent, cenozoic episode via the antillean islands and/or a continental corridor  <cit> . molecular data suggest colonization of mesoamerica by primary freshwater fishes about 4– <dig> mya  <cit> . this is incongruent with the geological data, which does not support the existence of a continental land-bridge before the closure of the panama strait . older colonization events have been postulated for secondary freshwater fishes: for example, early to mid miocene  colonization for synbranchidae  <cit> , 14– <dig> mya for heroinid cichlids  and  <dig> – <dig> mya for rivulids  <cit> .

the absence of primary freshwater genera  from mesoamerica and the antillean islands argues against an ancient colonization route through a proto-antillean arc. instead, it supports a colonization route through an incipient land-bridge formed during the gradual uplifting of the panama isthmus  <cit> , over a time span of 3– <dig> mya, combined with changes in sea level  <cit> . this is supported by molecular studies of arthropods  <cit> , amphibians  <cit> , and marine geminate species pairs on either side of the panamanian isthmus  <cit> .

support for a more recent colonization of mesoamerica by primary freshwater fish through the panama strait comes from phylogeographical studies of characids . these studies indicate multiple waves of rapid expansion from south america during the pliocene ~ <dig>  mya.  <cit> .

the genus astyanax provides an ideal model to investigate the relative importance of vicariance and dispersal on biogeographical patterns. this is partly because it is widely distributed across the region  <cit> , and because its dispersal is confined to freshwater routes and dependent, therefore, on the formation of land-bridges.

characiforms are generally assumed to have a gondwanan  origin  <cit> , as supported by the fossil record  <cit> , so the presence of characidae in northern america is viewed as a consequence of dispersal.

astyanax comprises more than  <dig> recognized species and is, together with hyphesobrycon , the largest and most diverse characiform genus  <cit> . moreover, astyanax has the widest distribution of american characids, being found from the nearctic  to the neotropics   <cit> .

previous phylogenetic studies  <cit>  of the biogeography of astyanax used a small number of samples from mexico, belize and guatemala, and did not find geographical congruence for some of the groups recovered . furthermore, conspecific cave and nearest surface populations formed two separate lineages, in agreement with an earlier study of the genus  <cit> . this was attributed to at least two separate colonizations of mesoamerica from south america during the pleistocene. estimated colonization times based on the cytochrome b gene were  <dig>  and  <dig>  mya , with an estimated divergence rate of  <dig> % per pairwise comparison per million years, which coincides with the closure of the panama strait   <cit> . however, incomplete sampling  could lead to erroneous interpretations. this study provides a phylogeographical analysis based on a comprehensive distribution-wide sampling regime and more extensive sampling, and thus should provide new insights into the evolutionary history of the genus.

the genus astyanax is characterised by high phenotypic plasticity and a capacity to adapt to diverse habitats  <cit> . there is clear evidence of extremely rapid adaptations of fish to new habitats and environments, with ecological specialization and morphological differentiation, generally in accordance with genetic divergence  <cit> . considerable attention has been given to the evolution of developmental mechanisms and adaptation to cave environments  <cit> , but less attention has been given to other habitat associated morphological plasticity. in this regard, bramocharax, which is sympatric with astyanax, is characterized by conspicuous trophic specializations, including differences in the number of premaxillary teeth, the presence of diastemas on the maxillary teeth, as well as differences in the shape and number of cuspids on the premaxillary, maxillary and dentary teeth, with some species  having intermediate states between the morphotypes of astyanax and bramocharax species  <cit> .

in this study we used mitochondrial and nuclear dna sequences to develop a robust phylogenetic hypothesis for astyanax and bramocharax. this allows us to test biogeographical hypotheses for the mesoamerican fish fauna, including the relative importance of historical geology and climatic factors.

RESULTS
three mitochondrial  genes and one nuclear gene  were sequenced, giving a total of  <dig> characters .

rag- <dig> was the most conservative of the genes analyzed . among the mitochondrial dna genes, cytb was the most variable, with coi exhibiting similarly high levels of variability and  <dig> s being the least variable. for the joint mitochondrial and nuclear analysis,  <dig> sites were variable, with  <dig>  being parsimony informative.

amplification  and sequencing  primers used for the rag <dig>  16s, coi, and cytb genes. *touchdown pcr was performed for the first  <dig> cycles: from 58°c to 53°c , followed by  <dig> cycles at 53°c.

the topologies recovered by maximum parsimony  and bayesian inference  for the cytb data set  and combined data set were similar. in addition, cytb and the combined data set analyses were also concordant, with discrepancies restricted to the tree topologies in clades iii and iv from group i . the combined data matrix was useful to resolve the deeper nodes and recovered mostly higher support values, providing greater phylogenetic resolution. for this reason, description of the higher-level groups identified was based on the topology obtained with the combined data set.

all analyses supported the polyphyly of bramocharax, with species of bramocharax being sister groups to different clades of astyanax , making astyanax paraphyletic.

we identified six major phylogenetic groupings with high bootstrap support and significant posterior probabilities . percentage divergences between groupings are given in table  <dig>  groups v and vi correspond to the chagres region  and lagarto-puntarenas basins of costa rica in lower central america, respectively. groups ii to iv are from middle central america and group i is from upper central america and mexico. these groups are non-overlapping geographically except for i with ii and ii with iii . their inter-relationships were not resolved with either the cytb or the combined data set .

 molecular characterization for the data set for each gene. pi = parsimony informative characters, ci = consistency index, ri = retention index.

geographic structuring within the major phylogenetic groupings
group i 
four main clades were recovered from group i. clade i comprised most of the mexican and upper central american  populations. clades ii-iv represented fewer populations with a patchy distribution over the range of clade i.

within clade i we found geographical structure corresponding to the following four lineages: lineage id, from the chiapas region of mexico, was sister to a clade comprising lineage ie from the candelaria region and a pair of sister lineages  that occupy a wider region from the yucatan peninsula to the bravo-conchos basin.


lineage ia contained individuals of a. mexicanus and the troglobitic species a. jordani from northern mexico. this lineage was subdivided in two sublineages. the first included samples from bravo-conchos basin in the northern-most part of the range of astyanax, and the basins of mezquital and nazas – aguanaval. the second sublineage grouped populations from the panuco, tuxpan, nautla and san fernando-soto la marina basins, including most troglobitic populations from the huasteca region . therefore, this latter sublineage included a. mexicanus and the cave-dwelling nominal species, a. jordani.

lineage ib contains astyanax and bramocharax from southern tmvb and belize. it is subdivided into four sublineages. it ranges from the media luna lagoon  to the mopan basin  on the atlantic slope, and from the armeria – coahuayana basin to the balsas basin  on the pacific slope. this group is a good example of morphological plasticity with low levels of genetic differentiation .

the first sublineage included astyanax fasciatus from puente nacional to grijalva – usumacinta basins  on the atlantic slope, and populations from the type localities of a. armandoi and a. altior . both of these are junior synonyms of a. fasciatus  <cit> . we also found shared haplotypes or low divergence  between bramocharax caballeroi and sympatric a. fasciatus from lake catemaco . additionally these distances were lower than those observed within astyanax populations.

the second sublineage  was a shallow clade restricted to the tuxtlas region , and comprised morphotypes of a. fasciatus and b. caballeroi, with very low genetic distinctiveness with haplotypes shared in some cases . the third sublineage included a. fasciatus, mostly from the pacific slope , and one single population of a. mexicanus from the media luna lagoon basin on the atlantic slope . the fourth sublineage  included a. fasciatus from grijalva-usumacinta , cenotes from yucatan peninsula, belize and nuevo basins  and mopan basin .


lineage ic,  comprised populations from the atlantic slope: astyanax fasciatus  from the type locality of a. petenensis  and a. fasciatus from the candelaria karst region in guatemala. this lineage included bramocharax dorioni from its type locality . similar to other instances of sympatry between bramocharax and astyanax, these two morphotypes showed low levels of genetic differentiation .


lineage id  grouped pacific slope populations of a. fasciatus  from the pichoacan basin  to the el jococal lagoon , including the guatemalan coast, with very low genetic divergence within the clade.


clade ii comprised two lineages. . lineage ie  grouped troglobitic morphotypes  from the piedras, tinaja, la curva, and sabinos caves  with the surface-dwelling populations of a. mexicanus from the mezquital and nazas – aguanaval basins, with a low level of differentiation between surface and cave populations .


lineage if included populations of a. mexicanus from the rascon valley and the panuco basin in tamposa. this lineage was highly divergent with regard to the rest of the lineages in this group, and those populations closest geographically 


clade iii grouped atlantic slope populations of a. fasciatus from the la palma and maquinas basins  with those from the upper polochic basin  and the grijalva-usumacinta basin.


clade iv contained populations from the montebello lagoons  in south-eastern mexico. this group clustered with the maquinas and la palma populations in the analysis of cytb alone, but this clustering was not supported by the combined nuclear and mitochondrial analysis .

group ii 
our analyses did not resolve relationships among the five main clades recovered within group ii. this group occurs widely over middle central america, ranging from belize to nicaragua and costa rica .


clade v included a. fasciatus from the macal basin . it is highly divergent with respect to the other clades from group ii .


clade vi  includes atlantic slope a. fasciatus from the moho basin , and from guatemala, downstream of the polochic basin to the puente virginia basin .


clade vii comprised two lineages . lineage iia included astyanax nicaraguensis and bramocharax bransfordii. as in other clades containing both morphotypes there were low levels of genetic differentiation . this lineage occurs from the jigüina basin to the sarapiqui basin  on the atlantic slope, and included populations from the great lakes of nicaragua  and the senacapa and brito basins  on the pacific slope. lineage iib included a. fasciatus from lake nicaragua and the san juan basin , as well as the barbilla and reventaza basins on the atlantic slope of costa rica.


clade viii included a. fasciatus from the pacific tributaries of nicaragua and a. nasutus from the managua lake basin.


clade ix included a. fasciatus from a very restricted area comprising the ciruelas and tempisque basins on the pacific slope of costa rica .

lower central america
four major groups  in lower central america were characterized by more restricted ranges relative to groups i and ii. group iii comprised a. fasciatus populations from the ciruelas and chires basins on the pacific slope of costa rica . two highly divergent  haplotypes  were found in sympatry in the ciruelas basin .


group iv included a single and well-differentiated population of a. orthodus from the sixaola basin on the atlantic slope of costa rica. group v contained pacific slope a. fasciatus populations from the puntarenas basin  to the lagarto basin on the panama-costa rica border. group vi included a. fasciatus from the chagres region on the atlantic slope of panama.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
systematics of the genera astyanax and bramocharax
our analyses do not support the previously proposed monophyly of bramocharax based on morphological analyses  <cit> . moreover, bramocharax specimens were present in two of the seven major astyanax clades, with low levels of genetic differentiation when both morphotypes were found in sympatry . differentiation was equally reduced between allopatric populations of bramocharax and astyanax.

the genus astyanax has been considered to be monophyletic in mesoamerica  <cit> , but polyphyletic in south america  <cit>  on the basis of molecular analyses. our results support the monophyly of mesoamerican astyanax only if we consider bramocharax species to be morphotypes of astyanax within the range of its phenotypic plasticity. this hypothesis is supported by the low genetic divergence between specimens of bramocharax and astyanax, and the evidence of recurrent evolution of the bramocharax morphotype within astyanax . this morphotype is associated with lacustrine habitats, suggesting that its recurrent evolution is a result of morphological convergence to similar ecological factors; similar patterns have been shown in other freshwater fishes  <cit> . if the "recurrent convergence" hypothesis is considered to be correct, then the taxonomy of bramocharax needs to be revised and the evolutionary mechanisms giving rise to these morphological homoplasies need further investigation. our analyses question the taxonomic utility of trophic characters , as previously done by rosen  <cit>  on the basis of intermediate morphological states between astyanax fasciatus and bramocharax baileyi.

further incidences of morphological convergence were found in troglobitic morphotypes of astyanax jordani , providing further evidence of independent  adaptation to troglobitic habitats. the presence of recurrent morphological convergence in astyanax  <cit>  makes the delimitation of species and genera difficult. thus the absence of congruence between phylogenetic relationships uncovered in this study and previous taxonomic classifications for astyanax and bramocharax from mesoamerica  <cit>  is not surprising. in addition, our results are not in agreement with the idea that astyanax  is a single species  as has previously proposed  <cit> .

although not a main goal of this study, we propose a provisional taxonomic nomenclature for astyanax populations from mesoamerica . the nomenclature proposed is based on well-defined monophyletic groups, high genetic divergences with cytb , and in agreement with geographical distributions. in ascribing species names we gave priority to previous species descriptions and diagnostic morphological traits. where monophyletic lineages could not be assigned to a valid species name, they were assigned to their own monophyletic group as astyanax sp.

genetic and time divergences
the penalized likelihood analyses performed in r8s for cytb sequences was calibrated using the following events: 1) the merida-perija uplift about 8– <dig> mya, 2) the presence of fossils of colossoma macropomum in the magdalena basin , and 3) the formation of the tmvb about 3– <dig> mya   <cit> . the analysis gave an average divergence rate of  <dig> % per million years with our in-group and the k81uf model of evolution . while this is similar to divergence rates reported for other fishes [cichlidae ,  <cit> , cobitidae   <cit>   and slightly lower than in cyprinid fishes   <cit> , it is much lower than previous molecular clock rates  proposed for astyanax   <cit> . this difference in estimated divergence rate is partially the cause of discrepancies between our study and previous historical biogeographical interpretations for astyanax  <cit> .

biogeographical implications
we found a pattern of north-south phylogeographical structuring. the major phylogenetic groups were mostly non-overlapping, with the exception of groups i and ii, which overlap in the upper part of the polochic basin of guatemala, and groups ii and iii, which overlap in the ciruelas basin of costa rica. this north-south pattern is similar to that reported for other freshwater fishes  <cit> . we explain the observation of sympatric lineages of astyanax in terms of niche overlap and lineage turnover, similar to that proposed in biogeographical models for other characins in mesoamerica  <cit> .

the lack of phylogenetic structuring in astyanax in middle central america  can be explained by a more recent colonization and rapid radiation about  <dig>  mya ; this pattern has been previously observed in other freshwater fishes of the region  <cit> .

*primary freshwater fishes, ** secondary freshwater fishes.

dispersal hypothesis on the origin of genus astyanax in mesoamerica
we accept the widely held hypothesis of a south american origin for astyanax and other central american characids  <cit> . this is supported by the observation that lower central america lineages were most closely related to south american samples from brazil and argentina. considering the widely used cytb calibration rate for fish   <cit>  and our mean rate of  <dig> %/my k81uf distances from r8s , levels of divergence for populations of south and central america imply a period of mesoamerican colonization/expansion of astyanax from south america about  <dig> – <dig>  mya, before the final uplift of the isthmus of panama ~ <dig>  mya  <cit> . the inclusion of more astyanax samples from both sides of the sierra de perija and merida andes in further studies could improve this dating scenario.

the colonization of central america prior to late cenozoic closure of the panama strait is incongruent with the geological data, and with other studies of characid genera   <cit> , including a previous study of astyanax  <cit> , all of which propose that closure of the strait ~ <dig>  mya provided the first opportunity for colonization of central america from south america.

an earlier colonization of mesoamerica has been proposed for other freshwater fishes  . for example, ancient colonization events have been proposed for the family poeciliidae   <cit>  and the cichlidae, rivulidae and synbranchidae families   <cit> . however in contrast with astyanax, these families also occur in the caribbean islands, and as secondary fishes could have crossed through a shallow passage between south america and central america during the miocene  <cit> .

divergence times similar to those found in this study have been reported in molecular studies of primary freshwater fauna  <cit> . for example, the bermingham and martin model  <cit>  proposes a colonization of mesoamerica between  <dig> and  <dig> mya, prior to the final closure of the panama isthmus , based on comparative phylogeography of three genera  moreover, rhamdia seems to have colonized mesoamerica in two different waves, one prior to the closure of the panama strait   <cit> . these estimates are in agreement with our study, and coincident with other primary and secondary freshwater fish fauna  <cit> , as well as divergence times for invertebrates   <cit>  and benthic foraminifera fossils   <cit> .

we found evidence of a unique biogeographical pattern involving multiple waves of expansion of group i  astyanax in the upper part of the polochic-motagua fault . these clades have a restricted distribution overlapping that of clade i, and in general occupy relatively stable ecological environments , which can be less affected by climate change. niche overlap and lineage turnover could explain this pattern, except in stable habitats where two lineages are found in sympatry .

main vicariant events in astyanax populations from mesoamerica
the vicariance events involving astyanax in mesoamerica occurred during the plio-miocene , occurring earlier in lower central america  than in central and upper mesoamerica.

a pattern of restricted geographic ranges in lower central america  supports pronounced geographical fragmentation as a consequence of tectonics movements  <cit> , which eventually resulted in closure of the panama strait ~ <dig>  mya. bermingham and martin  <cit>  have implicated multiple range fragmentation during the miocene in patterns of diversity in other taxa of the primary freshwater fauna. with our data, five main vicariant events were identified for lower central america . these are related to changes in eustatic sea level   <cit>  and to the formation of inter-oceanic biogeographical barriers  <cit>  during the middle-late miocene .

in upper central america, the main volcanic activity was produced by the trans-mexican volcanic belt . this region was affected by periods of intense geological activity between  <dig> and  <dig> mya, with some volcanic activity still occurring today  <cit> . the geographic structuring evident in clade i of astyanax indicates that the tmvb formed an effective geographic barrier during its development during the late miocene  <dig> –  <dig> mya . this date is in agreement with the geology of the region and previous studies of several groups of vertebrates  <cit> .

other biogeographical patterns
other biogeographical patterns were obtained in lower and middle central america. these cannot be explained by geological barriers, but are in accordance with the main biogeographical regions proposed for other freshwater fishes  <cit> .

while our results contrast somewhat with the mesoamerican faunal regions recognized by bussing  <cit> , they do support his isthmian region, but with a fragmented pattern similar to that reported for other primary freshwater fishes  <cit> . furthermore, we found that some belize and guatemala astyanax clades  were joined to the central america group , a pattern shared with other mesoamerican cichlids  <cit> . our chiapas-nicaraguan lineages  did not reach the pacific cost of costa rica, but instead have their southern limits in el salvador. the distribution of lineages from san juan region differs from bussing's proposal  <cit> , occurring from the barbilla basin  to belize  and on the pacific slope from the rio grande basin to the ciruelas basin in the nicoya gulf . this pattern has been previously reported by other authors  <cit> .

finally, we dated the separation of groups i and ii to about  <dig> and  <dig>  mya . these coincide geographically with polochic-motagua fault  <cit> , reported as a transition region for other freshwater fish groups  <cit> . in addition, we observed the presence of two well differentiated lineages of astyanax  in sympatry in the polochic basin, a finding that has not been reported for other characids  <cit> . we explain this pattern in terms of river capture whereby the cahabon tributary was diverted to the polochic river as a consequence of tectonic activity , while separating the cahabon river from the grijalva-usumacinta . this has been proposed for rhamdia  <cit> .

