BACKGROUND
microbial spoilage of foods, particularly highly perishable foods , is a considerable challenge that needs to be addressed to successfully supply food for an anticipated world population of  <dig> billion people by  <dig>  <cit> . for example, while approximately  <dig> billion liters of milk are produced in the us annually  <cit> , as much as  <dig> billion liters is potentially lost every year due to microbial spoilage  <cit> . whereas manufacturing-related spoilage  can be eliminated, contamination with gram-positive sporeformers, which are microorganisms that can survive pasteurization, is not easily eliminated  <cit> . among these sporeformers, those that can grow at refrigeration temperatures are a specific concern with regard to food spoilage and spoilage of fluid milk in particular. two bacterial genera, bacillus and paenibacillus, have been found to be the predominant aerobic sporeformers isolated from pasteurized milk  <cit> . bacillus spp. and paenibacillus spp. have also been isolated from dairy farm environments and processing facilities  <cit> , suggesting that these spoilage organisms can be introduced at various stages of the dairy production chain. while the predominant sporeformers isolated early in the shelf life of htst pasteurized milk are typically bacillus spp., later in the shelf life a shift in bacterial ecology has been reported with paenibacillus spp. representing the majority of sporeformers isolated  <cit> , suggesting that paenibacillus spp. may, on a population basis, show a better ability to grow in milk stored at refrigeration temperatures. molecular and phenotypic characterization of > <dig>  sporeformers isolated from milk production not only supported that bacillus spp. and paenibacillus spp. represented the phylogenetic groups most common among aerobic sporeformers isolated from milk, but also identified a considerable number of viridibacillus spp. isolates  <cit> . this study also showed that while most paenibacillus spp. display β-galactosidase activity and were able to grow in milk at 6°c, only few bacillus spp. and viridibacillus spp. isolates show these phenotypic characteristics. it has been well established though that isolates representing specific bacillus spp.  and viridibacillus spp.  typically have the ability to grow in refrigerated milk  <cit> . while paenibacillus spp. are thus the main aerobic sporeformer group of concern as a spoilage organism for the fluid milk industry, some bacillus and viridibacillus spp. may also cause spoilage problems in these types of products.

considerable efforts have been undertaken to analyze and characterize the genomes of bacillus cereus sensu lato strains, which include human pathogenic species , and foodborne pathogens . conversely, our current knowledge of paenibacillus spp. is rather limited. recently, a number of paenibacillus genomes, representing strains isolated from different environments , have been sequenced and their genomes have been released ; however, only a few studies have reported genomic characterization and phylogeny of the sequenced genomes  <cit> . species belonging to the paenibacillus genus have been isolated from diverse environments including soil, water, milk, insect larvae, and humans  <cit> . some genomic characteristics associated with the adaptation and survival of paenibacillus in different environments include genes encoding nitrogen fixation enzymes, or genes encoding antimicrobial compounds and bacteriocin production  <cit> . to date, genomic characteristics of paenibacillus strains associated with spoilage of fluid milk remain unknown. here we analyzed the genomes of isolates representing common rpob allelic types of bacillus, paenibacillus and viridibacillus spp. that were found to contaminate pasteurized milk  <cit> . the aim was to explore genomic characteristics linked with phenotypic characteristics related to milk spoilage, such as the ability to grow in milk at 6°c and proteolysis of milk proteins, such as casein.

RESULTS
the genomic comparisons and supporting phenotypic experiments reported here focused on  developing an improved understanding of the genomics of sporeforming food spoilage organisms in the order bacillales and  identifying specific genomic features that may allow specific members of this order to grow in milk at refrigeration temperatures. as all isolates sequenced here represent species and genetic types that are frequently isolated from commercially processed dairy products, we also hypothesized that genomic analyses may identify novel generally recognized as safe  compounds and enzymes that are predicted to be produced by these organisms and that may be useful for food applications . this hypothesis is supported by previous studies that have identified, through non-genomics classical screening approaches, gras bacteriocins from paenibacillus isolates  <cit> .

phylogenomic analysis places bacillus, paenibacillus and viridibacillus into three highly divergent clades, including three distinct paenibacillus clades
the genomes of ten sporeforming gram positive bacteria isolated from pasteurized milk and dairy farm environments  were sequenced; these isolates represented paenibacillus spp. , bacillus spp.  and viridibacillus sp.  . genome sequencing was conducted with the illumina hiseq; the draft genomes reported here represented  <dig> contigs for viridibacillus sp.,  <dig> to  <dig> contigs for bacillus spp., and  <dig> to  <dig> contigs for paenibacillus spp. isolates . due to the fact that the genomes were not closed, it is possible that specific genes or orthologs could be misclassified as absent in a given genome; this should not affect the overall enrichment analyses reported below though and absence of specific genes was confirmed in selected target genomes through read mapping . genome sizes  for the two bacillus strains sequenced here were approximately  <dig>  mb, while the genome sizes for the paenibacillus spp. isolates ranged from approx.  <dig>  to  <dig>  mb . the viridibacillus strain sequenced represented the smallest genome . these genome sizes are consistent with previous data, which also found smaller genome sizes for bacillus isolates  as compared to paenibacillus spp. isolates; previously reported genome sizes for paenibacillus spp. isolates ranged from  <dig>  mb  to  <dig>  mb . it has been previously suggested  <cit>  that this difference in genome sizes may indicate a role of widespread horizontal gene transfer or gene duplication in the evolution of different paenibacillus species.

1
rpo
b allelic type )
2
3
4
5
1putative species were inferred based on 16s rrna phylogenies  and confirmed using phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> protein sequences .

2percentage of isolates with a given allelic type  from a total of  <dig>  isolates tested.

3only contigs >199 bp are included.

4inferred from genome sequence.

5fsl r5- <dig> was designated as bacillus sp. as this strain clusters with b. cereus in a 16s rrna phylogeny, but clusters with b. weihenstephanensis in the  <dig> protein phylogeny ; while this is consistent with previous reports that b. cereus is polyphyletic, final species assignment of this isolate will require sequencing and analysis of further bacillus isolates.

6isolates fsl r7- <dig> and r7- <dig> were classified as paenibacillus sp. as they could not be classified to species based on 16s rrna sequences; in a 16s rrna phylogeny both of these isolates clustered with p. caespitis , but were not assigned this species name as this species has not yet been validly published.

phylogenetic analysis of the genomes sequenced here, along with  <dig> genomes representing selected previously sequenced firmicutes, including five additional paenibacillus and nine additional bacillus , was performed using amino acid  sequences encoded by  <dig> core genes previously reported to represent suitable phylogenetic markers for bacteria  <cit> . this analysis places bacillus, paenibacillus and viridibacillus into three distinct well supported clades, which is consistent with reclassification, in  <dig>  of species now designated as paenibacillus into a genus distinct from the genus bacillus <cit> . as no genome sequence for the genus viridibacillus has previously been reported, the analyses reported here also provided an opportunity to clarify the phylogenetic position of a representative of this genus. based on the  <dig> protein sequence phylogeny, the v. arenosi strain sequenced here falls into a distinct clade that shares a common ancestor with a number of non-sporeforming firmicutes . this not only confirms that viridibacillus is distinct from bacillus and paenibacillus, but also suggests a single emergence of the most recent common ancestor of non-sporeforming firmicutes from a sporeforming ancestor.

our phylogenetic analysis of  <dig> protein sequences  also identified three distinct well supported clades among the paenibacillus genomes sequenced here, including  clade i, which contains the two p. amylolyticus strains ,  clade ii, which contains the two paenibacillus spp. strains  and one p. odorifer  strain, and  clade iii, which contains two p. lautus strains  and one p. glucanolyticus strain  . these three clades are well supported ; however, the number of genomes characterized here is small and additional studies will be necessary to further validate the three clades identified here. considerable genome divergence among the analyzed paenibacillus genomes is also supported by an overall genome alignment . analysis of the average nucleotide identity based on the blast algorithm  scores for paenibacillus isolates sequenced here confirmed that isolates fsl h7- <dig> and fsl r5- <dig>  represent closely related genomes , which also supports their classification into the same species . on the other hand the genomes of strains fsl r7- <dig> and fsl r7- <dig> ) show an anib of  <dig> % , suggesting that these two strains represent separate species despite a 1223/ <dig>  nucleotide 16s rrna identity. this finding is consistent with previous reports that 16s rrna sequence divergence statistics show less resolution for bacterial species designation than the anib values  <cit> .

paenibacillus and bacillus genomes carry a diversity of antimicrobial resistance genes
characterization of phenotypic antimicrobial resistance patterns among the strains sequenced here  found resistance to at least one antibiotic in all but two strains. the most common resistance pattern  was found in two bacillus and two paenibacillus isolates ; in addition, one strain showed resistance to lincomycin-streptomycin, two strains showed resistant to streptomycin only, and one strain showed resistance to lincomycin only . while this is, to our knowledge, the first report of antimicrobial resistant bacillus and paenibacillus isolates from milk, previous studies have reported antimicrobial resistance in disease associated paenibacillus isolates, including  resistance to metronidazole  <cit> , tetracycline  <cit> , and glycopeptides  <cit>  in p. larvae, which is associated with disease in honeybees and  multi-drug resistance  in a paenibacillus isolated from fertile soil in india  <cit> . similarly, antimicrobial resistant bacillus isolates have previously been isolated from a variety of clinical  <cit>  and non-clinical  <cit>  sources.

1
3
1relative growth in skim milk broth, plated on bhi at day  <dig> of shelf life :  < <dig> log cfu/ml,  1– <dig> log cfu/ml,  > <dig> log cfu/ml.

2isolate produced pinkish coloration of skim milk agar.

3isolates were tested for susceptibility against  <dig> antimicrobials included in the gram positive narms panel .

4strain was considered too fastidious for susceptible testing.

analyses of the sequenced genomes also identified putative antimicrobial resistance genes, in both pan-susceptible and resistant bacillus and paenibacillus isolates . most genomes contained more than  <dig> putative antimicrobial resistance genes . for example, we identified, in the genomes sequenced here, genes putatively encoding resistance to β-lactams , aminoglycosides , chloramphenicol , copper , vancomycin , arsenic , tellurite , and quaternary ammonium  as well as genes encoding a number of efflux pumps . antibiotic resistance genes have previously been reported in paenibacillus from non-dairy sources  <cit> , including reports of resistance genes similar to those found here in p. vortex and p. larvae genomes  <cit> . similarly, presence of antimicrobial resistance genes appears to be common in bacillus spp.  <cit> .

interestingly, the presence of genes putatively encoding resistance to a given antibiotic did not always correlate to the resistance phenotypes of the respective isolates. for example, while genes encoding β-lactamases were detected in all  <dig> genomes, only  <dig> strains showed penicillin resistance . similarly, while the lincomycin resistance operon lmrab was detected in all  <dig> genomes, only  <dig> strains showed phenotypic resistance to lincomycin. an alignment of lmrab showed two clades, one that contains only resistant strains and one that contains resistant and susceptible strains . these observations could be interpreted as being consistent with previous reports that proposed that, in paenibacillus and bacillus isolates, these “antimicrobial resistance genes”, are not necessarily involved in the resistance against anthropogenic antibiotics, but rather encode “defense mechanisms” that allow the bacteria carrying these genes to compete against antagonistic bacteria  <cit> . this hypothesis is also supported by studies that suggest that expression of resistance genes might be tightly regulated in environmental non-pathogenic bacteria and that these genes may not necessarily be expressed under laboratory conditions that are appropriate to evaluate antimicrobial resistance phenotypes in bacterial pathogens. for example, the bacillus subtilis lincomycin resistance operon lmrab has been shown to be dually regulated in response to flavonoids, rather than in response to lincomycin  <cit> .

a number of bacteriocins and pathways for biosynthesis of non-ribosomal peptide antibiotics are encoded in the genomes of dairy associated paenibacillus and bacillus
paenibacillus spp. have previously been reported to produce certain antimicrobials, like bacteriocins and non-ribosomal peptides antibiotics   <cit> . here we investigated the presence of genes encoding bacteriocins and nrpa biosynthesis in the sequenced isolates, which could represent potential source for gras antimicrobials. using hmm searches, we identified genes encoding putative class ii bacteriocins in four of the genomes, including one bacillus strain  and three paenibacillus strains  . all of these bacteriocin genes were found in operons that encoded both the bacteriocins and the putative corresponding bacteriocin transporters  <cit> . in the genome of b. weihenstephanensis fsl h7- <dig> we specifically identified a bacteriocin operon that was annotated as encoding a bacteriocin cerein 7b precursor, an abc-type bacteriocin exporter, and a bacteriocin secretion accessory protein. these proteins present an average of 87% of amino acid  identity to the same operon in b. cereus . in two of the paenibacillus genomes  we identified an operon annotated as encoding the lantibiotic mersacidin biosynthesis protein lanm and the corresponding transporter protein . these proteins showed an average aa identity  of 38%  and 40%  with the corresponding b. cereus proteins. in addition, we identified, in the genome of paenibacillus fsl h8- <dig>  another class ii bacteriocin operon that was annotated as encoding a bacteriocin with a double-glycine leader peptide, a secretory protein, and an abc-type bacteriocin transporter. the proteins encoded in this operon present 34% aa identity  with a similar system in anoxybacillus flavithermus. to search for unusual or un-annotated bacteriocins we conducted a search with bagel <dig>  <cit> . this analysis identified additional putative bacteriocins of class i  in four genomes , as well as two class ii bacteriocins  in two genomes  . while some of the bacteriocins identified show a high level of homology with previously identified bacteriocins, most of the bacteriocins identified in the paenibacillus genomes show low level homology to previously identified bacteriocins, indicating that they may represent novel bacteriocins.

strain 
1
3
 <dig> 
1the full strain designation includes the prefix fsl, e.g., fsl r5- <dig> 

2bacteriocin genes identified are predicted to encode class i and ii bacteriocins.

3the designation assigned to a given putative antimicrobial system represents the designation associated with the previously annotated system that showed the highest similarity to the query sequence, or the designation predicted by bagel <dig> 

4identified by bagel <dig> 

5the designation “uncharacterized antibiotic” was given to orfs that contain domains involved in peptide antibiotic synthesis.

6average protein blast identity for all proteins encoded in a given operon.

genes encoding putative nrpa biosynthesis pathways were identified in the two bacillus and five paenibacillus strains . in each of the two bacillus strains, we identified two highly similar operons, one annotated as encoding proteins involved in gramicidin biosynthesis and one annotated as encoding proteins involved in biosynthesis of a putative, uncharacterized, antibiotic. the proteins encoded by these operons showed aa identities of >97%  to the corresponding proteins in b. cereus . similarly, a number of different operons encoding proteins involved in the synthesis of nrpa were detected in five paenibacillus genomes; paenibacillus strains fsl r7- <dig>  fsl r7- <dig>  fsl r5- <dig>  fsl r5- <dig>  and fsl h7- <dig> were annotated as encoding two, three, three, one, and five nrpa biosynthesis operons, respectively. while nrpa have previously been identified in several paenibacillus spp.  <cit> , paenibacillus strains without nrpa have also been described  <cit> . the operons identified here were annotated as encoding proteins required for the biosynthesis of nrpa similar to mycosubtilin, musaricidin, gramicidin s, cereulide, iturin, bacitracin, and lichenysin . interestingly, many of the proteins encoding these putative nrpa biosynthesis pathways showed low levels of protein identity  to corresponding proteins in bacillus genomes. this suggests that many of these operons may encode proteins that facilitate the biosynthesis of novel nrpa, which could potentially represent novel antimicrobials that inhibit dairy associated bacteria. while it is possible that these antimicrobials would be granted gras status , additional scientific safety studies may be needed, particularly if efficacy against relevant target organisms is shown.

both paenibacillus and bacillus genomes encode proteolytic systems with a putative role in casein breakdown
phenotypically, both bacillus isolates sequenced here as well as five of the seven paenibacillus isolates showed proteolysis . blast searches of all  <dig> genomes sequenced here were thus performed to screen for the presence of genes encoding proteolytic systems and proteins previously reported as facilitating casein breakdown in lactic acid bacteria  <cit> . using protein sequences for appropriate cell-wall proteinases , peptide transporters , and  <dig> different peptidases   <cit>  as query sequences, we identified cell-wall proteinases as well as oligo-peptide  and di-peptide  transporters in all  <dig> genomes . genes encoding tri-peptide transporters  were found in four genomes , including one strain that did not show proteolytic activity in the phenotypic assay . we also identified genes encoding peptidases in all  <dig> genomes; the number of peptidase encoding genes ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  peptidase genes per genome; genes encoding pepd, pepo and pepe/pepc, which had previously been shown to contribute to growth in milk in lactic acid bacteria  <cit> , were not found in any of the  <dig> genomes . overall, even though some of the  <dig> strains characterized here were negative for proteolysis on skim milk agar, all strains appear to encode proteins for all major steps required for casein breakdown in lactic acid bacteria . future experimental work will thus be required to dissect the function of the different putative casein hydrolysis-related proteins encoded in the genomes sequenced here.

paenibacillus genomes carry several genes encoding β-galactosidase activity
consistent with previous phenotypic studies  <cit> , we found that only the seven paenibacillus isolates expressed β-galactosidase activity; the two bacillus and the viridibacillus isolates characterized here were β-galactosidase negative . an hmm search for β-galactosidase domains also identified genes with these types of domains only in the seven paenibacillus genomes, but not in the bacillus and viridibacillus genomes . interestingly, we identified between  <dig> and  <dig> genes encoding putative β-galactosidases in each paenibacillus genome . a maximum likelihood phylogeny of the aa sequences for all β-galactosidases  not only revealed considerable diversity among these proteins, but also allowed us to classify these proteins into  <dig> β-galactosidase types ; putative β-galactosidases were assigned the same type if they clustered into the same clade . while five β-gal types  were found in each of the seven genomes ;  <dig> β-gal types  were absent in both strains classified into paenibacillus clade iii  and one β-gal types  was only found in clade ii strains . both paenibacillus clade i strains contained the identical repertoire of β-gal types.

similarly to our findings, presence of multiple genes encoding β-galactosidases has been previously described for haloarchaeal bacteria  <cit> . interestingly, β-galactosidases have also been identified in microorganisms typically found in lactose-free environments  <cit>  and β-galactosidases in these bacteria have been shown to hydrolyze pectin-like plant polysaccharides  <cit> . for example, a β-d-galactosidase from paenibacillus thiaminolyticus was found to have fucosidase activity  <cit> . further experimental work will be needed to define the role of the multiple β-galactosidases reported here in dairy related paenibacillus spp. isolates. for example, the different β-galactosidases may be expressed under different conditions  or may facilitate use of diverse oligo- and polysaccharides in addition to lactose. in addition, our data suggest that paenibacillus may represent a potential source of gras β-galactosidases for industrial applications.

comparison of the two paenibacillus strains in clade i revealed cold-growth related genomic features only in the strain able to grow at 6°c in skim milk broth
strains fsl h7- <dig> and fsl r5- <dig> are closely related strains of paenibacillus, which both have rpob allelic type  <dig>   <cit> . accordingly, these two strains clustered in the same clade in the phylogenetic analysis  and presented a high genome-wide average nucleotide identity . however, these strains differed in their abilities to grow at 6°c in skim milk broth ; while fsl h7- <dig> was able to grow under these conditions, fsl r5- <dig> was not . we thus performed a comparative analysis of the genomes for these two strains to identify potential genomic features that may contribute to these distinct phenotypes. this analysis identified  <dig> and  <dig> functionally annotated genes unique to strains fsl h7- <dig> and fsl r5- <dig>  respectively . genes only found in fsl h7- <dig> encode proteins involved in a number of functions including, for example, synthesis of non-ribosomal peptide antibiotics , transmembrane transport , antibiotic resistance , as well as mobile elements  and a toxin-antitoxin system . while genes only found in fsl r5- <dig> encode many proteins involved in similar functions , more mobile elements were found only in this strain. for example, we identified two putative prophages that appear complete, and multiple transposons in fsl r5- <dig> , while no complete prophages and only two transposons were identified in fsl h7- <dig>  importantly, prophages in fsl r5- <dig> do not seem to be interrupting genes related with cold growth. different stressful conditions , could induce the prophage lytic cycle, and consequently lyse the cells; experimental evidence will be necessary through to determine whether cold-growth could induce the lytic cycle in the prophage identified here, thus preventing cold growth.

interestingly, we identified, in the genome of fsl h7- <dig>  one cluster of genes annotated as encoding a dna methylase, a restriction endonuclease, and a dead box helicase ; these genes were absent in fsl r5- <dig> with upstream and downstream genes located in a single contig, indicating that genes are not missing due to a sequence gap. dead box helicases are proteins that participate in a number of functions, including cold adaptation  <cit> . in bacillus subtilis, deletion of dead box helicases was found to cause a cold-sensitive phenotype  <cit>  and in listeria monocytogenes deletion mutants of dead box helicases were unable to grow at 3°c  <cit> . another dead box helicase  was found in both strains of clade i. while the presence of two dead box helicases only in the strain able to grow at 6°c in skim milk broth could be one of the genomic features that contributes to the cold growth phenotype of this strain, further experimental work is necessary to elucidate the role of this protein in cold adaptation of fsl h7- <dig>  in addition, novel unrelated dead box helicases cannot be excluded as contributing to the ability of some paenibacillus to grow at low temperatures.

comparison of paenibacillus clade ii and clade iii genomes revealed a number of genes encoding cold adapted features and lactose utilization in clade ii strains
clade ii strains present different phenotypic characteristics than clade iii strains; specifically, only clade ii strains were able to grow at 6°c in skim milk broth and showed proteolysis on skim milk agar . initial comparative genomic analyses identified  <dig> and  <dig>  orthologs present in only clade ii or clade iii strains, respectively. to identify genomic features and genes that may be linked to the unique phenotypic characteristics of clade ii strains , we performed an enrichment analysis for rast subcategories among clade ii and iii genomes. this analysis identified nine rast subcategories that were overrepresented in the clade ii genomes ; these subcategories were also significantly overrepresented in a comparisons of “cold adapted paenibacillus”  and “non-cold adapted paenibacillus”  . while most of these subcategories are involved in energy acquisition or in bacterial growth; some of these subcategories  encode proteins that could facilitate growth of clade ii strains in milk. the rast subcategory “di- and oligo-saccharides” includes genes encoding essential enzymes for lactose and galactose uptake and utilization . these findings suggest that clade ii strains contain unique genomic features that may facilitate their growth in milk and dairy production associated environments.

we also identified a number of specific genes that were only identified in clade ii strains and that encode for properties that could be involved in the ability of these strains to grow in milk at cold temperatures, including genes encoding β-galactosidases  as well as genes encoding  peptide transport systems and peptidases and  cold-adaptation related proteins. while we already reported the presence of several proteinases and peptide transport systems in all paenibacillus genomes , some of these proteins appear uniquely encoded in the genomes of clade ii strains. for example, two operons for peptide transport  as well as several peptidases  were identified specifically in clade ii . interestingly, these enzymes are associated with the three steps of bacterial casein breakdown, which includes  hydrolysis of casein into oligo- and dipeptides by cell envelope proteinases,  peptide-transport-system-facilitated import of these peptides into the cell, and  peptide degradation by intracellular peptidases  <cit> . we further analyzed the amino acid composition of the clade ii specific proteins involved in casein hydrolysis to test the hypothesis that these proteins may contain specific structural features associated with cold-adaptation. in cold-adapted enzymes the protein structure is more flexible, which allows for catalysis at cold temperatures  <cit> ; features associated with increased structural flexibility include disorder regions and amino acid bias   <cit> . our analyses found that the cell-envelope associated peptidase s <dig> encoded by clade ii strains  shows significant  enrichment of disorder-promoting aa residues and  shows enrichment of certain aa associated with cold adaptation  . the peptidases of the s <dig> family have been found to function at extreme temperatures  <cit>  and their stability is enhanced by calcium  <cit> , important features for the growth in milk at refrigeration temperatures. in addition, genes encoding three β-galactosidases  and several glycosyl hydrolases with possible β-galactosidase activity were identified in the genomes of clade ii strains, but not in clade iii strains . we, however, did not identify cold-adapted features in any of these proteins. interestingly, we found though that genes classified into glycosyl hydrolase families that have been shown to specifically have β-galactosidase activity  were over-represented in clade ii , suggesting that clade ii may have unique carbohydrate metabolic capabilities  that may facilitate growth in milk.

we also identified, in clade ii strains, genes encoding several cold growth associated proteins that have been previously identified in other bacteria , including  the low temperature requirement protein a , which has been found to be important for growth at 4°c in l. monocytogenes <cit> ;  chaperone dnaj, which has been found to be up-regulated in e. coli and lactococcus at cold temperatures  <cit> ,  glutamate transport atp-binding protein, which has been found to be up-regulated in b. subtilis at cold temperatures, and  d-alanyl-d-alanine carboxypeptidase, which could decrease the cell wall resistance at cold temperature  <cit> . among these proteins, dnaj was identified to have cold-adapted features . interestingly, two dnaj-encoding genes were identified in clade ii strains, one that is present in both the  <dig> clade ii and the  <dig> clade iii strains, and one that is present only in the  <dig> clade ii strains and that encodes a dnaj with cold-adapted features. in addition, in clade ii strains we identified four aspartate aminotransferases, enzymes reported to be essential for growth of lactococcus lactis in milk  <cit> , as well as a number of proteins with no clear association with cold-adaptation . overall, we identified a number of proteins that could facilitate the growth of strains in clade ii in milk at 6°c. mapping of clade iii genome sequencing reads against the clade ii genome contigs that contained the clade ii specific genes mentioned above  confirmed that these genes were absent from the clade iii genomes . to further understand the features associated with the cold tolerant phenotype of these strains; additional experimental data, including expression studies, are needed. the genes identified here do represent potential targets for these types of studies.

CONCLUSIONS
genomic analysis of selected sporeforming bacillales isolated predominantly from milk allowed for identification of a number of genes encoding potentially relevant gras proteins such as potentially novel bacteriocins and nrpas. further comparative genomic analyses, focusing on paenibacillus clades and strains that differed in their ability to grow in milk at refrigeration temperatures, identified a number of genomic features that likely allow some strains to grow at refrigeration temperatures and to break down milk associated proteins and carbohydrates at these temperatures. this study thus demonstrates how a genomic approach can be used to develop an improved understanding of microbial food spoilage, which will facilitate subsequent identification of genomic targets  that can be used to control food spoilage or rapidly screen foods or raw materials for presence of bacteria with specific spoilage related genomic features.

