BACKGROUND
the production of recombinant proteins in eukaryotic cells requires the fusion of the target genes to promoter sequences functional in the eukaryotic cells and exhibiting the desired expression pattern. the molecular cloning procedures necessary for the construction of these fusions are usually performed in bacteria, mostly in escherichia coli k <dig>  a heterologous expression of powerful toxins like for example botulinum toxin, tetanus toxin or diphtheria toxin may pose a risk for the persons carrying out the experiments. a careful risk analysis considering an exposition to the toxin produced in the eukaryotic cells as well as a potential danger originating from toxin production by the recombinant e. coli has therefore to be carried out.

since the nucleic acid sequences characterising eukaryotic-type and bacterial promoters are different, it is usually regarded improbable that promoter sequences functional in eukaryotic cells are able to direct a considerable transcription initiation in bacteria  <cit> .

there are numerous differences between the transcription machinery of eukaryotes and eubacteria represented by different structures of promoters and the complexity of rna polymerases and transcription factors  <cit> . on the other hand, the rna polymerases are evolutionary conserved and belong to a protein family termed "multisubunit rnap family"  <cit> . the subunits of the eubacterial rna polymerase all have counterparts in the subunits of the rna polymerase from archaea and the three rna polymerases from eukaryotes  <cit> . there is also an obvious similarity between the tata box from eukaryotes and archaea to the - <dig> consensus sequence from eubacterial promoters.

this discrepancy reflected by differences versus similarities of the transcription machinery of organisms belonging to different kingdoms motivated us to analyse the capacity of promoter sequences to direct gene expression in foreign hosts. in previous studies we have shown that a high percentage of eukaryotic-type promoters specific for plants can direct gene expression in eubacteria. by testing promoter activity of ten plant-specific promoters in five eubacterial species we could show that in  <dig> % of the tested combinations the promoter sequences could be used in the bacterial host  <cit> . in a subsequent study we demonstrated that not only eukaryotic promoter sequences but any type of eukaryotic dna has a high probability to initiate transcription after transfer into bacteria. this was shown by transfer of random dna fragments from the yeast saccharomyces cerevisiae into e. coli k <dig> and detection of initiation of significant gene expression in about  <dig> % of the transformed e. coli  <cit> .

in this study we addressed the question if heterologous gene expression in e. coli by viral promoters has to be considered when specifying safety measures for correspondent experiments. we selected five frequently used viral promoter sequences:  the polyhedrin promoter from baculovirus ,  the enhancer and immediate early promoter from cmv ,  the early promoter from sv <dig> ,  the thymidine kinase promoter from hsv <dig> , and  the 5'ltr promoter from hiv . the heterologous gene expression of these promoters in e. coli k <dig> was tested using the luxab genes from vibrio harveyi as reporter system. two of the promoters  were analysed in more detail to determine the transcription start sites in e. coli. by additionally fusing these two promoters to a gene encoding a cytotoxin  the relevance of the heterologous gene expression by viral promoters for safety considerations was further supported.

RESULTS
lux gene expression in e. coli directed by viral promoters
to investigate whether viral promoters can initiate gene expression in bacteria, we constructed fusions between various viral promoters and the promoter-less luxab genes from v. harveyi, transformed the fusions into e. coli k <dig> and measured the luminescence of the transformants. the viral promoters analysed were the polyhedrin promoter from baculovirus , the enhancer and immediate early promoter from cmv , the early promoter from sv <dig> , the thymidine kinase promoter from hsv <dig> , and the 5'ltr promoter from hiv . as positive controls gene expression levels caused by homologous bacterial promoters in e. coli were determined by fusing the promoter from the nptiii gene  and the promoter from the tem- <dig> β-lactamase gene  to the luxab genes. the vector pkklux without any promoter sequence was included as negative control. the results of the luminescence measurements are shown in fig. 1a. the vector pkklux generated a background luminescence , which was identical to the luminescence caused by the p tk construct . the p ph  initiated a weak gene expression in e. coli, while the p ltr  caused a luminescence  <dig> times above background. the p cmv  and the p sv <dig>  initiated a strong gene expression in e. coli, which was comparable to the gene expression of the bacterial p bla . the bacterial p nptiii caused the highest luminescence values with  <dig> rlu/ <dig> s. in summary, four of the five viral promoters tested generated a luminescence at least four times above background . the luminescence caused by the p cmv and p sv <dig> was even similar to the luminescence caused by the bacterial p bla supporting the relevance of the heterologous gene expression with respect to the phenotypic expression of transferred traits.

confirmation that our reporter assay reliably reflects the strength of the tested promoters was achieved by performing quantitative rt-pcr assays using primers and probes specific for the luxb gene .

mapping of dna sequences in viral promoters serving as transcription start sites in e. coli
we chose two different approaches to determine the location of dna sequences in the viral promoters which may be used as transcription initiation sites by the rna polymerase from e. coli.

the first approach consisted in a statistical analysis of the nucleotide sequences of the promoters with a neural network promoter prediction program  <cit> . the number of predicted prokaryotic promoters in the five sequences analysed varied from zero to six. surprisingly, the promoter prediction program identified no potential promoter sequence in the p sv <dig>  which was the promoter causing the strongest luminescence in our reporter assays . the construct with the p cmv, which was almost as strong as the construct with the p sv <dig> in the luminescence assay, was shown by statistical analysis to have six potential start sites. in each of the remaining three promoter sequences , the promoter prediction program predicted one potential start site. interestingly, a potential promoter was also identified in the p tk sequence, although the p tk luxab fusion pointed out to be negative in the luminescence assay.

in summary, it can be concluded that a prediction of the gene expression activity of a dna sequence solely on the basis of a statistical analysis of the sequence is not reliable, and that only an experimental approach using a reporter system can provide this information. this result is in good agreement with the outcome of our previous studies  <cit>  on the functionality of plant promoters in bacteria and on the promoter activity of yeast dna in e. coli. there we also demonstrated that it was not possible to reliably predict the occurrence of a bacterial promoter in a dna sequence by statistical analysis.

our second approach consisted in the experimental determination of transcription start sites by the 5' race-method and sequencing of the 5' race products. for this purpose, we selected two viral promoters which had both been shown to direct gene expression according to the results of the luminescence measurements. the construct with the p cmv belonged to the viral promoters initiating a very strong heterologous gene expression, while the p ph caused a weak heterologous gene expression in e. coli. constructs containing the bacterial promotersp bla and p npiii were included into the experiments as positive controls.

the results summarised in fig.  <dig> show the transcription start sites and the location of the putative - <dig> and -35-regions. the transcription start sites determined in the p bla and p nptiii promoter regions by the 5' race method were identical with the start sites described by other authors  <cit>  confirming our experimental approach.

we could identify specific start sites in the two tested constructs containing the viral promoters p ph and p cmv confirming that the luminescence resulted from specific transcription initiation events. one start site was identified in the p ph, whereas two start sites were found in the p cmv . in the upstream region of all transcription start sites we found at a distance of  <dig> to  <dig> bp a region with similarity to the - <dig>  consensus sequence which was separated by  <dig> to  <dig> bp from a region with similarity to the - <dig>  consensus sequence.

it was very astonishing, that none of the transcription start sites within the viral promoters determined by the 5' race method corresponded to the transcription initiation sites predicted by the promoter prediction programme . the difficulties encountered in the efforts to predict promoter activities in bacteria by statistical analysis can at least in part be explained by the importance of the nucleotide sequences surrounding the - <dig> and - <dig> regions which determine the physical-chemical and structural characteristics of the dna and the promoter strength  <cit> . jacquet and reiss  <cit> , for example, analysed the influence of the context of the - <dig> and - <dig> regions on transcription efficiencies and found that transcription efficiencies varied by a factor of ten depending on the sequences surrounding the consensus sequences. progress in bacterial promoter prediction has been made using neural network programs like the one we have employed for our statistical analysis. demeler and zhou  <cit>  reported a prediction accuracy of  <dig>  % using a neural network for the prediction of e. coli promoters. further problems of promoter predictions consist in the existence of different sigma factors binding to different recognition sequences and in the variation between the consensus sequences of different bacterial species.

expression of the hemolysin gene vlly from v. vulnificus in e. coli directed by viral promoters
as heterologous gene expression was observed using luciferase as reporter system, we were interested, if the promoter activity of the viral promoter sequences in e. coli was sufficiently strong to significantly express virulence factors. this would be of importance for risk assessments of corresponding genetically modified organisms. for instance it has been shown that the transfer of the inv locus necessary for the invasion of yersinia pseudotuberculosis into host cells enabled a non-invasive strain of e. coli to penetrate cultured cells  <cit> . similar observations have been made with the invasion locus of mycobacterium avium. after transfer of this locus into non-invasive e. coli and mycobacterium smegmatis the recipients could invade epithelial cells  <cit> . a worst case scenario would be the heterologous expression of a toxin able to operate without being dependent on other virulence factors. many hemolysin genes fulfil this condition. the phenotypic effect of hemolysins can be relatively easily monitored and hemolysin genes are prevalent in many pathogenic bacteria. we selected the vlly gene from v. vulnificus as reporter gene  <cit> . an advantage of vlly for our purposes is its small size  facilitating the amplification and cloning procedures. furthermore, a  <dig>  kb fragment of v. vulnificus dna carrying vlly has been shown to confer a hemolytic phenotype onto e. coli  <cit> .

we inserted the promoter-less vlly  downstream from the viral promoters p ph and p cmv present in the pkklux constructs and transformed the promoter-vlly fusions into e. coli k <dig>  as negative control, vlly was inserted into pkklux without any promoter sequences.

we first monitored the vlly expression by plating the transformants onto blood agar plates and observing hemolysis zones around the colonies. e. coli containing p ph as well as e. coli containing p cmv were hemolytic . however, a quantification to what extent a lysis of erythrocytes had occurred, was not possible with this method.

we therefore also measured release of haemoglobin from lysed erythrocytes in a liquid hemolysis assay. since vlly had been shown before to be located in the periplasma and cytoplasma of recombinant e. coli  <cit> , our assay involved sonication of the e. coli cells to liberate periplasmic and cytoplasmic vlly. the outcome of a typical hemolysis assay is shown in fig. 3d. both viral promoters initiated an expression of vlly. in accordance with the luminescence assays, the p cmv directed a very strong vlly expression resulting in lysis of almost half the erythrocytes present in the assay, while the p ph was much weaker causing a lysis of about 20% of erythrocytes.

CONCLUSIONS
we showed that four  out of five tested viral promoters carry structural features required by the bacterial rna polymerase to initiate transcription. two promoters  were as strong as the promoter from the bacterial tem1-β-lactamase gene. the determination of the transcription start sites in selected viral promoters confirmed the presence of sequences with homology to the bacterial - <dig> and - <dig> promoter consensus sequences. two promoters  were shown to be able to direct expression of a bacterial cytotoxin, which illustrated the relevance of this type of heterologous gene expression for the specification of safety measures for the handling of genetically modified organisms. a strong expression of a foreign gene by a heterologous promoter must either be taken into consideration when defining safety measures or if necessary, it must be excluded by performing appropriate experiments. if there is the need for exclusion of a heterologous gene expression, care should be taken in choosing convenient promoter sequences. alternatively, site-directed mutagenesis can be employed to design promoter sequences according to the experimental requirements. by exchanging nucleotides, which are required for binding of the bacterial rna-polymerase, but which are of no or little importance for the transcription initiation in the final eukaryotic recipient, it is possible to minimise the heterologous gene expression while maintaining the desired characteristics of the promoter with regard to its function in eukaryotic cells or tissues  <cit> . finally, the generation of a functional gene product not only depends on the presence of functional promoter sequences but can be also influenced by factors like the presence or absence of introns, the codon usage, post-translational modifications or the necessity of protein secretion.

