BACKGROUND
photorhabdus are gram negative bacteria that are highly virulent pathogens of a wide variety of insect larvae whilst also maintaining a mutualistic interaction with nematodes from the family heterorhabditidieae. photorhabdus normally colonise the intestinal tract of the infective stage of the nematode, the infective juvenile . the ijs are a non-feeding stage of the nematode that lives in the soil where they actively seek out potential larval hosts. on finding a suitable host the ij enters the larva and the bacteria are regurgitated into the insect hemolymph. photorhabdus actively circumvent the insect innate immune system by inhibiting and adapting to the humoral response whilst also suppressing phagocytosis by circulating haemocytes  <cit> . during infection of the insect the bacteria grow exponentially, producing a wide range of toxins and hydrolytic exoenzymes that are responsible for the death and subsequent bioconversion of the insect larva into a nutrient soup that is ideal for nematode growth and development  <cit> . the nematodes feed on the bacterial biomass within the insect cadaver and develop through juvenile  stages to form adult males and females. after several rounds of reproduction the j <dig> stage nematodes receive uncharacterised environmental cues that stimulate the development of ijs. at this point the developing ijs are colonised by photorhabdus before they emerge from the insect cadaver to find new hosts .

many bacteria are motile through the action of large complex protein assemblages called flagella. the production and function of flagella are best studied in the enteric bacteria escherichia coli and salmonella enterica serovar typhimurium where it has been shown that the expression of genes required for flagella-mediated motility  is controlled by a complex regulatory network  <cit> . flagellum-mediated motility often plays a key role in mediating different bacteria-host interactions. for example motility is important during the colonisation of the squid by vibrio fischeri and also during the infection of mammals by both salmonella and e. coli  <cit> . photorhabdus are motile through the action of peritrichously arranged flagella and we hypothesised that motility must play some role in the interactions between photorhabdus and its invertebrate hosts. this was based on the principle that unused or redundant traits in bacteria will be lost over time  <cit> . therefore we constructed specific flagellum-minus  and non-motile  mutants of photorhabdus and, using these mutants, we show that motility is not required for either pathogenicity or mutualism. however we do show that wt bacteria out-compete non-motile mutants during prolonged incubation in insect cadavers suggesting that motility confers a fitness advantage during colonisation of the insect.

RESULTS
construction of mutations in flgg and motab
the genome sequence of p. luminescens tt <dig> is available and, by comparison with the closely related genome of e. coli, the tt <dig> genome is predicted to contain  <dig> genes required for the production and assembly of functional flagella and chemotaxis  <cit> . the motility-associated genes are found as  <dig> distinct genetic loci on a large  fragment of tt <dig> genomic dna stretching from nucleotide  <dig> to  <dig> . to examine the role of motility in p. luminescens tt <dig> we constructed mutations in genes that are known to be required for motility in other bacteria, flgg and motab. the flgg gene encodes the distal rod protein of the flagellar hook-basal body  and mutations in flgg would be expected to prevent completion of this structure and, therefore, flagella assembly . the motab genes encode the motor-force generator that is required for rotation of the flagella and strains carrying mutations in motab can assemble normal flagella but the flagella cannot rotate . using a strategy that results in the construction of unmarked, non-polar deletions we completely removed the flgg gene such that only the start and stop codons remained. however the motab operon overlaps with the downstream chea gene and, to prevent any polar affects on chea expression, the last  <dig> nucleotides of the motb gene  were not deleted. we confirmed that bmm <dig>  and bmm <dig>  were non-motile using swim agar and that motility could be restored by the in trans expression of the respective genes from a plasmid i.e. pbmm <dig>  and pbmm <dig>  respectively .

motility is required for attachment to surfaces
in e. coli  it has been shown that flagella are important for bacterial attachment to abiotic surfaces  <cit> . therefore the wells of a polypropylene microtitre plate were inoculated with tt <dig>  bmm <dig>  and bmm <dig>  and the plate was incubated at 30°c without shaking for  <dig> h,  <dig> h and  <dig> h. bacterial attachment was quantified using crystal violet and it is clear that both the Δflgg and Δmotab mutants were severely affected  in their ability to attach to the walls of the microtitre plates when compared to the wt bacteria . attachment was restored to the mutants carrying a plasmid expressing the appropriate gene. therefore, as in other enteric bacteria, motility is required for attachment of photorhabdus to abiotic surfaces.

there is a cost associated with the production of flagella
although flagella are generally not required for growth their production and assembly can be costly to the cell in terms of the utilisation of resources  <cit> . to determine whether the production of flagella is costly to photorhabdus we set up a competition experiment whereby lipid agar plates were inoculated with 50: <dig> mixtures of wt bacteria with either the Δflgg or the Δmotab mutant. the plates were incubated at 30°c and the relative abundance of each bacterial strain on the agar plate was measured at time intervals post-inoculation i.e.  <dig> days and  <dig> days. in preliminary tests using lb broth we established that the growth rates of the Δflgg and the Δmotab mutants were identical to wt . however, when grown for an extended period of time on lipid agar plates, we observed that the Δflgg mutant was present at higher levels than the wt  on the plate . on the other hand the Δmotab mutant maintained a 50: <dig> ratio with the wt throughout the  <dig> days . therefore there is a measurable cost associated with the production of flagella, but not motility per se, during photorhabdus growth in vitro.

motility is required for the competitive fitness of photorhabdus during insect colonization
to test for a possible role during insect virulence, we injected  <dig> cfu of tt <dig>  bmm <dig>  or bmm <dig>  into final instar galleria mellonella larvae. the lt <dig>  values of the wt and mutant bacteria were similar showing that motility is not required for photorhabdus virulence against insects . to test whether motility might confer an advantage at some point during infection of the insect we injected a 50: <dig> mixture of tt <dig> with either the Δflgg or the Δmotab mutant into g. mellonella larvae and incubated the larvae at 25°c for either  <dig> or  <dig> days . the insects were then homogenised and the proportion of motile to non-motile bacteria was determined using swim agar, as described. after  <dig> days in the insect the Δflgg mutant was present at slightly higher levels than the wt but this trend was reversed after  <dig> days at which time the wt predominated in the insect cadaver . similarly the wt had almost completely out-competed the Δmotab mutant after  <dig> days in the insect . therefore motility confers a fitness advantage to photorhabdus during the prolonged incubation in the insect normally experienced by these bacteria as part of their life-cycle. this would suggest that the cost associated with the production of flagella is offset by the ability of photorhabdus to be motile in the insect.

motility affects the ability of photorhabdus to colonise the nematode
to test for a role for motility during the interaction with the nematode we inoculated lipid agar plates with overnight cultures of tt <dig>  bmm <dig>  or bmm <dig> . after  <dig> days at 25°c the bacterial biomass on the plates was seeded with  <dig> surface-sterilised ij nematodes and incubated, in the dark, at 25°c for a total of  <dig> days. during this time  <dig> aspects of the bacteria-nematode interaction are routinely monitored: 1) the fraction of inoculated ijs that exit diapause to develop into adult hermaphrodites ; 2) the total number of new generation ijs that are recovered after  <dig> days  and 3) ij colonisation by the bacteria . we did not observe any defect in either ij recovery or ij yield suggesting that bacterial motility does not make a significant contribution to nematode growth and development . on the other hand we did observe that the Δflgg mutant was present in the ij at levels significantly higher than the wt  whilst, in contrast, the Δmotab mutant was present in the ij at significantly lower levels than the wt  . therefore, although not required for colonisation, the ability to produce flagella and motility do appear to have contrasting affects on the final number of bacteria present in the ij.

discussion
photorhabdus are highly virulent to a wide range of insect larvae and, following insect death the bacteria must remain in the insect cadaver at high densities for extended periods of time  to facilitate nematode growth and development. we have shown that, although neither flagella production nor motility is required for pathogenicity, there is a significant advantage to being motile during the normally prolonged incubation in the insect.

our data show that, on agar plates, the Δmotab mutant is as competitive as the wt suggesting that there is no perceived benefit to being motile in this environment. this was not unexpected as the concentration of agar used would prevent cells from swimming or swarming, whether they are motile or not, thus rendering the Δmotab mutant neutral in this environment. on the other hand, the Δflgg mutant has a considerable advantage over wt suggesting that there is a metabolic cost associated with the production of flagella. in a recent study fontaine et al  showed that the reduced mortality associated with a flia mutation in e. coli was probably due to decreased internal cell stress due to the absence of physical destabilisation of the membrane  <cit> . therefore the cost associated with flagella production in photorhabdus may be due to the utilisation of resources and energy for the production and/or function of the flagella or it may be due to the stresses associated with assembly of the flagella through the cellular membrane. in the insect this trend is reversed and the Δflgg cells are now disadvantaged during extended growth . this would suggest that flagella production benefits the bacteria during insect infection. therefore the costs of flagella production  appear to be offset during extended incubation in the insect. in support of this, the Δmotab mutant, that still bears the cost of producing flagella and yet does not derive any benefit associated with motility in the insect, is present at much lower levels than the Δflgg mutant in competition assays after  <dig> days.

the frequency of motile cells observed throughout the growth of photorhabdus under normal culturing conditions  is very low  . during growth under static conditions the frequency of motility in the population increased reaching a maximum of 30% at  <dig> h post-inoculation before rapidly decreasing . therefore motility is restricted, both spatially and temporally, during the growth of photorhabdus. this limited exposure of motility to any selection pressure in the environment could explain the relatively modest differences in fitness observed in this study.

in uropathogenic e. coli  motility has been shown to contribute to the fitness of the bacteria during colonisation of the urinary tract  <cit> . indeed recent studies have shown that motility facilitates the movement of upec to the upper urinary tract  <cit> . moreover motility has been shown to be required for salmonella to access high-energy nutrients found at sites of inflammation in the mammalian gut  <cit> . in the same way we expect that motility in photorhabdus, a closely related bacterium, will facilitate the movement of the bacteria throughout the insect cadaver thus enabling invasion of nutrient-rich niches that facilitate growth of the motile strain. in this regard photorhabdus would also be expected to undergo chemotaxis and the genome is predicted to encode a complete che signalling system in addition to  <dig> methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins i.e. mcps . however the role of chemotaxis was not investigated in this study.

we have shown that neither flagella production nor motility is required for the mutualistic association between photorhabdus and the heterorhabditis nematode. photorhabdus has  <dig> roles during the interaction with the nematode: 1) the bacteria must provide nutrients for the nematode and 2) the bacteria must colonise the ij. the nematodes feed on the photorhabdus biomass that is present either in the insect or on agar plates and, therefore, the nematodes obtain a substantial part of their required nutrients directly from the bacteria. we did not see any differences in the growth and development of the nematodes growing on agar plates with the wt bacteria compared to the Δflgg and Δmotab mutants. indeed infecting insects with ijs colonised with either Δflgg or Δmotab mutants resulted in an ij yield  very similar to that observed with ijs colonised with wt bacteria . therefore flagella production and motility do not appear to play any role in the nutritional interaction between photorhabdus and the nematodes either on agar plates or in the insect.

photorhabdus are maternally transmitted from the hermaphrodite stage nematode  to the developing ij  <cit> . as the heterorhabditis nematodes feed on photorhabdus some viable bacteria enter the lumen of the gut of the hermaphrodite and attach to specific cells in the distal region of the gut . the bacteria infect the neighbouring rectal glands cells and replicate within vacuoles. the rectal gland cells rupture, releasing photorhabdus into the body cavity of the hermaphrodite where the bacteria encounter and colonise the developing ijs  <cit> . the ij is initially colonised by 1– <dig> bacteria that subsequently replicate, resulting in a final population of approximately  <dig> cfu of wt bacteria per ij. the proportion of ijs colonised by the Δflgg and Δmotab mutants is the same as the wt  suggesting that attachment to the ij, and presumably infection of the hermaphrodite, is independent of flagella and/or motility. on the other hand, the final population level of photorhabdus within the ij is significantly altered in nematodes that are cultured on either the Δflgg or the Δmotab mutant strain. therefore ijs that have been grown on the Δflgg mutant carry, on average, a bacterial population that is 50% greater than the population within ijs cultured on wt bacteria. in contrast the Δmotab mutant does not reach population levels within the ij that are equivalent to the wt suggesting that the production of non-functional flagella negatively influences growth in the nematode. these results might be explained in terms of the metabolic cost associated with the production of flagella. therefore, in the absence of flagella production, the Δflgg mutant may be able to put more of the limited resources available within the nematode into biomass production and division. on the other hand the Δmotab mutant still bears the cost of producing flagella although these are non-functional. interestingly the fact that the Δmotab mutation is not neutral, in terms of ij colonisation, suggests that photorhabdus are likely to be motile at some point during the colonisation of the nematode. the bacteria initially colonise the proximal end of the ij gut and one possibility is that motility may facilitate exploration of the distal regions of the gut thus allowing the bacteria to make better use of the limited resources available within the nematode.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we show that there is a significant metabolic cost associated with the production of flagella  in photorhabdus. nonetheless photorhabdus are motile suggesting that motility is an adaptive trait that is under powerful positive selection in the environments where photorhabdus is normally found i.e. in the insect and nematode. in this study we show that, although motility is not required for either pathogenicity or mutualism, this trait is advantageous during the interactions between photothabdus and both of its invertebrate hosts. therefore, in addition to describing a role for motility in photorhabdus, this work also highlights the functional overlap between pathogenicity and mutualism and reinforces the utility of photorhabdus as a model for studying these different bacteria-host interactions.

