BACKGROUND
the technologies investigated in this study involved the use of polymeric alkylpyridinium sponge toxins,   <cit> . poly-aps is a marine toxin preparation extracted from the sponge reniera sarai, which can form reversible pores or lesions in cell membranes  <cit> . this toxin preparation primarily contains a cocktail of two polymeric  <dig> -octylpyridinium salts of  <dig>  and  <dig> kda sizes  <cit> . at a high concentration , polyalkylpyridinium salts can cause irreversible depolarisation in membrane potential and a collapse in input resistance. however, at lower concentrations  poly-aps show reversible actions on the electrophysiological properties and ca2+ permeability in hek  <dig> cells, dorsal root ganglion neurons and f- <dig> cells. the unique pore formation properties in addition to their poly-positive charged characteristics, could be useful in non-viral gene therapy  applications. in a previous study  <cit>  some us have shown that sponge toxins can be used to deliver cdna into hek <dig> cells and that this results in the expression of the protein encoded by these genes. furthermore, the co-transfection of cdna is stable and colonies of cells can be produced that contain poly-aps delivered cdna and the proteins they encode for  <cit> . however, there has to date been no reported study on the interaction of this polycationic toxin with dna and further information is required on the mechanism of transfection and the versatility of macromolecule  delivery. this is particularly important given that our data suggest membrane poration is required for poly-aps-mediated transfection because low molecular weight pyridinium surfactant monomers and dimers can also be efficient non-toxic agents for gene delivery  <cit> . however, in contrast, pyridinium surfactant monomers are not efficient pore formers and appear to package dna for delivery by fusion and/or endocytosis.

the aims of our study were to explore the dna condensation properties and temperature sensitivity of their gene delivery mechanism. in addition, the aims were extended to the delivery, using poly-aps, of small interfering rna  into cells and thus to the knockdown of gene expression. comparisons are made with the activity of lipogen, a synthetic lipospermine  an efficient dna delivery agent  <cit> , and lipofectamine, a commercially available transfection reagent.

RESULTS
dna condensation study of poly-aps and lipogen
the dna condensation experiments were run with a plasmid encoding for enhanced green fluorescent protein  or luciferase , and with calf thymus dna . in dna condensation experiments, ethidium bromide , a dna intercalating cationic dye was used as a fluorescent probe. this intercalation increases the fluorescence yield of ethbr . many compounds that bind to dna, including dna condensing agents used in nvgt, can displace ethbr from ethbr-dna complexes. ethbr has been widely used to assess the dna-polyamine complex formation efficiently  <cit> . in  <dig>  a modified reproducible ethbr displacement assay was reported by geall and blagbrough  <cit> . the excitation wavelength was optimised at  <dig> nm  <cit>  where ethbr is indirectly excited by energy transfer from the dna. the proposed protocol also allows the experiment to be run without pre-complexing dna and its binding molecule, a "displacement assay"  <cit> . the dna condensed particle formation has been measured at uv absorbance of  <dig> nm  <cit> . the double-helical dna was bound by polyamines and formed nanoparticles, which scatter the light resulting in the uv absorbance increase above  <dig> nm. light scattering  is measured rather than uv absorption . a little precipitation of the dna may be visible, but it does not increase the absorption above  <dig> nm. the dna concentration used in this assay was a 10-fold excess compared to the ethbr assay given the low sensitivity of this experimental system and lack of fluorescence indicator.

both poly-aps and lipogen  were able to condense pegfp, pgl <dig>  and ctdna efficiently with residual fluorescence at  <dig> % in ethidium bromide  assay . the increase of uv absorption was also confirmed by light scattering experiments, indicating dna nanoparticle formation . optimal n/p ratios for dna condensation for poly-aps and lipogen were at  <dig> – <dig>   and  <dig> – <dig>  . all three dna samples used in our study were condensed in the same manner by each compound. interestingly, fluorescence intensity from lipogen-mediated dna condensation experiment decreased much more sharply than with poly-aps. this superior dna condensation effect could be associated with the positive charge distribution/number and lipophilicity of lipogen over poly-aps.

poration of cell membranes by poly-aps
the measurement of increases in intracellular ca2+ with fura- <dig> can be used as an index of ca2+ entry through channels resulting from the interactions of pore forming molecules with cell membranes  <cit> . ratiometric intracellular ca2+ imaging was conducted to compare pore formation or permeabilisation of cell membranes by poly-aps, lipogen and lipofectamine. poly-aps  evoked transient increases in intracellular ca2+ in hek  <dig> cells at room temperature . in contrast lipogen  and lipofectamine  both failed to evoke any changes in intracellular ca2+ indicating that acute application of these compounds at this concentration did not result in pore formation in cell membranes and an increase in ca2+ permeability . poly-aps also efficiently evoked ca2+ transients at 12°c .

dose/response relationships for poly-aps-evoked intracellular ca2+ transients were generated at 12°c and at room temperature . at 21°c a clear dose-dependent relationship was obtained with  <dig>  μg/ml poly-aps giving significantly larger responses than  <dig>  μg/ml poly-aps . in contrast at 12°c no clear dose-dependent relationship was observed with the mean responses to  <dig>  and  <dig>  μg/ml poly-aps not being significantly different. this can be explained by the significantly larger ca2+ transients evoked by  <dig>  μg/ml poly-aps at 12°c. at 12°c the peak ca2+ transient had a mean amplitude of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  fluorescent ratio units , at 21°c the same concentration of poly-aps evoked a significantly smaller response of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  fluorescent ratio units . this effect of temperature became less apparent at higher concentrations of poly-aps. at  <dig>  μg/ml poly-aps there was no significant difference between responses obtained at 12°c and 21°c . therefore there was an apparent 10-fold shift in sensitivity to poly-aps with a 9°c drop in temperature. the increase in sensitivity of hek  <dig> cells to poly-aps at low temperature was also apparent because a few cells failed to respond at all to poly-aps applied at 21°c but subsequently responded well to poly-aps when the temperature was reduced to 12°c. the majority of experiments were conducted by applying poly-aps at room temperature and then reducing the temperature to 12°c and reapplying cooled poly-aps. however, temperature sensitivity was still equally apparent when the experiments were conducted the other way around by firstly applying poly-aps at 12°c and then raising the temperature to 21°c and reapplying poly-aps. the changes in temperature sensitivity to poly-aps were readily reversible within  <dig> to  <dig> min of a temperature increase or decrease.

intracellular delivery of lucifer yellow
experiments into pore formation were also conducted using lucifer yellow as a probe. although lucifer yellow has a low molecular weight  it is a convenient dye to assess changes in membrane integrity. in the absence of poly-aps, no lucifer yellow was found intracellularly, this was irrespective of the incubation periods of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> h and temperature, 7°c, 21°c and 37°c. similarly, no intracellular delivery of lucifer yellow was achieved using poly-aps at an incubation temperature of 37°c. however, low levels of intracellular delivery of lucifer yellow, was seen with poly-aps at an incubation temperature of 21°c. we estimate that at 21°c intracellular loading with lucifer yellow was seen in about  <dig> % of hek  <dig> cells, but that this loading into individual cells was intense . in contrast, when incubations were carried out at 7°c poly-aps achieved efficient loading of lucifer yellow into at least  <dig> % of cells . furthermore, the loaded lucifer yellow remained in these cells after returning the cells to culture medium and incubating them in standard culture media at 37°c for  <dig> h. in contrast little  or no  lucifer yellow uptake was observed when hek  <dig> cells were incubated with either lipofectamine  or lipogen .

pegfp delivery by poly-aps and lipopolyamines
given that pore formation in cell membranes could be achieved at 12°c with poly-aps, we examined whether lipofectamine, lipogen and poly-aps would still function as transfection reagents at lower temperatures. for these experiments different incubation protocols were used for lipofection systems and for poly-aps. a standard protocol forming complexes between lipofectamine and dna and lipogen and dna was used but for poly-aps to work poly-aps was applied separately to cells to allow pore formation before adding dna  <cit> . incubation protocols with hek  <dig> cells, lipofectamine and poly-aps at 12°c still resulted in delivery of cdna encoding for the expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein and transfection with both reagents . lipofectamine was less efficient as a transfection reagent at 12°c with about 30– <dig> % of hek  <dig> cells transfected compared with 75– <dig> % transfection at 37°c. with poly-aps the transfection efficiency was 20– <dig> % at 12°c and therefore similar to that achieved at 37°c  <cit> . lipofection systems were also assessed at 12°c and 37°c using the same transfection condition and htta hela cells. there was a significant decrease of gene expression at 12°c , compared to transfection and gene expression at 37°c normally used for optimal cell growth. this data suggests that lipogen and lipofectamine-mediated transfection requires endocytosis, and probably does not work to any great degree through the pore formation mechanism.

intracellular delivery and function of sirna
given the abilities of poly-aps, lipofectamine and lipogen to act as transfection reagents for cdna we were interested to determine whether they would deliver sirna into hek  <dig> cells. for these experiments initial incubation protocols were carried out at 37°c because at this temperature transfection with cdna has been achieved with all three reagents used. the intracellular delivery of sirna was detected firstly by visualisation of intracellular sirna labelled with fluorescein and secondly by evaluating knockdown of specific protein expression. experiments using lipofectamine showed that in the presence of serum substantial knockdown in protein expression was observed after  <dig> h. in contrast when incubations were carried out in serum-free conditions substantial knockdown could be identified after  <dig> h but knockdown did not increase further after  <dig> h. therefore in all other experiments serum-free incubation conditions were used and analysis of protein knockdown was carried out after  <dig> h.

figures 7a&b show intracellular fluorescence produced by the fluorescein-labelled sirna delivered into hek  <dig> cells using lipofectamine or lipogen. no intracellular fluorescence was observed under control conditions, in the absence of any transfection reagent  or when  <dig>  μg/ml poly-aps was used to porate the cell membrane. in the presence of poly-aps intracellular fluorescence of fluorescein-labeled sirna was not seen even if the sirna concentration was increased 4-fold. additional experiments were conducted at a lower temperature to increase poly-aps-mediated pore formation. when incubations were carried out with poly-aps and sirna conjugated with fluorescein at 12°c for  <dig> h no intracellular delivery of the sirna was detected . the presence or absence of  <dig> % serum did not influence either the activity of lipofectamine or the inactivity of poly-aps . the delivery of sirna specific for β-actin, using lipofectamine or lipogen had functional consequences, knocking down protein expression by  <dig> %  compared to β-actin expression in control cells . the levels of β-actin seen in cells exposed to poly-aps and sirna specific for β-actin were comparable with those measured for the controls but significantly  higher than the levels seen after lipofectamine or lipogen mediated delivery of sirna .

discussion
poly-aps is a highly efficient dna condensing agent with an additional property of being able to reversibly form pores in membranes, which are highly desirable characteristics for any non-viral vectors. in addition to cell entry facilitation, this membrane perturbation could also help in endosomal escape process, which is one of key barriers in gene delivery. the structure modification of poly-aps i.e. lipid conjugation, alkyl chain length control and degree of polymerisation, may further improve its dna condensing, pore formation, transfection efficiency, and toxicity profiles.

other pyridinium compounds have proved useful transfection reagents, these include the saint  series  <cit> , which have high transfection efficiency when used in a liposomal formulation with  <dig> -dioleoyl phosphatidylethanolamine . the saint series are conjugations of two fatty acid chains  with pyridinium head groups. from structure-activity relationship studies, it was found that unsaturated fatty chains enhanced the transfection efficiency. head group modification by introducing another pyridinium group linked with an alkyl spacer, also significantly improved the transfection efficiency. interestingly, c <dig> spacer  linking two pyridinium heads shows the highest efficiency in dna delivery, compared to c <dig> and c <dig> spacers  <cit> . lipophilicity and alkyl chain length modifications of poly-aps, leading to optimal positive charge regiochemical distribution,  may in the future improve pore formation and transfection properties of modified poly-aps.

previously, we have shown that a sponge toxin preparation, poly-aps, can produce pores in cell membranes and perform as a transfection reagent. this is unusual given that poly-aps is a natural product preparation and it raises the possibility that in nature as well as acting in chemical defence, polymeric alkypyridinium compounds may also provide a novel mechanism of natural horizontal genetic material transfer between marine microorganisms. the mechanism by which poly-aps delivers macromolecules into cells and achieves transfection is unknown. however, reversible pore formation by poly-aps and movement of macromolecules down concentration or electrochemical gradients into cells through these structures may provide a novel mechanism for the intracellular delivery of normally impermeant molecules. an alternative mechanism might involve the binding of poly-aps to cdna, this complex binding to cell membranes and then internalisation by endocytosis. the processes of endocytosis are temperature dependent as temperature affects both rate of ligand binding and mobility of ligand-receptor complexes in membranes. endocytotic processes are usually blocked at temperatures below 12°c. for example lucifer yellow uptake into platelets by fluid phase endocytosis occurs above 15°c  <cit> . although platelets clearly load with lucifer yellow at 37°c no such uptake was seen at this temperature in hek  <dig> cells. however, dramatic stable intracellular loading of lucifer yellow into hek  <dig> cells was facilitated by poly-aps during low temperature incubations. this event was not supported by lipofectamine or lipogen and must therefore be due to some processes other than fluid phase endocytosis. experiments were conducted to determine whether poly-aps would permeabilise cells, as reflected by calcium influx, support transfection of cdna encoding for the expression of enhanced green fluorescent protein and delivery of lucifer yellow into cells at 7–12°c. at low temperatures, poly-aps functions well, both as a pore former and as a transfection reagent for delivery of cdna. this indicates that endocytosis is unlikely to be the mechanism by which poly-aps delivers cdna and lucifer yellow into cells. additionally, the protocol used for cdna delivery also suggests that endocytosis is not involved because there is a requirement to incubate cells in poly-aps prior to exposure with cdna. furthermore, the temperature data adds to the evidence , that pore formation by poly-aps is critical for macromolecule delivery. although lipofectamine and lipogen could be used as a transfection reagent at 12°c they were much less efficient at low temperatures compared to high temperatures. a further difference was the failure of lipofectamine and lipogen to cause an increase in intracellular ca2+, therefore these reagents show very different biological activity compared to poly-aps.

the polymeric structure of poly-aps appears critical to at least some of its biological activities. we previously found that two monomeric compounds, cetylpyridinium chloride and cetyltrimethylammonium bromide, did not reversibly permeate cell membranes and did not support transfection  <cit> . a recent investigation on poly-aps and synthetic linear alkylpyridinium monomers, dimers and tetramers showed that biological activities such as antibacterial, hemolytic activities, anti-acetylcholinesterase activities and inhibition of protein phosphatase 2a are greatly and differentially influenced by increasing numbers of positive charges and pyridinium rings. the smaller synthetic compounds showed good anti-enzymatic and antibacterial activity. in contrast poly-aps showed much greater hemolytic activity compared to the smaller synthetic compounds  <cit> .

evidence suggests that a reduction in temperature enhances pore formation by poly-aps both at the lowest concentration of poly-aps tested  and in cells that were less sensitive and failed to respond to poly-aps at room temperature. it is likely that this effect is due to both temperature-dependent alterations in physicochemical properties of the cell membrane and conformational changes in poly-aps resulting in promotion of poly-aps insertion into the membrane and pore formation. however, poly-aps did not deliver sirna or knockdown protein, whereas both lipofectamine and lipogen delivered sirna and produced specific knockdown of functional β-actin similarly. it is not clear why sirna was not delivered into hek  <dig> cells.

CONCLUSIONS
in conclusion, poly-aps was found to be an efficient pore former and at low temperatures  could deliver into cells both cdna and lucifer yellow but not sirna. in the future it would be interesting to evaluate the binding of sirna to poly-aps and its influences on pore formation. it is noteworthy that pyridinium salts are efficient quenching agents reflecting binding properties. although quenching might have accounted for the negative result obtained when we attempted to deliver fluorescein-labeled sirna with poly-aps, it does not explain the negative results with sirna targeted against β-actin. in contrast to poly-aps, lipogen and lipofectamine did not form ca2+ permeant pores, but did deliver sirna into cells and are likely to function in a similar manner. further studies of the temperature sensitivity to poly-aps might provide approaches, using low temperature and low poly-aps concentrations, to improve efficiency and selectively delivery of macromolecules into cells. in the context of the negative temperature coefficient for poly-aps, it is interesting to note that newly discovered  <dig> -dialkylpyridinium and related compounds have been extracted from arctic species of sponges  <cit> . these findings show that alkylpyridinium compounds are not confined to temperate and tropical haplosclerida but may contribute to host defence in cold environments.

