BACKGROUND
scrapie is a fatal neurodegenerative disease of sheep, and is one of the diseases in the group called transmissible spongiform encephalopathies , where prpsc, an abnormal form of the normal cellular prpc, is believed to be the infective agent  <cit> . other tses are creutzfeldt-jakob disease  in man, bovine spongiform encephalopathy  in cattle and chronic wasting disease  in deer, to mention a few. tses were at first regarded as neurodegenerative diseases without an inflammatory component, but the characterisation of a marked functional activation of microglial cells and identification of increased cytokine expression in the affected areas of the brain, points towards a localised inflammatory response  <cit> . the prpsc and its dissemination and related histopathology have been, and is still, extensively studied in several different animal models, especially in murine models. scrapie affected sheep  with the most susceptible prp genotype, vrq/vrq and vrq/arq, have a preclinical prpsc dissemination in peripheral lymphoid tissue throughout the body, and this has proven useful in preclinical diagnosis by immunohistochemistry  and western blot  of sheep of such prp genotypes  <cit> . less susceptible prp genotypes have shown to have a less predictable lymphatic tissue involvement, thus increasing the risk of false negative lymphoid biopsies  <cit> . during the last decade there has been an increasing interest in the search for other non-prpsc disease related biomarkers for tses by the use of different -omics techniques, especially in the search for preclinical diagnostic markers that could be used for diagnostics in the live animal. in the search for non-prpsc markers of scrapie much work has been done in screening mostly brain, but also peripheral lymphoid tissue and serum in different murine models, for different gene expressions, especially different cytokines which have been detected both at mrna and protein levels  <cit> . not all of these murine models show the same results, and tribouillard-tanvier et al  suggest that this may be attributable to the animal model used  <cit> . recently, huzarewich et al  published a review on different potential disease markers detected in the application of -omics to prion biomarker discovery  <cit> . in the search for a non-prpsc marker of prion diseases it is quite noticeable that many of the significant genes and proteins are linked to the activation of microglia in the brain, and the processes in and around the innate immune response including the acute phase response.

measurements of serum or plasma proteins in relation to diagnostics have been performed for many years, and particularly acute phase proteins , which increase or decrease in response to a number of inflammatory insults as part of the acute phase response   <cit> . the apr is part of the innate immune system and first line of defence. it is the organism’s first response to tissue injuries, infections, stress and inflammation, and is characterised by a local reaction at site of injury followed by a number of systemic reactions including changes in the concentration of acute phase proteins   <cit> . the majority of serum proteins are synthesised in the liver, including the apps, which are part of the apr. the apr is thought to be beneficial to the animal in restoring homeostasis, and the response is tightly controlled by negative feedback loops, as the apr itself can cause harm if it comes out of control.

measurements of apps in serum/plasma can be used to assess the innate immune system’s systemic response to infection, inflammation, trauma and other pathological injuries; they have even been suggested as markers for overall herd/flock health in farm animals by detecting subclinical conditions. the apps are mainly synthesised in hepatocytes, but also extrahepatically, and they are induced by cytokines including interleukin- <dig> , interleukin- <dig>  and tumor-necrosis factor- alpha  released mainly from macrophages, monocytes and astrocytes at site of lesion  <cit> . measurements of apps have shown to be useful as diagnostic and prognostic markers in several conditions in addition to assessing response to treatment, as their levels correspond to tissue damage. apps lack specificity, but are highly sensitive indicators of inflammation and tissue injury  <cit> .

serum amyloid a , haptoglobin  and ceruloplasmin  have been described as important apps in sheep, with saa and hp being the major apps in this animal species  <cit> . increased plasma and serum levels of these proteins have been associated with a variety of diseases and conditions, and neither saa nor hp are usually detected at all in healthy sheep. hp and cp have been shown to increase significantly in experimental mannheimia haemolytica infection, and remain elevated for ten days before returning to pre-infection levels  <cit> . cp is an effective antioxidant, also in the cns, protecting neural cells from oxidative stress, which plays a crucial role during cns injury, when free iron and reactive oxygen species  increase  <cit> .

moderate increases in saa and hp have been detected in subclinical infections, and, on this basis, it has been suggested that measurements of these two apps can become useful in determining health status in flocks. as there is an association between app levels and the severity of disease it has also been proposed that apps can be used as prognostic indicators  <cit> .

this work is part of a larger study to investigate non-prpsc markers in serum from experimentally infected sheep. in previous work by ersdal et al. the inoculation was performed between  <dig> and 61 days of age, while this later model, described by ulvund et al, the lambs are inoculated at birth  <cit> . this later model has a relatively short incubation period where the animals show clinical disease already at 4–5 months of age, and the distribution of prpsc is extensive in the brain at clinical end stage. initial proteomic analysis of serum from these sheep at the terminal clinical end stage revealed serum amyloid a  levels in the scrapie group to be significantly differently expressed from the healthy group, and by latent variable methods, was found to discriminate affected from healthy sheep with 95% correct classification rate . to our knowledge, this represents the first verification of a measurable apr in sheep with both experimental and naturally occurring classical scrapie. the apr was mainly measured by hp, saa and cp levels in serum.

RESULTS
experimental classical scrapie model
this experimental model of classical scrapie has been reported elsewhere  <cit> . all the animals in the scrapie group developed clinical signs of classical scrapie within time of euthanasia at 23 weeks of age/post infection. already at four months of age, very subtle clinical signs of pruritus and wool eating were detected; though only on video surveillance. clear clinical signs of disease were first obvious during the last week before euthanasia, and clinical presentation deteriorated quickly with noticeable pruritus, wool changes, ataxia, depressed mental status and recumbency. very few macroscopic changes were recorded during post mortem examination, apart from redness and abrasions of skin in areas of pruritus and wool loss. the brain from all the animals in both groups were examined for prpsc by immunohistochemistry  and wb, and only the animals in the scrapie group were positive .

total protein and albumin measurements and globulin calculation
the mean total protein  concentration in both groups increased steadily from six weeks of age  until a relatively high peak at  <dig> woa  and at  <dig> woa . tp level in the control group then decreased to reach  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg/ml at  <dig> woa. tp level in the scrapie group also declined after peaking, but later increased again at euthanasia at  <dig> woa , creating a significant difference between the groups . this significant difference in tp level was in majority due to the higher globulin level in the scrapie group  compared to the control group .

globulin levels in both groups increased and decreased in the same fashion as tp levels, and the fluctuation in tp levels seemed to be the result of globulin changes. this was not the case at  <dig> woa, where there was a significant difference in tp levels between the groups . coinciding with this, there was a significant decrease in albumin concentration  in the scrapie group  compared to the control group . changes in these proteins over time are presented in figure  <dig> 

acute phase protein responses in experimental classical scrapie
saa and hp concentrations were from undetectable to very low in the majority of samples during the study. analytical sensitivity of the two kits used was  <dig>  μg/ml for saa and  <dig>  mg/ml for hp . one control animal had detectable saa response at ages  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> woa, and increased hp measurements at  <dig> and  <dig> woa. two scrapie animals had increased levels of both saa and hp at  <dig> and  <dig> woa respectively. no clinical signs of disease were detectable at any of these incidences in either group. from  <dig> woa, saa and hp levels increased in the scrapie group, while remained undetectable in the control group. measurements in serum from one of the animals in the scrapie group had only a moderate level of saa  at 22 weeks and undetectable level of end stage, and hp measurements at the same times where at the levels measured for the control group.

the four animals in the control group were sampled ten times each, and out of these  <dig> individual samples, only three had detectable saa levels, and all the three samples were from the same animal . of the  <dig> samples from the scrapie group,  <dig> had undetectable saa levels, two animals had isolated incidences of elevated saa levels at a subclinical stage of scrapie at  <dig>  and  <dig>  woa. from 20 weeks of age, there was a tendency for saa levels to increase more dramatically until time of euthanasia . the individual saa measurements are shown in dot plots representing each time point sampled in figure  <dig> 

hp levels in the control group were low throughout the sampling period with a mean value of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg/ml, and the mean level in the scrapie group up until 22 weeks of age was similar at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg/ml. thereafter the haptoglobin level increased steeply to reach a mean value of  <dig>  ± <dig>  mg/ml. hp measurements are presented individually in a dot plot at each time point in figure  <dig> 

cp levels were slightly higher in the scrapie group throughout most of the studied period, but the most prominent difference was detectable from 22 weeks of age and onwards. during the last fortnight, the cp levels in the control group decreased, while there was a sharp increase in the scrapie group, resulting in a significant difference  between the two groups at time of euthanasia . figure  <dig> 

natural cases of classical scrapie
all the natural cases of classical scrapie were confirmed by histopathological examination of the brain by typical lesions as well as detection of prpsc <cit> . four out of these five animals had shown pruritus for more than three weeks, two of these developed severe neurological signs before euthanasia, and one animal was without any visible clinical signs . tp levels in these five sheep ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mg/ml . albumin levels were relatively stable for all five sheep at  <dig>  ±  <dig>  mg/ml, and slightly lower in one sheep . calculated globulin levels ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  mg/ml . hp concentration was compared to the experimental control group and not found to be statistically different . one animal had a very high level of hp at  <dig>  mg/ml, while the remaining four had a mean of  <dig>  mg/ml. all the animals had detectable saa levels, ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  μg/ml, with significant difference from the control group . results for all the measured serum proteins are presented in table  <dig> 

overview over admission dates and time of euthanasia, age in years, prp genotype, clinical presentation at time of euthanasia and pathognomonic histopathology of the brain of the five natural classical scrapie cases. prpsc was identified by immunohistochemistry on sections of the brain as described by ersdal et al.   <cit> 

level of different proteins in serum from five cases of naturally occurring classical scrapie. hp and saa levels were compared to measurements of the oldest animals in the control group. the “-“ indicates that measured levels were below detection range of test.

evaluation hp and saa kit performance
the coefficients of variation for both kits are presented in table  <dig>  intra-assay cv for hp and saa was  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, and inter-assay cv for hp and saa was  <dig> % and  <dig> %. the limitations in these measurements were that the inter-assay cv was based on only two separate plates and the first plate mean was calculated from only one duplicate. the second mean was calculated from the same duplicate samples as used for intra-assay cv. to achieve a better estimate of the inter-assay cv, more samples and assays would be needed. the intra-assay cv was based on similar numbers of samples as presented by the manufacturer.

cv: coefficient of variation; n: number of duplicate samples; sd: standard deviation; hp: haptoglobin; saa: serum amyloid a.

discussion
in this work, we describe increased levels of certain apps in sheep with experimental and natural cases of clinical classical scrapie. such rise of these apps in sheep has not earlier been published in classical scrapie. regarding protein degradation during storage, serum samples from experimental scrapie had been stored in aliquots at −70 °c, and the sera from natural cases had been stored at −20 °c. all the samples had been stored for more than one year, and one of the natural cases was from  <dig>  the deteriorating effects on protein concentration in these samples are unknown, but it has been shown that albumin and total proteins levels remain stable for at least eight months in canine serum at −20 °c  <cit>  and recently gislefoss et al. reported non-significant differences of albumin in samples stored for 25 years, two years and one month  <cit> . based on these examinations, the results achieved in this work were regarded to be reliable and indicative of the true protein status in the samples. cp measurements were based on its oxidative activity, which decreases over time in storage, and therefore cp was not measured in the naturally occurring classical scrapie cases.

as age has a major effect on the concentration of many serum proteins, it was difficult to find reference ranges based on animals in the age range of 6 weeks to six months of age  <cit> . total serum protein has a wide dynamic range, thereby making analysis difficult to interpret when comparing to reference ranges developed by others. in addition, the protein levels may also be influenced by breed, management systems and analytical methods, and available reference ranges usually do not give either of these influential factors. therefore, it may be misleading to uncritically compare results with any reference range listed. the animals used in this project were kept under very strict management system, and all the animals were managed similarly, they are of the same breed and age. due to reasons mentioned above, the serum proteins were compared between the groups in question at same age, breed and feeding regime and management.

the total protein and albumin profile changed over time in a similar fashion to what was described by kaneko  <cit> , although the total protein levels in both groups were slightly to moderately higher than those reported for lambs younger than 12 months. albumin levels were clearly lower. as albumin and globulins make up most of the total serum protein, globulin levels were higher than indicated by others  <cit> . there was a general increase in total protein from birth, combined with a minimal change in albumin and a marked increase in globulins with advancing age, reaching high levels at  <dig> – 20 weeks of age. at birth, the total protein is relatively low, but increase rapidly after ingestion of colostrum and maternal immunoglobulins. as globulins declined due to normal turnover, the animals begin to synthesize their own immunoglobulins, and reach adult levels of albumins and globulins in young adulthood. total protein levels reached above average adult levels as a result of a minor decrease in albumin and progressive increase in globulins  <cit> . from 20 weeks of age, there were significant differences in tp levels between the groups, with a marked increase in the scrapie group. this increase was mainly due to a significant increase in the globulin fraction. as the apps and immunoglobulins are part of the globulin fraction, this increase could be the result of increased synthesis of apps, as seen for the three positive apps tested in this work: hp, saa and cp. several studies have failed to describe a significant increase in immunoglobulins at clinical classical scrapie, especially scrapie-specific igg  <cit> .

there are very few available reference ranges for apps in sheep, but recently lepherd et al. <cit>  published good reference ranges for saa and hp in young sheep. although these reference intervals were from a different breed and sheep kept under different management systems, they were in the same age range and seemed appropriate in that manner. skinner and roberts  <cit>  evaluated hp levels in a variety of conditions, both infectious and non-infectious, in addition to healthy sheep, and concluded that hp values above  <dig>  g/l were “positive”. it is also interesting to see that 7% of the randomly selected healthy sheep had a positive hp value, which could indicate the presence of subclinical conditions. in other studies, levels of saa below 2 μg/ml  have been reported in clinical healthy sheep  <cit> . apps are often reported as undetectable to very low levels in healthy individuals, and subclinical conditions would often lead to a temporary elevation before decreasing to resting levels. thus the moderate increase in saa and hp seen approximately half-way through the incubation period in two animals in the scrapie group, and one control, could be due to a subclinical condition. as no clinical signs of disease were detected in any of the animals at this time, it is difficult to rule in or out any specific conditions, including scrapie. there is a possibility that the increase in saa and hp in the two scrapie infected animals at  <dig> and 14 weeks of age could relate to the expected prpsc dissemination through peripheral lymphoid tissue that is seen about half-way through the incubation period in this experimental model. this would need further testing to confirm. batxelli-molina et al.  reported transthyretin to discriminate scrapie affected sheep from healthy sheep, both during early asymptomatic phase and later during the symptomatic phase, although only significant at the late stage  <cit> . transthyretin is a negative app, and thus decreased levels would be an expected finding along with increased levels of positive apps during an apr. the clear and significant increase in saa, hp and cp measured at the clinical end stage indicate a detectable apr at this stage of classical scrapie, both in the experimental and the natural cases. this coincides well with the pathological changes seen on histopathological examination of the brain and the onset of severe clinical disease seen at this late stage in this experimental model. apps levels are reported to be directly related to severity of both tissue damage and level of inflammation, i.e. they are specific markers for tissue damage and inflammation  <cit> . pro-inflammatory cytokines, like interleukin  <dig> , interleukin- <dig>  and tumor-necrosis factor α , are released by damaged tissues locally and into the circulation, where more inflammatory cells are activated. these responses result in production of more cytokines and inflammatory mediators circulating in the blood acting on different target organs/cells leading up to a systemic reaction with alteration in synthesis of apps in the liver and activation of the hypothalamic-pituitary-adrenal  axis  <cit> . this stimulation will lead to increased production of cortisol by the adrenal glands, which has a negative feedback effect on this axis. this stimulation of the hpa axis could contribute to the hypercorticism with increased cortisol, 20β-dihydrocortisol and cortisone detected in plasma and urine of sheep with subclinical and clinical scrapie that has been reported with a certain discriminating level  <cit> . cytokines induce production of adrenocorticotrophic hormone  which in turn stimulates synthesis of the corticosteroid, cortisol  <cit> . this is an important regulatory feature in inflammatory and cytokine responses, as adrenalectomized rodents show increased mortality in experiments involving injection of bacterial lipopolysaccharide, il- <dig> or tnf-α. after administration of glucocorticoids, these mice survived. thus by regulating cytokine production and action, hpa axis contributes to modulation of the inflammatory response  <cit> .

saa and hp are characterised as major acute phase proteins  in sheep and these are known to increase with severity of tissue damage and level of inflammation. interestingly, the saa response in these experimental cases of scrapie are higher than levels reported for mulesing and caseous lymphadenitis   <cit> , and more in the region of experimental mastitis  <cit> . it is tempting to think that the app levels in the naturally affected animals were related to extent of histopathological changes in the brain, as the two animals with clear neurological signs had highest levels of app. the others with much lower levels of app presented with pruritus as the main clinical sign, although all of them had pathological changes in the brain. it is also worth noticing the clear increase in the globulin fraction of the tp in three out of the five natural cases which was outside the reference range  <cit> . relating these results to clinical findings, these three sheep were presented with the most severe clinical signs. albumin level in the worst clinically affected sheep were even lower than the others, perhaps due to the on-going apr. this leads to the thought that the systemic effects of scrapie was related to severity of clinical signs and could be measured in serum by saa, hp and cp levels. measuring app levels in serum may provide objective information about the extent of the on-going process, magnitude and duration may reflect the severity  <cit> . even though the apr is a non-specific response, it is a feature of clinical scrapie, and due to the high sensitivity of the apr, measurements of apps could be useful in evaluation of the underlying pathological processes and the systemic involvement of scrapie.

apps respond rapidly to insults and the majority peak about one day after the initial insult before returning to resting levels within a week due to the fact that most apps have half-life of only  <dig> to  <dig> hours  <cit> . this means that some important time points may have been missed. even though this experimental model gives fairly predictive and consistent development of classical scrapie and clinical signs at around the same time, individual differences may result in individual app expression profiles. a different sampling strategy with more frequent blood sampling could detect more subtle changes in the app profile of scrapie affected sheep throughout the incubation period.

the exact underlying cause or the actual triggering factors behind the detectable increase in apps seen in this study remains unknown, but this response coincides well with the known accumulation of prpsc in the brain, astrocytosis and vacuolar changes seen at this late clinical stage in vrq/vrq animals  <cit> . several murine models of classical scrapie show that pro-inflammatory cytokines like il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf-α, have increased expression at both mrna and protein levels in brain, peripheral lymphoid tissue and serum at the terminal end stage  <cit> . microglia produce pro-inflammatory cytokines like il- <dig>  il- <dig> and tnf-α upon activation, and these are stimulators of the production of most apps  <cit> . newsom et al.  reported recently quite an extensive list of proteins with altered expression in brain, lymphoid tissue and serum both pre-clinically and clinically in a murine model  <cit> . volkel et al.  investigated plasma samples from patients with cjd and found significant increase in both c-reactive protein  and interleukin- <dig>  compared to healthy controls, and concluded that these could be assessed for cell damage and inflammation in similar fashion to other markers <cit> . coe et al.  showed in an experimental scrapie murine model increasing plasma levels of serum amyloid p with the onset and progression of clinical signs  <cit> . there exist differences in expression patterns both in the brain and peripheral in the different murine models, and as postulated by newsom et al, this could be attributable to the animal model used  <cit> . there are only a couple of records of apps being of significance in scrapie in sheep, serum transthyretin and urinary α-1antichymotrypsin have been found to discriminate healthy from scrapie infected both at pre-clinical and clinical stage of scrapie  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
based on the results from these different murine models and the two reports on sheep, our results are of great relevance as we described increased levels of the major apps in sheep which to our knowledge has not been published in relation to scrapie in sheep. it is also interesting to see that in an experimental model as the one used here, where prpsc dissemination, pathological changes and onset of clinical disease are expected to show little between individual differences, there is a great variation in quantitative expression of the apps.

due to the low number of animals in this study and the lack of disease specificity of the acute phase response, these findings will need to be further evaluated in larger groups to establish the expected dynamic range of apps in classical scrapie and other neurological and non-neurological diseases of sheep. comparable conditions of interest are listeriosis, cerebrocortical necrosis, focal symmetrical encephalomalacia and tick born fever and encephalitis.

