BACKGROUND
the marine environment encompasses nearly 71% of the earth's surface, with deep-sea habitats  representing 91% of the total bottom surface area of the world ocean  <cit> . given the vastness of this ecosystem, it is likely that deep-sea fauna constitute a substantial proportion of the earth's biodiversity; understanding the diversity, abundance, and ecological roles of deep-sea taxa is crucial for quantifying biological contributions to global nutrient cycles such as carbon flux  <cit> . assessing the scale of this role is largely dependant on accurately characterizing the abundance and diversity of deep-sea biota, as decreasing biodiversity has been linked to exponential reductions in ecosystem functioning  <cit> .

nematodes represent the most abundant metazoan phylum in deep-sea sediments, comprising 85-96% of all benthic meiofauna  <cit> . we lack an accurate characterization of species diversity and phylogeographic patterns in this dominant benthic group--a situation hindered by logistical difficulties in sampling the deep-sea and a persistent shortage of nematode taxonomists. currently, we do not understand what proportion of the deep-sea nematode fauna represents unique taxa  and what fraction instead represents a subset of shallow water biodiversity. fossil evidence  <cit>  proposes that deep-sea species originally represented invasions from nearby shallow-water habitats, but 'endemic' lineages developed over time as taxa retreated from shallow water habitats altogether and became strictly deep-sea groups. evidence from isopods suggests that deep-sea taxa represent a mix of older endemic lineages and fauna derived more recently from shallow water forms. within the janiroidea, there is evidence supporting the radiation of shallow-water isopods into deeper habitats through isothermal water columns  <cit> , reinvasions of shallow habitats by deep-sea taxa  <cit> , and multiple independent colonizations of the deep-sea  <cit> --thus, deep-sea taxa within this group probably represent ancient evolutionary lineages that split off early from other taxa  <cit> . on the other hand, the flabellifera contains no endemic deep-sea isopod families , and exhibits low diversity in deep habitats  <cit> ; this group is thought to have arisen relatively recently, with shallow-water taxa invading deep-sea habitats subsequent to anoxic oceanic conditions that prompted mass deep-water extinctions in the palaeocene.

it is unknown whether extant deep-sea nematode species represent relatively recent radiations or older lineages. for small immobile animals such as nematodes, historical expansions and contractions of anoxic zones may have played a large role in shaping phylogeographic patterns amongst taxa  <cit> . although nematodes are able to survive low oxygen conditions and short-term anoxia  <cit> , they appear unable to survive in permanently anoxic sediments  <cit> . the scale of past anoxic events is largely unknown, and it is possible that some oxygen minimum zones were patchy and localized rather than globally encompassing the entire deep-sea  <cit> ; thus, different depths  may have acted variably as source or sink habitats at different timepoints. many deep-sea genera are cosmopolitan in their occurrence  <cit> , but there is little information on species distributions within this habitat. limited data from shallow water nematodes indicates that some nematode species have large ranges  <cit> , but it is unknown whether or not deep-sea taxa possess similar dispersal capabilities.

our investigation of deep-sea nematodes has focused on the order enoplida, a diverse group of species  commonly found in marine sediments. using up to three gene sequences from individual specimens , our narrow taxonomic focus has allowed for an intensive assessment of evolutionary relationships between shallow-water and deep-sea taxa representing multiple ocean basins and a range of collection depths. more concentrated sampling within certain genera has allowed further assessment of geographic patterns within specific deep-sea lineages. by clarifying the phylogenetic placement of deep-sea species, our investigation represents another important step towards a comprehensive molecular framework of the nematoda. in addition, this study is elucidating biogeographic and bathymetric patterns for the first time using molecular data from deep-sea nematode species; characterizing genetic diversity within this extensive habitat is crucial for quantifying global nematode diversity.

RESULTS
ssu tree topologies provide substantial insight regarding the evolution of deep-sea species. phylogenetic relationships amongst enoplid taxa were overwhelmingly congruent in both maximum likelihood and bayesian tree topologies. deep-sea nematodes represent a wide taxonomic and phylogenetic breadth within the enoplida. deep-sea species were recovered in most marine families--the absence of representatives within some clades may be due to limited sampling. within genera, phylogenies recovered deep-sea species and shallow water species as sister taxa, as clearly seen for syringolaimus, bathylaimus, oxystomina, halalaimus, and chaetonema species ; deep-sea taxa do not form an independent lineage within the enoplida. within more intensively sampled clades , there does not appear to be any observed clustering pattern according to sample depth or geographic location.

high pairwise sequence identities were observed between many deep-sea and shallow water species, implying a recent divergence between taxa in these habitats. phylogenetic structures further suggest both frequent and recent interchanges between habitats--there appear to be multiple, independent evolutionary origins for both shallow water and deep-sea taxa. within the well-sampled genus halalaimus , shallow water lineages appear to have arisen independently at least three times from deep-sea lineages, and there is further evidence for at least three independent invasions of the deep sea. extant shallow water lineages in clades iiib and iiic  also seem to represent additional derivations from deep-water taxa. habitat transitions in the opposite direction  are instead implied by the structure outlined in clades i and ii ; here, deep-sea taxa are recovered as recent splits within primarily shallow clades. the presence of highly divergent, early branching deep-sea lineages within some clades  also suggests a more ancient origin for some groups of deep-sea nematodes.

sequence data from multiple genes provides some evidence for widespread  distributions in a small fraction of nematode species. pairwise sequence identity comparisons within ssu, lsu, and cox <dig> datasets revealed a subset of specimens possessing identical gene sequences. identical gene sequences were, unsurprisingly, most often observed amongst specimens collected at the same sample site. however, a number of specimens shared identical  <dig> s and  <dig> s ribosomal sequences  despite being collected from disparate geographic locations . the highest number of identical gene copies were recovered from nematodes belonging to the oncholaimidae  collected from intertidal sediments; the distance between sample sites varied from tens to thousands of kilometres . one set of viscosia specimens were isolated from devon, england, the clyde estuary in scotland and new hampshire, usa. another set of oncholaimus specimens were collected from at two sites in massachusetts, usa as well as at two south african beaches. where available, analysis of mitochondrial sequences showed that nematodes within these two groups additionally shared mitochondrial haplotypes. one group of oncholaimus specimens with identical ribosomal sequences exhibited two primary mt haplotypes ; these haplotype sequences only differed by  <dig> substitutions. little mitochondrial data was obtained from deep-sea nematodes , but identical ribosomal sequences were isolated from the antarctic shelf , bathyal sediments , and abyssal habitats . our data further recovered identical gene sequences from trefusia specimens in the clyde estuary and antarctic shelf . unfortunately, only one specimen was recovered from the antarcitic shelf site, but this result was surprising given the large distance  and depth gradient  between the two sites.

discussion
no endemic deep-sea lineages and frequent deep/shallow interchanges
prior to this investigation, there were no public data available for reconstructing the evolutionary history of deep-sea nematode taxa. morphological evidence previously indicated that most deep-sea genera are ubiquitous and benthic community assemblages are similar worldwide  <cit> , although a number of novel deep-sea genera had been identified  <cit> . within our dataset, deep-sea specimens comprised a taxonomically diverse group of genera representing every major phylogenetic lineage in the enoplida . certain genera were particularly abundant in deep-sea sediments  and isolated from most geographic locations, supporting previous conclusions from taxonomic studies.

clade structures  do not reveal any concrete evidence for endemic deep-sea lineages, and deep-sea nematodes do not represent a separate, independent clade within the nematoda. instead, specimens are recovered as close relatives of shallow-water species. our data suggest repeated and recent interchanges between the deep-sea and intertidal zone, supporting ideas that habitat transitions are frequent and common amongst nematodes  <cit> . a recent study by van gaever et al.  <cit>  reported similar findings, observing low shallow-deep molecular divergences in halomonhystera and terschellingia specimens inhabiting bathyal shelf sediments. in the present study, topologies of more densely sampled genera provide evidence for multiple, independent invasions of both deep-sea and shallow water habitats. within the genus halalaimus , there appear to be at least  <dig> separate invasions of shallow habitats, and evidence for at least  <dig> independent colonizations of the deep-sea; two deep-sea lineages also appear to show reinvasions from shallow water. clades i and ii  instead support movement from shallow to deep habitats; deep-sea specimens in these clades appear to be recently derived from shallow water fauna.

this complex structure suggests multiple evolutionary origins for deep-sea nematode taxa, similar to patterns observed in isopods  <cit> . although we can never unequivocally confirm an exact evolutionary history from phylogenetic topologies, the most parsimonious interpretation of our data supports both deep-sea and shallow water origins for extant enoplid taxa. in some clades , extant intertidal taxa may be originally derived from historical source populations in the deep-sea. in other taxa  deep-sea taxa are instead nested amongst intertidal species, implying recent shallow water ancestry within these clades. deep-sea clades additionally represent a mixture of early-branching lineages and recently derived taxa , supporting an evolutionary history defined by multiple invasion events. additional data will continue to add further insight to these emerging patterns; although we aimed for intensive sampling within the enoplida, our investigation was not an exhaustive inventory of global marine habitats and did not recover all known genera within this group.

although we cannot label any marine lineage as 'endemic', species distributions of extant nematodes indicate that at least some taxa are not found outside the deep-sea. the genus acantholaimus is rarely found in shallow water, with only one species described from intertidal sediments  <cit> . morphological evidence suggests that species within this typical deep-sea group have migrated up to shallower shelf habitats in the weddell sea  <cit> ; it is possible that the overall absence of acantholaimus in shallow habitats could represent a secondary reduction of species in these habitats, following radiation events and speciation in the deep-sea. although there are currently no molecular studies of acantholaimus species, the present study has included representatives of another purely deep-sea genus, bathyeurystomina  <cit> . this genus does not appear to have any recent shallow-water relatives in molecular phylogenies and appears to have split off early from other genera within the enchelidiidae ; more extensive sampling is needed to further elucidate generic relationships within this family. similarly, the genus cricohalalaimus  has only been described from deep-sea sediments  <cit> -- molecular evidence indicates that this taxon represents a divergent lineage that is most closely related to genera thalassoalaimus and litinium , even though the distinct morphology of cricohalalaimus does not intuitively suggest a relationship with either group.

widely distributed, closely related species assemblages in the deep-sea
regional isolation in the deep-sea has previously been implied in taxonomic studies, which typically record a high number of distinct, geographically restricted morphospecies and only rare descriptions of the same species from distant locales  <cit> . in our dataset, gene sequences from well-sampled enoplid clades do not suggest any obvious clustering pattern according to ocean basin or collection depth --phylogenetic topologies instead indicate widely distributed, closely related species assemblages  in the deep-sea. many genera contained specimens from distant sample sites that exhibited pairwise sequence identities >97%. although such pairwise values are not a definitive indicator of a species, these high sequence identities suggest recent vicariance or dispersal between remote deep-sea locations. one set of phanodermatidae specimens displayed high pairwise identities  in  <dig> s sequences but showed signs of mitochondrial divergence; 'tcr 75' and 'cr 72b'  were collected from deep-sea sites  <dig>  miles apart and exhibit sequence identities of 99% , 94%  and 85% . this pairwise identity in cox <dig> sequences exceeds interspecific divergence values reported in other nematode genera , suggesting that these two nematodes represent closely related species. five additional deep-sea enoplids within the phanodermatidae exhibited >99% ssu sequence identities, but our efforts failed to amplify cox <dig> from most of these specimens.

close phylogenetic relationships were additionally observed amongst specimens from antarctic shelf habitats  and abyssal sediments in the southern indian ocean . within the phanodermatidae , the deep-sea sub-antarctic specimen 'cr 72b' exhibits a 99%  and 93%  pairwise sequence identity with antarctic shelf specimen 'bca 37', despite a difference of ~ <dig> metres in vertical depths; similar relationships were observed within the genus halalaimus . while lsu divergence points towards separate species, high ribosomal sequence identities nonetheless suggest a relatively recent common ancestor between these species. although we did not sample intermediate depths outside the southern ocean, low genetic divergence across vertical depth may be specific to antarctic shelf habitats; such patterns may reflect historical cycles of shelf ice formation and retreat, where periodic extinctions of shelf fauna were followed by upward migrations of deep-sea taxa  <cit> . 

a number of benthic species are known to maintain wide geographic distributions in the deep-sea  <cit> , although most of these taxa produce dispersive propagule stages or pelagic larvae that facilitate gene flow over these large distances. marine nematodes lack any obvious propagative phases, and thus little research has been conducted on dispersal mechanisms for deep-sea species. the present study presents compelling evidence for cosmopolitan oncholaimid species, supporting previous evidence for long-distance dispersal and broad geographic ranges in shallow-water nematodes  <cit> . given the close evolutionary relationships between deep and shallow marine species, it seems plausible that deep-sea species retain behaviours that promote similarly broad distributions in the deep sea. future investigations will need to sample nematodes from other continental shelf sites in order to assess whether species' large depth ranges are specific to antarctic habitats.

high nematode diversity in the deep-sea
free-living marine nematodes appear to exhibit a high species diversity--a complex branching structure containing a number of divergent clades was observed within the most densely sampled nematode clades, . community assemblages in the deep-sea appear to comprise a diverse group of species; specimens representing multiple phylogenetic lineages within the same genus  were often present within the same geographic region, and even within the same sample site. for example, nematodes representing  <dig> distinct halalaimus lineages were found within a single sediment core in the southern indian ocean ; at least  <dig> unique halalaimus lineages seem to be present across all sites in the southern indian ocean, despite sample areas being no more than ~ <dig> km apart . similar patterns were observed in other well-sampled clades such as the phanodermatidae  and oxystomina .

although this study aimed to intensively sample enoplid taxa from each deep-sea site, our overall sampling regime only examined a limited number of sediment cores representing a very small area of the seabed . our investigation suggests a huge diversity of species, despite this small total surface area. furthermore, our restricted focus on the order enoplida analysed only a specific fraction of the diverse nematode assemblages present in deep-sea sediments. given the diversity uncovered within the enoplida alone, the global species richness of deep-sea nematode fauna is likely to be very high.

cosmopolitan species in intertidal habitats
when added to other evidence of broad species ranges in nematodes  <cit> , our results strongly support the existence of cosmopolitan oncholaimid species. although several mitochondrial haplotypes were found amongst oncholaimid specimens possessing identical ribosomal sequences , cox <dig> variants only differed at 1- <dig> nucleotide positions, equating to a genetic divergence <1%. this low divergence is comparable to intraspecific variation observed in other nematode species  <cit> ; furthermore, the same haplotype was often recovered from transatlantic locations. potential mechanisms that may help maintain cosmopolitan distributions in oncholaimids include water-column processes, natural rafts  or anthropogenic transport. hydrodynamic forces have been shown to place an important role in the transport of shallow-water meiofauna; heavy storms are known to erode sediments at depths up to  <dig> m and carry sediments up to  <dig> km away  <cit> , while more typical tidal actions can transport meiofauna at a rate of  <dig> km per day as a result of erosion and passive drift  <cit> . previous studies have reported an abundance of nematodes in floating mangrove detritus  <cit> , drifting algae  <cit> , and phaeocystis 'seafoam'  <cit> , promoting the role of raft attachment as a dispersal method. meiofauna have also been observed to aggregate in clumps of 'marine snow'  <cit> , and transport via these small organic parcels would presumably provide nutritional sustenance during pelagic journeys. some authors have additionally suggested that meiofauna can be transported via sea ice  <cit> , floating pieces of rubbish  <cit> , or even attached to birds' feet  <cit> . in terms of anthropogenic transport, ballast water  and fouling on vessels are known to carry meiofaunal populations across oceans during shipping operations  <cit> . the nematode pellioditis marina is one nematode species that apparently maintains transatlantic populations, and specimens have been found floating in macroalgae rafts in the north sea  <cit> ; however, the frequency of long-distance dispersal events is unknown.

behavioural evidence also suggests that oncholaimids may be particularly adept at long-distance dispersal. viscosia viscosa often inhabits the surface layers of sediment and is apparently capable of floating  <cit> , increasing the probability that this species will be resuspended in the water column and passively transported. in addition, there is evidence to suggest that oncholaimid nematodes can actively and rapidly transport themselves to suitable new habitats  <cit> , supplementary to passive mechanisms. our investigation was focused on a single nematode order that may be unique amongst free-living marine species; many enoplids are large, predatory nematodes and may thus be more motile than smaller bacterial or fungal feeding nematode species. this motility may enable continued gene flow across geographically disparate sites and prevent allopatric speciation. the unique lifestyles of enoplid nematodes may also help to explain the closely related species assemblages observed across deep-sea sites. additional molecular studies are needed in order to assess the distribution of species  in other nematode orders.

similar patterns may additionally exist within the trefusiidae; the observation of identical trefusia species in a scottish estuary and antarctic shelf habitats may provide another plausible example of long-distance dispersal as well as eurybathic species distribution, although, only one specimen was recovered from the antarctic site. lab contamination can be ruled out, and video capture images of morphology confirm the taxonomic identity of these specimens--regardless, additional data is needed to validate this preliminary insight.

CONCLUSIONS
this study has provided the first insight into the evolution and phylogeography of deep-sea nematode fauna, but much further work is needed. our data suggest high species richness for marine nematodes, frequent interchanges between deep and shallow habitats, and closely related species complexes in deep-sea habitats, but data from other nematode groups  is needed to assess whether these patterns are broadly applicable to all nematode taxa. despite the intensive sampling effort of this investigation, deep-sea nematodes were only isolated from a small number of sites representing a minute fraction of the seafloor. in addition, our efforts focused on relationships at the genus level, and the scope of this study was not aimed at delineating species. future molecular investigations should be expanded to include a wider range of marine sites , include a heavy focus on mitochondrial genes , and represent the full taxonomic spectrum of deep-sea nematode communities.

