BACKGROUND
many attributes of voluntary or instructed movements are prepared in advance, in order to facilitate efficient execution. such facilitation may for example result in enhanced accuracy and shortened reaction times. preparation of movement direction may already begin about  <dig> ms after presentation of a directional cue  <cit> . moreover, providing prior information  about the direction of an upcoming movement results in a strong reduction in reaction times  <cit> .

on the neurophysiologic level, directional coding has been studied extensively in behaving animals. the activity of single neurons in the motor cortex is gradually modulated by movement direction  <cit> . the direction of any particular movement can therefore be encoded across a population of motor cortical cells. neuronal coding of direction has been reported not only to occur shortly before or during the execution of movements but also during preparatory intervals, several hundreds of milliseconds before the onset of actual movement  <cit> . furthermore, preparatory activity of direction-selective neurons in monkey motor cortex can predict the direction and the reaction time of a subsequent movement on a trial-to-trial basis  <cit> . thus it seems that prior information about movement direction facilitates reaction time through pre-activation of neuronal output systems.

here we aimed to find neurophysiologic evidence for the preparation of movement direction in humans. although it is virtually impossible to measure directional coding of individual neurons in healthy humans, on a macroscopic level the representation of movement direction in motor cortex can be investigated with transcranial magnetic stimulation . classen and colleagues introduced the use of tms-evoked thumb movements to reveal changes in motor-cortical movement representations  <cit> . by assessing the direction of tms-evoked thumb movements they showed that these movement representations can be modulated experimentally  <cit> . tms-evoked movements have also been applied in reaction tasks to show that their directions starts to follow the intended movement well before the start of the voluntary response, but these studies focussed on the period after the response signal   <cit> . in this study, we assessed whether purely preparatory processes influence the cortical movement representation and if the direction of an intended movement may already be determined prior to the response signal, namely the preparatory interval.

the brief muscle twitches underlying tms-evoked movements can be recorded electromyographically as so called motor-evoked potentials . their amplitudes are a measure of corticospinal excitability. several earlier studies have made clear that corticospinal excitability of movement agonists increases during the last  <dig> ms of the response interval  <cit> . recent tms research has shown that if a specific movement can be prepared, corticospinal excitability of the movement agonists may also increase during the preparatory interval  <cit> . if preparation of a specific movement direction is reflected by the kinematics of tms-evoked movements, it should correspondingly modulate corticospinal excitability. during preparation of a particular direction, the agonists are expected to be facilitated. however, there is also accumulating evidence for an important role of corticospinal inhibition in motor preparation  <cit> . this inhibition seems to be related to the estimation of the timing of the response signal rather than to preparation of a specific response, as it is not specific to movement agonists  <cit> . inhibition associated with time preparation appears to be aimed at spinal circuits whereas response specific preparation most likely occurs at the cortical level  <cit> .

we sought to elucidate whether prior specification of the required direction of an upcoming movement is associated with changes in the corticospinal output  during the preparatory interval preceding that movement. our subjects performed a motor preparation task that involved brisk concentric thumb movements. the required movement direction was instructed via a precue . in order to modulate the amount of preparation that could be attained, the precue either was presented relatively late in the preparatory interval or relatively early in the preparatory interval. compared to a late precue, an early precue provided an additional period of  <dig> milliseconds where movement direction could be prepared, and was hence expected to yield a shorter reaction time. in trials with an early precue, we used tms to determine 1) whether the directional precue modulates the direction of tms-evoked thumb movements; 2) how these changes relate to changes in corticospinal excitability, as reflected by meps from hand muscles.

RESULTS
in total, 13% of all trials were discarded because subjects made errors, and/or pretrigger electromyographic  activity was detected.

voluntary movements
examples of voluntary thumb movements of one of the subjects are shown in figure  <dig>  on average , the movement direction deviated  <dig>  ±  <dig>  degrees from the precued direction. the anova  <cit>  showed that average movement directions were significantly different between all five precue conditions . thus, subjects were able to accurately move their thumb in all five directions, with little overlap between movements in response to different precues. figure  <dig> shows for each muscle the average rms amplitudes across subjects in the five different movement directions. during movement, the thumb muscle  displayed the largest emg amplitudes. furthermore, the thumb muscles were most strongly activated during movement directions of 180°, 225°, and 270° . the emg amplitudes of the index finger muscle  and the wrist flexor  were much smaller than the amplitudes of the thumb muscle indicating little involvement in any movement direction.

the average rt of the early-precue trials without tms was  <dig> ±  <dig> ms . this was significantly faster than the late-precue trials that had an average rt of  <dig> ±  <dig> ms .

there was a significant reduction in rt when a tms pulse was applied during the preparatory interval  . post-hoc comparisons showed that a tms pulse at - <dig> ms or at - <dig> ms before the response signal significantly reduced rt compared to no-tms or to tms at - <dig> ms before the response signal .

tms-evoked movements
examples of tms-evoked thumb movements in a single subject, obtained at the four stimulation times are plotted in figure  <dig>  analysis of the group results showed that over time a significantly increasing proportion of tms-evoked movements fell outside the baseline zone  . before precue onset, 40% ±  <dig> % of the tms-evoked movements fell outside this baseline zone and this progressively increased to 62% ±  <dig> %. post-hoc tests revealed a significant change in the proportion already within the preparatory interval, namely the increase from 45% ±  <dig> % to 52% ±  <dig> % between  <dig> and  <dig> ms before the response signal . this proportion further increased to 62% ±  <dig> % during the response interval . compared to the baseline, the proportion of tms-evoked movements falling outside the baseline zone was increased at - <dig> and  <dig> ms .

further analyses showed that there were no changes in the proportion of tms-evoked movements falling within the target zone   . this result was surprising, as we expected an increase in the tms-evoked movements at least during the phase after the response signal . therefore, we conducted further analyses. an increase in the proportion of movements in the precued target zone might be revealed for precued directions near the baseline thumb movement direction. to this end, we divided the precued directions into two categories: a) precued directions with a small deviation  from the baseline direction, b) precued directions with a large deviation  from the baseline direction. similar to the initial analysis, we then analysed the time-dependent change in the proportion of tms-evoked movements falling within the target zone for each of these two categories separately. as expected, for targets near the baseline direction a larger proportion fell into the target zone than for targets far from the baseline . however, the anovas did again not reveal any significant temporal modulation of the proportion of tms-evoked movements in the target zone, neither for targets near the baseline direction , nor for targets far from the baseline direction .

thus after precueing, the direction of tms-evoked thumb movements became increasingly less consistent, but we found no indication for a specific implementation of the precued direction.

motor-evoked potentials
the initial three-way anova showed significant main effects of muscle , precue , and time . all interactions were significant . the main effect of muscle indicated that the mep amplitudes differed between muscles, as can be seen in figure  <dig>  as expected, tms over the optimal position for evoking thumb movements resulted in largest meps in the thumb muscle , smaller meps in the index finger muscle , and smallest meps in the wrist muscle . as the three-way interaction indicated that the modulation of mep amplitudes by precue and time differed in the three muscles, this effect was further specified with a separate two-way anova  for each muscle.

mep amplitudes of the apb were significantly modulated by the precue . the effect of time was not significant , but there was significant precue × time interaction . this interaction pointed to a differential effect of the precue across the four time points. to determine at which time points the precue differentially modulated the mep amplitude, separate one-way anovas with the factor precue were conducted on the mep amplitudes at each of the four stimulation times. this showed that at - <dig> ms  and - <dig> ms the mep amplitudes were not different for the five precues . however, at - <dig> ms and  <dig> ms, there was a significant effect of precue on the mep amplitudes . post-hoc comparisons revealed that at - <dig> ms and at  <dig> ms, the mep amplitudes in the conditions with 180°, 225°, 270° precues were significantly smaller than in conditions with 90° and 135° precues .

the mep amplitudes of the fdi were significantly modulated by time , but not by precue . the precue × time interaction was not significant . post-hoc comparisons showed that fdi mep amplitudes progressively decreased from - <dig>  through - <dig> ms, and remained unchanged from - <dig> through  <dig> ms .

the mep amplitudes of the fcr were not different between precues , nor stimulation times , and that there was no interaction between these factors  .

in short, the mep amplitudes from the thumb and the finger muscles were modulated during the preparatory interval and the response interval. for the finger muscle this effect was similar regardless of the direction conveyed by the precue. for the thumb muscle the effect of the precue depended on the time point in the trial. there was a significant precue effect during the preparatory interval, as well as during the response interval. the mep amplitudes in the wrist muscle remained unchanged.

background muscle activity
the anovas on the pretrigger emg rms amplitudes showed that there was no modulation of background muscle activity over time in the apb , in the fdi , and in the fcr . thus, the observed changes in tms-evoked movements or mep amplitudes can not be explained by changes in background muscle activity.

discussion
the aim of this study was to examine the effects of prior knowledge about the direction of an impending thumb movement on both the thumb movement representation  and on corticospinal excitability . our data show that during the preparation of a directed thumb movement progressive changes in tms-evoked movements occur. we found that the direction of tms-evoked movements became increasingly unpredictable but contrary to our expectation, the tms-evoked movements did not change towards the precued direction . however, the mep amplitudes did show a precue specific modulation of corticospinal excitability in the thumb muscle while other muscles only displayed a-specific excitability decreases over time or no modulation at all.

in the early-precue task, tms was given in 78% of the trials. since supra-threshold tms evoked a thumb movement itself, the tms pulse can be conceptualized as a perturbation that interferes with preparatory processes. to control for a direct interference of tms on voluntary movement and reaction time, we regarded only data of trials without tms. on a more general level, some kind of strategic compensation for expected tms perturbations might have influenced the subjects in the early-precue task. nevertheless, the behavioural data show that this did not abolish the intended experimental manipulations and that the subjects' performance conformed to the task's requirements. the actual direction of the voluntary thumb movements closely matched the direction instructed by the precue. moreover, the five precues elicited voluntary thumb movements in five distinct directions. thus, the precue induced the programming of a thumb movement in the corresponding direction. when the required movement direction was precued early in the preparatory interval reaction time was much faster than when the direction was precued at the end of the interval, in agreement with previous work  <cit> . this strongly suggests that parts of the thumb movement were programmed before the response signal occurred.

the thumb movement representation underwent progressive changes during motor preparation. the increased variability of tms-evoked movements became apparent already during the preparatory interval. it is tempting to assume that these changes were evoked by the directional information conveyed by the precue. however, as there was no indication that the tms-evoked movements turned towards the precued direction, we cannot conclude whether or not these changes were due to implementation of the direction of the thumb movement . that said, the mep data revealed that the directional information of the precue was integrated into the preparation on the level of the motor output system, because it affected corticospinal excitability in a muscle, time, and precue specific manner . the electrodes to measure the emg of the thumb were placed above the apb, which is the predominant muscle for abduction movements. directly besides the apb lies the flexor pollicis brevis, the muscle responsible for thumb flexion. when the precue instructed an abduction/flexion movement the mep amplitudes from the thumb musculature were significantly lower than when the precue instructed an abduction/extension. in addition, this effect was present only at  <dig> ms before and  <dig> ms after the response signal and it was specific to the thumb musculature. the mep amplitudes of the index finger muscle, not primarily involved in thumb movements, progressively decreased during the preparatory interval, but this decrease was not different between precues.

in accordance with previous work  <cit>  our data indicate that corticospinal inhibition is a prominent aspect of motor preparation. both the movement agonist and a neighbouring muscle showed decreases in corticospinal excitability during the preparatory delay. it is possible that a non-specific activation by the warning signal had initially increased mep amplitudes and that they subsequently returned to resting levels, because baseline measures were obtained after the warning signal was presented. more likely, the inhibitory effects in our data are partly related to the timing of the early precue. corticospinal inhibition is typically pronounced with relatively short intervals of about  <dig> ms and was not expected to play a major role in our task. originally, we conceptualized the preparatory interval of our tasks as the interval between the neutral warning signal and the response signal, which was  <dig> ms. however, the occurrence of the early precue halfway the preparatory interval provided an additional temporal cue  to the subjects. as such, the early precue gave rise to a new sub-interval of  <dig> ms. such intervals are prone to corticospinal inhibition  <cit> . recent work suggests that motor inhibition plays a role in withholding general motor activation caused by warning signals  <cit> . another aspect that may have boosted motor inhibition is the inclusion of no-go trials. the no-go trials were included to prevent premature  response tendencies, which is important when investigating purely preparatory processes. however, the no-go trials introduced uncertainty about the actual requirement of a movement. as a consequence, any response tendencies had to be suppressed until the subject was certain about the need for a response. such a 'corticospinal braking mechanism' may have caused the observed reduction of mep amplitudes across the preparatory interval  <cit> . these considerations should be taken into account in future tms studies on motor preparation. experimental designs without catch trials and/or using variable or relatively long preparatory intervals may significantly reduce inhibitory tendencies, although recent data suggests that long or variable intervals not necessarily eliminate motor inhibition  <cit> .

in an earlier study, sommer and colleagues showed that tms-evoked movements follow the intended direction during the end of the response interval  <cit> . what can explain that in the response interval of our experiment the tms-evoked movements did not correspond to the intended movement direction? in the experiment of sommer et al. the tms-evoked movements did not follow the intended direction until  <dig> ms before movement onset. this corresponds to the time at which the pre-movement increase in corticospinal excitability starts  <cit> . a sharp increase in mep amplitudes in that period would suggest the release of the corticospinal brake  <cit> . the reaction times and mep data in our study indicate that the pre-movement excitability increase had not been initiated at the latest stimulation time . it has been suggested that motor inhibition secures the development of a motor plan without leading to premature output  <cit> . hence we believe that in our experiment the movement direction was integrated into the motor plan, but the program could not be released  due to a superimposed braking mechanism. after this brake had been withdrawn, the involved muscles became facilitated in correspondence to the parameters of the forthcoming movement.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that during preparation of a voluntary thumb movement, corticospinal output probed by tms-evoked movements displays a progressive modulation. tms-evoked movements increasingly deviated from the baseline direction, but did not turn towards the precued direction. the modulation of tms-evoked movements over the preparatory interval was accompanied by inhibitory changes in corticospinal excitability that were muscle specific and depended on the prepared direction . earlier studies have shown that shortly before movement onset, when corticospinal excitability increases sharply, tms-evoked movements do turn to the intended direction. taken together, this suggests that during preparation, a corticospinal braking mechanism is active to counteract concurrent facilitatory processes. this inhibition ceases just before movement onset, releasing the intended movement.

