BACKGROUND
the emission of volatiles by plants allows them to interact with other organisms at a distance. for example, many plant species emit floral volatiles which have diverse functions in pollinator attraction and repulsion  <cit> . volatiles are also released from vegetative plant organs, especially after herbivore damage. vegetative volatiles can function as attractants for enemies of herbivores  <cit>  and have been suggested to serve as direct defenses against herbivores  <cit> , as defenses against pathogens  <cit> , as protectants against abiotic stress, and as signals in intra- and inter-plant communication  <cit> . however, some of these roles are only poorly studied. more knowledge about precisely where volatiles are emitted within a leaf might reveal more about their roles.

during the last two decades maize  has been established as a model system for studying herbivore-induced vegetative volatiles. maize leaves damaged by lepidopteran larvae emit a complex blend of volatiles that can be utilized by parasitoids of the herbivore to locate their potential hosts on the infested plant  <cit> . the parasitoids oviposit on or into the host which continues to feed, but often at reduced levels, and eventually dies without reaching the adult stage  <cit> . recruitment of herbivore enemies can thus be beneficial for the plant and has been termed “indirect plant defense”. the volatile blend of herbivore-damaged maize leaves consists of three classes of compounds: 1) mono-, sesqui- and homoterpenes produced by the isoprenoid pathways, 2) green-leaf odors such as saturated and unsaturated six-carbon alcohols and esters derived from the lipoxygenase pathway and 3) aromatic compounds like indole, methyl anthranilate and methyl salicylate generated by the shikimate/tryptophan pathway  <cit> . the quantitative and qualitative composition of this blend varies between maize cultivars but is usually dominated by sesquiterpenes  <cit> . while the majority of the sesquiterpene volatiles is released from the herbivore-damaged leaf itself, low levels of volatile emission have also been observed from adjacent leaves  <cit> . the composition of the blend from adjacent leaves is different from damaged leaves in that it lacks most sesquiterpenes but still contains the monoterpene linalool and the homoterpenes - <dig> -dimethyl- <dig> ,7-nonatriene  and - <dig> ,12-trimethyl- <dig> , <dig> -tridecatetraene   <cit> .

previous studies with maize have shown a strong correlation between monoterpene and sesquiterpene emission and biosynthesis  <cit> , suggesting that compounds are released soon after synthesis without any long-term storage. but the relationship between emission and biosynthesis has never been studied within individual leaves. the majority of herbivore-induced sesquiterpenes of maize is produced by two terpene synthases  which both convert the farnesyl diphosphate  substrate into multiple, structurally diverse products. the terpene synthase tps <dig> forms -α-bergamotene and -β-farnesene along with thirteen minor sesquiterpenes in herbivore-damaged leaves  <cit> . the efficacy of tps <dig> sesquiterpenes for indirect defense against lepidopteran larvae has been tested with arabidopsis plants overexpressing tps <dig>  after an initial learning experience, the tps <dig> volatiles were utilized by the parasitic wasp cotesia marginiventris to find their lepidopteran host  <cit> . the herbivore-induced sesquiterpene synthase tps <dig> forms mostly -β-caryophyllene which can also attract parasitic wasps to leaf-feeding herbivores  <cit> . in addition, tps <dig> is induced in roots after damage by the western corn rootworm  where the -β-caryophyllene product attracts entomopathogenic nematodes to the attacking herbivore  <cit> . while nearly all maize cultivars produce the tps <dig> products -α-bergamotene and -β-farnesene, the tps <dig> product -β-caryophyllene is only formed in european maize lines  <cit> . apparently, many maize lines derived from north american breeding programs have lost the capability to express tps <dig>  <cit> . beside tps <dig> and tps <dig>  a further terpene synthase was recently described to be involved in vegetative volatile biosynthesis in maize. this enzyme, tps <dig>  is constitutively expressed in nearly all plant organs and seems to be involved in pathogen defense  is active against a necrotrophic fungus in planta. submitted).

despite all of the available information about the chemical and molecular bases of terpene emission in maize, we know little about its location within individual leaves. more knowledge of where volatiles are made and emitted in maize leaves would not only shed more light on their function, but also increase our understanding of what controls synthesis and emission. in this study we have investigated the pattern of sesquiterpene emission and biosynthetic gene expression in herbivore-damaged vs. control leaves and at the site of herbivory vs. sections of the rest of the leaf. to detect the small amounts of sesquiterpenes emitted by individual leaf parts, we analyzed the volatiles released from macerated tissues and used them as an estimate for natural sesquiterpene emission. both gene expression and emission data indicate a directed movement of a damage-induced signal toward the apex of the leaf and not across the midrib. analysis of defense hormone levels within the leaf suggests the involvement of jasmonates in the signaling process.

RESULTS
sesquiterpene production is induced in herbivore-damaged leaves, but only at low levels in neighboring control leaves
the response of the leaves of maize cultivar b <dig> to herbivore attack was investigated by measurement of both sesquiterpene release and the transcript level of tps <dig>  the most important enzyme in volatile sesquiterpene biosynthesis in herbivore-damaged leaves. since there is no standard method sensitive enough to measure head-space volatiles from small areas of plant tissue, we macerated leaf samples in liquid nitrogen and analyzed the release of terpenes from the resulting powder using solid-phase microextraction . a preliminary experiment carried out on entire plants comparing the maceration method with conventional head-space volatile collection revealed that the amount of sesquiterpenes released from total leaf powder and collected using a spme fiber was directly correlated with the amount of head-space sesquiterpenes emitted from intact plants  demonstrating the value of the maceration method as a good proxy for natural sesquiterpene emission.

the volatile sesquiterpenes emitted from the leaves can be categorized in two groups according to their biosynthetic origin . the first group are products of the herbivore-induced tps <dig>  including the sesquiterpenes -α-bergamotene, -β-farnesene and β-sesquiphellandrene  <cit> , while the second group are the products of tps <dig>  a multiproduct sesquiterpene synthase constitutively expressed in all organs of the maize variety b <dig>  including α-copaene, -β-caryophyllene, germacrene d and δ-cadinene  is active against a necrotrophic fungus in planta. submitted). the -β-caryophyllene synthase tps <dig> is not involved in -β-caryophyllene formation in b <dig> since tps <dig> is not expressed in this variety  <cit> .


herbivore-damaged leaves emitted tps <dig> and tps <dig> terpenes at much higher rates than control leaves. the control leaves released only relatively low amounts of tps <dig> compounds . neighboring, undamaged leaves of herbivore-induced plants emitted only trace amounts of tps <dig> products along with levels of tps <dig> terpenes that were comparable to those of control plants. transcript levels of tps <dig> were determined by rna hybridization. the gene was highly expressed in damaged leaves, but no transcripts could be detected in neighboring control leaves. this pattern is similar to that of the tps <dig> volatile measurements and indicates no systemic induction of volatiles beyond the herbivore-damaged leaf in maize line b <dig> 

terpene emission in maize leaves is restricted to the area between the site of damage and the leaf apex
to analyze the spatial distribution of terpene emission around the site of herbivory, we measured the volatiles emitted from different leaf sections. these experiments used the maize variety delprim which releases volatiles at higher rates than line b <dig>  <cit> . the base, middle, and apex of the second fully expanded leaf were exposed to s. littoralis larvae for seven hours. a small cage was used to restrict the damage to the respective leaf section. in contrast to the volatile blend emitted by b <dig> , the hybrid line delprim produced -β-caryophyllene from tps <dig> but no tps <dig> terpenes. after herbivore feeding on the leaf base, -α-bergamotene and -β-farnesene  and -β-caryophyllene , were produced by all sections of the leaf . however, herbivory restricted to the middle of the leaf led to the emission of sesquiterpenes from only the middle and upper sections of the leaf; no sesquiterpenes were released from the leaf base. after herbivore feeding on the leaf apex, sesquiterpenes were emitted exclusively from the upper section.


sesquiterpene synthases are expressed at the site of sesquiterpene emission
to analyze whether the sesquiterpenes found in the leaf distal to the damage site are produced de novo or transported from the site of wounding into these leaf tissues, we measured the transcript accumulation of the genes tps <dig> and tps <dig>  which encode the enzymes producing the herbivore-induced sesquiterpenes, in the different leaf parts. rna hybridization demonstrated that the patterns for transcript accumulation of tps <dig> and tps <dig>  were identical with those of their respective volatile products . this suggests that -β-caryophyllene, -α-bergamotene, and -β-farnesene are likely formed de novo at the site of emission by the action of the terpene synthases tps <dig> and tps <dig> 

the signal mediating herbivore-induced terpene formation is not transported laterally across the midrib
since herbivore-induced terpene formation is restricted to the site of damage and distal areas of the leaf, a signal must be transmitted from the damaged tissue to the leaf tip. to test whether this signal can propagate across the midrib perpendicular to the leaf axis, we measured the herbivore-induced sesquiterpenes -β-caryophyllene, -α-bergamotene, and -β-farnesene as well as the transcript accumulation of the corresponding biosynthetic genes tps <dig> and tps <dig> separately on both sites of the midrib after herbivory restricted to only one side . as observed previously, the tissues at the site of damage and distal to it emitted induced volatiles and accumulated transcripts of tps <dig> and tps <dig> . however, only traces of volatiles and no transcripts could be detected in the corresponding tissues on the other side of the midrib , suggesting that the signal is not transmitted laterally across the midrib.


the accumulation pattern of jasmonic acid and its isoleucine conjugate correlates with the sites of terpene release
the plant hormone jasmonic acid  and its isoleucine conjugate  are involved in the signaling of direct and indirect plant defenses against herbivores  <cit> . in maize it has been shown that the emission of volatile sesquiterpenes closely corresponds to the level of endogenous ja in the damaged leaf  <cit>  and emission is inducible by the application of exogenous ja to excised as well as intact leaves  <cit> . to test whether jasmonates might play a role as mobile signals within the leaf, we measured the levels of ja and ja-ile in the different parts of maize leaves after herbivore damage to the middle section of the leaf. the levels of ja and ja-ile were strongly increased in herbivore-damaged leaves around the damage site and distally in the leaf tip relative to control leaves . since the patterns of ja and ja-ile concentration were similar to those of the terpene synthase transcript levels, terpene production might well be mediated by a ja-dependent signaling process. another plant hormone involved in plant defense, salicylic acid , is frequently involved in anti-pathogen responses and can act as a ja antagonist  <cit> . herbivory resulted in slightly decreased levels of sa at the damage site and above in comparison to control leaves . there was no difference between sa levels in the bases of herbivore-damaged and control leaves.


herbivore-induced terpene biosynthesis takes place in the inner leaf tissues and not in the epidermis
tissue and cell specific localization of volatile terpene biosynthesis could help to understand the regulation and ecological role of this biochemical pathway. because localization experiments using antibodies specific for the recombinant terpene synthases tps <dig> and tps <dig> were unsuccessful , we measured transcript accumulation of tps <dig> and tps <dig> in isolated epidermal tissue in comparison to the complete leaf to get insight into whether terpene biosynthetic rate differed among various leaf tissues. the epidermis was carefully stripped from the leaf surface using a sharp pair of tweezers. rna was isolated from epidermal tissue powder and from leaf powder obtained from all tissues together. hybridization experiments using specific probes for tps <dig> and tps <dig> showed that both gene transcripts accumulated in the whole leaf after herbivore damage, but could barely be detected in the epidermis. the weak bands in the damaged epidermis sample may just be caused by contamination of underlying tissue from the stripping procedure. these results suggest that transcript accumulation of tps <dig> and tps <dig> is localized in inner leaf tissues like mesophyll or bundle sheath cells and not in the epidermis .


discussion
herbivore damage to specific plant organs frequently results in systemic defense responses, such as emission of volatiles from other parts of the plant  <cit>  or the production of defensive proteins like protease inhibitors in adjacent organs  <cit> . however, here we report that the induction of sesquiterpene volatiles from the maize inbred line b <dig> damaged by s. littoralis is almost completely restricted to the damaged leaf and occurs at only trace levels in adjacent leaves. within the herbivore-damaged leaf, emission was highest at the site of herbivore damage, declining slowly towards the upper part of the leaf, but was barely detectable towards the base of the leaf . these results plus measurements of biosynthetic gene expression and jasmonate signaling compounds within the leaf have interesting implications for the physiology, function and regulation of terpene emission in maize.

the limitation of volatile sesquiterpene emission to the actual leaves damaged by herbivores and not to undamaged adjacent leaves fits with previous studies  <cit> . in general, when volatile emission after herbivory has been measured in a leaf-specific manner, many other plant species also show only localized release of sesquiterpenes and/or monoterpenes that is largely confined to the damaged leaves. for example, the emission of herbivore-induced sesquiterpenes from holm oaks is mostly restricted to herbivore-infested leaves  <cit> . the absence of a systemic response was also observed after wounding of transgenic arabidopsis that contained an herbivore-inducible monoterpene synthase promoter-gus fusion  <cit> . in contrast, the study of maize roots attacked by the larvae of diabrotica virgifera virgifera did show systemic induction  <cit>  with -ß-caryophyllene emission being detected at the site of attack and in adjacent roots.

the emission of sesquiterpene volatiles from the site of damage and towards the leaf tip, but not towards the leaf base, will create a volatile gradient from the tip of the leaf increasing towards the damage site. for herbivore enemies that start their searching at the tips of the long leaves, this might aid in host or prey finding. if herbivore-induced sesquiterpenes function in other ways as signals to other plants or other parts of the same plant  <cit> , release from the tip may also be valuable to increase the range of signal transmission. on the other hand, if volatiles act in direct defense against herbivores  <cit> , their release from the damage site and apical, but not basal portions of leaves is not readily understandable unless feeding herbivores tend to move apically as they feed. one might expect increased emission from the leaf base since the presence of meristematic tissue likely makes it more valuable than the tip. however, greater emission from the tip may be an unavoidable result of a damage signaling pathway that is constrained to be directed toward the leaf apex rather than the base.

the localization of sesquiterpene formation to the inner leaf tissues of maize may reflect a link to photosynthesis. constitutive and herbivore-induced terpene emission in plants typically follows a diurnal rhythm with an emission maximum during the day and emission minimum during the night  <cit> . moreover, a previous study showed that volatile release from leaves of herbivore-damaged maize seedlings is dependent on light. in experiments with an artificial light–dark cycle comprising three repetitions of three hours light and three hours dark, gouinguene and turlings  <cit>  demonstrated that the plants only released herbivore-induced volatiles during the light phases. in the present study, the transcripts of tps <dig> and tps <dig> were not found in the epidermis, but only in underlying leaf tissues. given the fact that much of this underlying tissue is photosynthetic, the dependence of volatile terpene biosynthesis on light suggests that volatile formation in leaves occurs in photosynthetic cells. a finer, cell-specific localization of tps transcripts and measurements of terpene biosynthetic rate after application of specific photosynthetic inhibitors could help to understand more about the link between light and terpene emission. sesquiterpene formation occurring in maize roots  <cit>  does not appear to have a direct link to photosynthesis.

the close correlation of the site of terpene synthase expression in maize and the site of volatile terpene emission suggests that terpene products are formed de novo in the emitting tissues and are not transported from the damage site to other parts of the leaf, such as the tip. previous experiments with radioisotopes established definitively that in cotton herbivore-induced, systemic volatiles are synthesized at the site of release  <cit> . to induce terpene synthase activity in distant parts of the leaf, a mobile chemical messenger must exist that moves from the site of damage to other parts of the plant. the first such systemic signaling compound, the oligopeptide systemin, was described in species of the solanaceae  <cit> . however, the pattern of systemic damage signaling in maize is fundamentally different than that in the solanaceae  <cit>  and other dicotyledonous plants as the signal is only directed from the wounding site in an apical direction, but cannot cross the midrib. this signal path is much like that of xylem movement which conducts water and nutrients from the roots to above-ground organs, suggesting that the mobile damage signal moves through the xylem. it is notable that several plant hormones like abscisic acid, cytokinins and strigolactones are transported by the flow of the xylem  <cit> .

the plant hormone ja and related jasmonates are perhaps the best known components of signal transduction pathways which trigger defense responses after herbivory, including the emission of volatiles in many plant species  <cit> . these compounds are known to act at a distance from the site of herbivore damage. radio-labeled ja applied to leaves of nicotiana sylvestris was transported to the roots where it is thought to increase nicotine biosynthesis in these organs  <cit> . similarly, methyl jasmonate can function as a mobile signal in n. tabacum where it is transported via the phloem and the xylem to undamaged systemic leaves  <cit> . in the wound response of tomato, wasternack and coworkers  <cit>  concluded that ja, rather than the peptide systemin, acts as the mobile signal. the plant hormone ja could also be involved in mobile defense signaling in maize leaves, given that its accumulation is highest at the sites of highest volatile emission . a similar ja accumulation pattern has recently been reported by engelberth and coworkers  <cit> . in both studies, herbivory on the middle part of a maize leaf was mimicked by mechanical wounding and subsequent application of either crude caterpillar regurgitant  <cit>  or the elicitor n-linolenoyl-glutamine  <cit> . both treatments resulted in high ja accumulation around the wounding site and in the leaf tip, but only trace accumulation in the leaf base. furthermore, a transcript analysis of allene oxide synthase , an enzyme considered to catalyze the key step in ja biosynthesis  <cit> , revealed that aos expression was highest in the treated part of the leaf and the distal tissues  <cit> . since the expression of aos and other ja biosynthesis genes is known to be inducible by jasmonates, one can speculate that these compounds could also function as long-distance signals in maize, being transported via the xylem from the wounding site to apical leaf tissues where they induce their own biosynthesis as well as the expression of terpene synthase genes. however, the presence of other signaling compounds that activate ja biosynthesis locally after transport cannot be excluded at this time, and physical processes like wound-induced changes in hydraulic pressure  <cit>  or an electrical signal  <cit>  could also be involved. further studies with labeled jasmonates and the chemical analysis of maize xylem sap might help to understand the complete nature of the signals that mediates terpene biosynthesis in this species.

CONCLUSIONS
our study showed that herbivore-induced sesquiterpene formation in maize is restricted to the wounding site and distal leaf parts. the resulting volatile gradient between the leaf tip and the site of damage might aid herbivore enemies in host or prey finding. since the signal mediating this reaction is directed to the leaf tip and cannot across the midrib, it is likely connected to the xylem.

