BACKGROUND
more than 90% of the ocean biosphere is deep  and most of this remains unexplored  <cit> . the oceans host life at all depths and across the widest ranges of environmental conditions , and they represent a huge reservoir of undiscovered biodiversity  <cit> . deep-sea ecosystems also contain the largest hypoxic and anoxic regions of the biosphere. the oxygen minimum zones  are widely distributed across all of the oceans, at depths generally from  <dig> m to  <dig>  m, and cover approximately  <dig> , <dig> km <dig>  these are characterised by very low oxygen availability  and high sulphide concentrations in the bottom sediments   <cit> . these environments are inhospitable to most marine species  <cit> , except host prokaryotes, protozoa and some metazoans that can tolerate these environmental conditions  <cit> . permanently anoxic conditions in the oceans are present in the subsurface seafloor  <cit> , and among other areas, in the interior of the black sea   <cit>  and in the deep hypersaline anoxic basins  of the mediterranean sea  <cit> . all of these extreme environments are assumed to be exclusively inhabited by viruses  <cit> , bacteria and archaea  <cit> . the presence of unicellular eukaryotes  in anoxic marine systems has been documented for decades  <cit>  and recent findings have indicated that some benthic foraminifera can be highly adapted to life without oxygen  <cit> . for limited periods of time, a few metazoan taxa can tolerate anoxic conditions  <cit> . however, so far, there is no proof of the presence of living metazoans that can spend their entire life cycle under permanently anoxic conditions  <cit> .

metazoan meiofauna   <cit>  represent 60% of the metazoa abundance on earth, and have a long evolutionary history and high phyletic diversity. they include  <dig> of the  <dig> animal phyla, six of which are exclusive of the meiofauna   <cit> . these phyla lack larval dispersal in the water column and spend their entire life cycle in the sediment. all of these characteristics make meiofauna the ideal organism for investigating metazoan life in systems without oxygen  <cit> .

the six dhabs of the mediterranean sea are extreme environments at depths > <dig>  m that have been created by the flooding of ancient evaporites from the miocene period   <cit> . among these, the l'atalante basin displays a  <dig> to  <dig> m thick hypersaline brine layer with a density of  <dig>  g cm- <dig>  <cit> , which represents a physical barrier that hampers oxygen exchange between the anoxic sediments and the surrounding seawaters. this basin is therefore completely oxygen free, rich in hydrogen sulphide, and hosts an incredibly diverse and metabolically active prokaryotic assemblages that have adapted to these conditions  <cit> . in  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> we carried out three oceanographic expeditions to search for the presence of living fauna in the sediments of the anoxic l'atalante basin .

RESULTS
in all of the sediments collected from the inner part of the anoxic basin, we found specimens belonging to three animal phyla: nematoda, arthropoda  and loricifera. the presence of metazoan meiofauna under permanently anoxic conditions has been reported previously also from the deep-sea sediments of the black sea, although these records were interpreted as the result of a rain of cadavers that sunk to the anoxic zone from adjacent oxygenated areas  <cit> . our specimens collected from the l'atalante basin were initially stained with a protein-binding stain  and examined under the microscope; here, all of the copepods were empty exuviae, and the nematodes were only weakly stained , whereas all of the loriciferans, if stained, were intensely coloured . differences in the colour intensity between live and dead metazoans were confirmed by additional experiments on deep-sea nematodes and copepods . the taxonomic analysis revealed that the loriciferans collected in the anoxic sediments belong to three species that are new to science and belong to the genera spinoloricus   <cit> , rugiloricus  and pliciloricus   <cit> .

the permanent reducing conditions of anoxic sediments can preserve dead organisms and their protein for a long time, so that microscopic analyses do not provide proof of the viability of an organism. however, the abundance of these loriciferans was the highest reported so far world-wide per unit of surface sediment investigated . this finding is per se surprising, as only two individuals of the phylum loricifera have been found in the deep mediterranean sea over the last  <dig> years  <cit> . deep-sea oxygenated sediments in the neighboring of the l'atalante basin were also investigated at the time of sampling as well as in several other occasions since  <dig>  and we never found one single individual of the phylum loricifera in the entire ionian basin. moreover, the analysis of the oxygenated deep-sea sediments surrounding the l'atalante basin revealed the dominance of nematodes and copepods  and the absence of loriciferans. the density of the loricifera extracted from the sediment of the l'atalante basin  was  <dig>  to  <dig>  g cm- <dig>  whereas the density of the brines above the sediment is significantly higher . moreover, the presence of laminated sediment layers along with the lack of turbidites in the l'atalante basin  <cit>  indicates the lack of lateral transport from adjacent systems. these independent evidences make very unlikely the sedimentation or transfer of loricifera or their carcasses from the oxygenated sediments surrounding the anoxic basin.

specimens of the undescribed species of both genera spinoloricus and rugiloricus had a large oocyte in their ovary, which showed a nucleus containing a nucleolus . this is the first evidence of loricifera reproducing in the entire deep mediterranean basin. microscopic analyses also revealed the presence of empty exuviae from moulting loriciferans , suggesting that these metazoans did grow in this system. moreover, scanning electron microscopy confirmed the perfect integrity of these loriciferans , while all of the other meiofaunal taxa were largely damaged or degraded.

a second expedition was dedicated to the demonstration of the viability of these loriciferans of the l'atalante basin, through independent experimental approaches. all of the experiments were conducted on deck , under anoxic conditions , in the dark and at the in-situ temperature  immediately after sample retrieval. in the first investigations, intact and undisturbed sediment cores were injected with -leucine  to investigate the ability of these loriciferans to take up this radiolabelled amino acid. following multiple and replicated incubations and controls , it was revealed that over a short time scale , the loriciferans incorporated amounts of this radioactive substrate that were significantly higher than in the controls . decompression can alter significantly metabolic activities of deep-sea organisms during their recovery. however, in our experiments this potential bias was the same for both the controls and the samples containing live loricifera. moreover, the ultra-structural analyses did not show any evidence of cell lysis related to the decompression. to test the reliability of the approach utilized we sampled living nematodes from oxygenated sediments and made incubations with -leucine of both living and killed nematodes. thanks to this experiment we demonstrated the presence of significant differences in the incorporation of radio-labelled compounds and proved the linearity between the number of nematodes and the incorporated radioactivity . these results, per se, are sufficient to provide compelling evidence of the activity of the organism from the anoxic systems, but we further investigated the viability of the loricifera collected from the l'atalante basin by incubating intact and undisturbed sediment cores containing the loriciferans with 5-chloromethylfluorescein diacetate  which has been previously used to identify living unicellular eukaryotes in anoxic sediments  <cit> . this fluorogenic probe labels hydrolytically active  cells  <cit> . comparative analyses conducted on anoxic sediments by confocal laser microscopy on loricifera kept alive and others that were killed prior to incubation revealed, on average, 40% higher fluorescence intensity in the living loricifera than in recently killed specimens and the intense fluorescence increased from the outer to the inner parts of the organism . the treatment for the preparation of the controls  did not inhibit completely the enzymatic activities present in the body of the animals and therefore we expected the presence of some fluorescence also in the body of the pre-killed animals. this effect has been tested also on different species of living nematodes collected from oxygenated sediments by means of repeated  incubation experiments with celltracker™ green cmfda. the differences between living and recently killed nematodes analyzed by confocal laser microscopy were in the same order of the differences encountered between alive and recently killed loricifera.

reported are individual disintegrations per minute of nematodes  and loriciferans  incubated with -leucine. data are means of replicates  ± standard deviation determined on living specimens  and loricifera collected from same anoxic sediments but killed prior to treatment . ind: individuals; dpm: disintegration per minute.

all of these findings provide the first evidence that the anoxic sediments of the l'atalante basin are colonised by natural populations of loriciferans, and that these metazoans are metabolically active and able to reproduce.

the adaptations to permanently anoxic conditions associated with high density/salinity and high hydrogen sulphide concentrations imply that these organisms have developed specific mechanisms for:  tolerating an enormous osmotic pressure ;  detoxifying highly toxic compounds ; and  living without oxygen. quantitative x-ray micro-analysis and fourier-transformed infrared spectroscopy on the body composition of the loriciferans collected from the anoxic sediments revealed significant differences with the loriciferans collected in the oxygenated deep atlantic ocean . loriciferans from the l'atalante basin had a ca content  that was nine-fold lower than in specimens inhabiting oxygenated sediments, on average, and showed mg, br and fe, which were absent in the loriciferans from oxygenated sediments. moreover, loriciferans from both oxic and anoxic sediments had similar concentrations of na and s, in spite of the much higher salinity and sulphide concentration present in the deep-anoxic sediments of the l'atalante basin . moreover, fourier-transformed infrared spectroscopy analyses indicated that the lorica of the loriciferans inhabiting oxygenated deep-sea sediments was apparently made of chitin, which was replaced by a chitin derivative, similar to chitosan, in the loriciferans inhabiting anoxic sediments . these results suggest the presence of chemical/structural adaptations of these loriciferans that can inhabit these anoxic sediments of the l'atalante basin. scanning electron microscopy revealed the lack of prokaryotes attached to the body surface of the loriciferans . ultra-structural analyses carried out by transmission electron microscopy revealed the lack of mitochondria, which are replaced by hydrogenosome-like organelles . the hydrogenosome-like structures showed a perfect integrity of their membranes as well as the presence of a marginal plate . these organelles have been previously encountered in various unrelated unicellular eukaryotes  <cit> , but have never been observed so far in multi-cellular organisms   <cit> . moreover, the loricifera retrieved from anoxic sediments contained hydrogenosome fields  similar to those reported in anaerobic ciliates  <cit> . previous studies have reported the ability of multi-cellular organisms to survive in oxygen-free environments, but only for limited periods of time or for a part of their life cycle  <cit> . the very high abundance of hydrogenosomes within the loricifera of the l'atalante basin and the presence of hydrogenosomes fields represent the first discovery for multicellular organisms. since the hydrogenosomes do not coexist with mitochondria and they are present only in obligate anaerobic eukaryotes   <cit> , these data exclude the possibility that the loricifera encountered in the anoxic basin are carcasses of organisms inhabiting oxygenated sediments and transported/sedimented into the anoxic basin. moreover, the transmission electron microscopy also revealed the presence of rod-shaped structures , likely prokaryotes, in close proximity to the hydrogenosome-like organelles . these structures and their spatial distribution resemble the association between hydrogenosomes and methanogenic archaea, documented so far only in protozoans living in permanently anoxic conditions  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the results reported here support the hypothesis that the loriciferans inhabiting the anoxic sediments of the l'atalante basin have developed an obligate anaerobic metabolism and specific adaptations to live without oxygen. although the evolutionary/adaptative mechanisms leading to the colonisation of such extreme environments by these metazoans remain an enigma, this discovery opens new perspectives for the study of metazoan life in habitats lacking molecular oxygen.

