BACKGROUND
during host colonization, bacteria use complex regulatory hierarchies to orchestrate the adaptive changes that are necessary to bypass host defenses and secure nutrients. for many bacterial species, the gaca regulator directs the expression of multiple, disparate traits important for colonization, primarily by activating the transcription of several non-coding csrb regulatory rnas that sequester csra, a regulator that binds and influences translation or stability of target mrnas . many defects conferred by mutations in gaca homologs are due to their inability to relieve csra repression of key transcripts involved in central metabolism, motility, and virulence . for squid light organ symbiotic vibrio fischeri, gaca is required for normal metabolism, motility, siderophore-mediated iron sequestration, and production of the key symbiosis factor luminescence, which provides protective counter-illumination camouflage for its squid host  <cit> . the metabolic defects of gacs/gaca mutants in culture recently revealed accumulation of citrate as a potential signal for gacs in a cascade whereby gaca activates the expression of csrb <dig> and csrb <dig> to antagonize csra, and linked regulation of metabolisms to luminescence  <cit> . in the absence of gaca, v. fischeri is impaired in the early initiation stages of host colonization, and is unable to achieve robust growth within light organs, thereby only rarely reaching large enough populations to induce low levels of luminescence via quorum sensing  <cit> . although the importance of gaca to squid symbiosis has been established and its relation to csra appears conserved and has already revealed important insights into the pathway  <cit> , the extent of csra interaction with targets in the complex gaca regulatory hierarchy are not yet fully elucidated.

even though characterization of global regulators like gaca provides an opportunity to simultaneously identify multiple phenotypes involved in colonization and elucidate the signal transduction cascades that direct the complex colonization process, their pleiotropy creates challenges for their study. even though many defects in gaca mutants in culture, including altered luminescence, motility and siderophore production, are not detrimental under most laboratory conditions, gaca mutants’ associated growth defects reduce fitness  <cit>  which could provide strong selection for secondary mutations that allow escape from the defect, known as suppression. depending on whether suppressor mutations dramatically change the appearance or behavior of mutants, they may go unnoticed and undetected without whole genome re-sequencing.

suppression, when applied in a genetic screen, is a powerful tool for identifying interacting partner proteins, domains of importance in protein activity and specificity, and associated defects that provide biological insight  <cit> . here we characterize a high frequency suppression phenomena observed in gaca mutants of v. fischeri that allowed the characterization of effects of a broader distribution of csra mutations than previously. genetic analysis of the naturally occurring gaca suppressors indicates that the suppressor mutations reduced the amount or function of the csra post-transcriptional regulator, consistent with an epistatic relationship of csra below gaca in its regulatory hierarchy. the screen also implicates the integration host factor  heterodimer as a potential mediator of gaca-csra regulation. our results suggest that null mutations in csra are not tolerated in v. fischeri even in the absence of its regulator, gaca.

RESULTS
phenotypic suppression of gaca mutants occurs through the selective growth advantage conferred by spontaneous csra mutations
if the gaca regulatory hierarchy of v. fischeri parallels that in other species, pleiotropic defects caused by their inability to antagonize csra could be restored by loss of function of csra . unfortunately, our attempts to test this hypothesis by allelic replacement of the native csra gene with several csra-mutant constructs in more than  <dig>  recombinants generated in both gaca+  and gaca mutant backgrounds were unsuccessful. this was unexpected given that even difficult-to-achieve mutants with growth defects are typically recovered with screening only a few hundred putative recombinant bacteria  <cit> . random transposon mutagenesis also failed to generate a csra::tnerm mutant. even with the failure of these attempts, several days after growth of Δgaca::km or gaca::tnkm mutants on agar media, suppressors with enhanced growth appeared as larger, yellow and opaque colonies . these suppressors arose to a high proportion in broth cultures after growth to stationary phase where gaca mutants exhibit a severe growth yield defect, but they were rarely detected during exponential growth, consistent with the observation that gaca mutants exhibit the same exponential growth rate  <cit> . identification of the source mutations conferring spontaneous suppression could reveal intermediates of the gaca regulatory pathway, potentially including csra.fig.  <dig> phenotypic suppression of gaca mutants in colony size, opacity and siderophore. suppression in strain vcw2f <dig>  is visible on lbs agar as large opaque colonies, a single suppressor is identified by the red arrow, among the small translucent colony-type. varying degrees of phenotypic suppression in spontaneously arising gaca mutant derivatives, compared to reference strains es <dig> and vcw2f <dig>  of opacity on lbs agar , and siderophore levels observed as an orange halo on cas agar  of each paired picture. the three gaca parental strain genotypes are color coded as described in table  <dig>  csra mutations are indicated below suppressor strains



based on the premise that defects in csra could suppress gaca mutant phenotypes, especially growth  <cit> , we isolated suppressors that arose in vcw2f <dig> , vcw2a <dig>  and a suppressor mutant vcw2e <dig> ) which was identified for its enhanced colony size and opacity on cas agar . strain vcw2e <dig> was used in this screen to assess whether the unidentified primary suppressor mutation in this derivative would promote the accumulation of a unique distribution of secondary suppressor mutations that would potentially allow us to capture additional informative targets for study. sixty-four derivatives, including a single derivative  that was isolated from an unusually luminous gaca-colonized squid, were recovered and the csra gene sequenced. all but one derivative with multiple suppressed phenotypes had acquired a mutation in the csra gene indicating most gaca phenotypes are csra mediated . no csra mutations were identified from  <dig> derivatives grown under the same conditions that were phenotypically indistinguishable from the parental strain. sequencing of the csrb <dig> and csrb <dig> genes  <cit> , encoding the gaca-activiated srnas that bind and sequester csra  <cit>  in vcw9d <dig> revealed it harbored a single nucleotide insertion upstream of csrb <dig> . consistent with the predicted role of csrb <dig> as an antagonist of csra, the most probable explanation is that this suppressor mutation enhanced expression of the gene, thereby decreasing csra activity. finally, whole genome re-sequencing of vcw2e <dig> revealed a single nucleotide substitution within ihfa  conferring a predicted r60g amino acid substitution that was not harbored by the parental strain . in agreement with ihfa being regulated by csra and thus a potential source for suppression, the transcript of this gene co-purified with csra in e.coli  <cit> . once suppressor mutations were identified, probable siblings were excluded from further analysis resulting in a collection of  <dig> independently derived suppressor mutants,  <dig> of which mapped to csra .table  <dig> ancestral and gaca mutant suppressors of vibrio fischeri that map to three unique genetic loci


astrain number text is colored for easy identification of derivative gaca mutant background, where green denotes ∆gaca::km, blue gaca::tnkm, and purple gaca::tnkm sup strains


bsuppressors identified genotypically by superscript “sup” followed in brackets with the gene allele of the identified mutation


cposition relative to the first nucleotide of the start codon


ddup; duplication; Δ: deletion; + :insertion of single base



distribution of spontaneous csra mutations suggested reduced activity rather than null csra mutations enhanced gaca mutant fitness
several informative patterns of acquired mutations in csra became apparent from the distribution and types of spontaneous mutations. independently-derived identical mutations were recovered at nucleotide position  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> and all possible substitutions were recovered at position  <dig>  suggesting the screen was near saturation for mutations in csra that provide a fitness benefit . the only frame-shift mutations, all generated by single nucleotide deletions, mapped within the sequence encoding the last  <dig> amino acids which are absent in some naturally occurring csra homologs , and each of these were predicted to extend rather than truncate the csra protein. no other missense or non-sense mutations that altered or truncated the csra protein in these  <dig> amino acids were recovered, suggesting their loss would not impair csra function and thus were not predicted to compensate for the gaca mutants’ inability to relieve csra repression . however, two point mutations that caused truncations of  <dig> and  <dig> amino acids were recovered . interestingly, all insertions/duplications maintained the original reading frame. since frame-shift mutations along with nonsense mutations have a high potential to eliminate protein function  the most plausible explanation for their absence is that null csra mutations did not improve gaca mutant fitness. the remaining mutations in the csra orf were missense point mutations .

many of the mutations mapped to conserved regions consistent with these impairing csra function. several mutations mapped near the conserved ha rna-binding motif, and one even in the valine in this motif , which would agree with previous studies that suggest conservation in this valine is not essential  <cit> . twelve mutations mapped to the  <dig> critical subdomains of conserved amino acids essential to csra function  referred to as region  <dig> and region  <dig>  <cit> . nine of those mapped to region  <dig> located in the β <dig> sheet, and only three to the less conserved region  <dig> in the β <dig> sheet  and these, based on phenotype, only modestly impaired csra function as did mutations that caused changes in the c-terminal alpha helix .fig.  <dig> location of suppressor mutations that mapped to the inferred csra protein within conserved regions and the resulting phenotypes relative to wildtype es <dig>  the native csra protein sequence of es <dig> was aligned with the secondary structure consensus  and identified conserved sequences  <cit>  that are region  <dig>  the ha rna binding gxxg motif, and region  <dig> . for each suppressor the deduced native amino acid  and predicted amino acid substitution, insertion, deletion or elongation is first identified below the consensus in orange text. for native amino acid position, “+” indicates an insertion of the amino acid described, and a “++” signifies frame shift mutations in every case altering more than  <dig> aa, and all conferring a protein extension . growth on minimal agar media which was supplemented with glycerol or n-acetylglucosamine is designated by “+” for growth and “-“no growth. growth yield  is expressed as a percent of wildtype grown overnight in swt. blue bars are percent siderophore levels and yellow bars percent luminescence relative to wildtype, where error bars represent 95 % confidence intervals using 5– <dig> replicates. the names of the strains are color coded by genetic background as described in table 1




eight mutations were predicted to change expression, rather than alter function of csra . among these were a single point mutation that altered the initiation codon from atg to the documented alternative start codon att  <cit> , which could alter the efficiency of translation initiation of a full length csra. though there is an alternative in-frame start codon downstream of this location, its use would generate a  <dig> amino acid n-terminal truncated protein and remove previously defined region  <dig>  <cit> . one large upstream deletion eliminated the predicted native promoter and altered the shine-dalgarno, but semi-quantitative rt-pcr revealed csra transcript was still produced from this mutant . even without its native promoter, the transcript could be expressed from an alternative promoter of the upstream aspartate kinase gene vf_ <dig>  the aggregate data indicated that null mutations in csra were not recovered in this suppressor screen, providing credence that csra mutations are highly deleterious.fig.  <dig> suppressor mutations predicted to reduce expression of wild-type csra. fold siderophore  and fold luminescence  relative to wild-type es <dig> are shown for gaca mutants and suppressors, where error bars indicate 95 % confidence intervals of 5– <dig> replicates. growth on minimal media agar supplemented with glycerol or n-acetylglucosamine is designated for each strain by “+” for growth and “-“for no growth. growth yield  is expressed as a percent of wildtype grown overnight in swt. for each suppressor the csra mutation precedes the row identifying whether a promoter, shine-dalgarno , alternative start codon, or silent mutation subject to codon bias  <cit>  is the predicted cause of decreased expression. the names of the strains are color coded by genetic background as described in table 1




spontaneous csra mutations typically enhanced luminescence to a greater extent than siderophore
in gaca− derivatives, mutations in csra simultaneously restored growth on the simple sugars, restored growth yield in rich medium, restored siderophore production and often greatly enhanced luminescence   <cit> . the lack of relative differences for growth yield and utilization of simple sugars contrasts with the highly variable degree of luminescence and siderophore enhancement observed in different suppressors. furthermore, the relative improvement in luminescence and siderophore activity often did not correlate with each other , which has also been reported for different csra-regulated traits in e. coli  <cit> . siderophore activity was on average restored to wild-type levels with a range of  <dig>  to 10-fold the wild-type level, and was greater in only 36 % of suppressors. luminescence much more often surpassed wild-type levels, on average 6-fold, with a minimum of  <dig>  and a maximum of 32-fold. whereas 95 % of the csra mutations fully restored luminescence, only 60 % restored siderophore activity to wild-type levels. the general trend of greater relative increase in luminescence than for siderophore activity with csra-impairment may allude to a higher binding affinity of csra to regulatory target that govern siderophore: a siderophore defect remained in many suppressors despite mutations that presumably impaired csra function. however, other regulatory changes in gaca mutants may act synergistically with reduced csra repression in the complex regulation of luminescence. interestingly, half of the suppressors with 20-fold or more increased luminescence over wild-type harbored mutations that we predict resulted in decreased levels of wild-type csra suggesting csra binding of mrna substrate for this trait was especially sensitive to stoichiometry and would agree with a lower affinity  although other explanations are possible and this hypothesis may be tested once targets are identified. one mutation that enhanced luminescence more than 24-fold , did not map to any conserved domain. a valine substitution at this same position that arose in the presence of the ihfas <dig> allele did not enhance luminescence and suggested it only modestly impaired csra function, although the ihfas <dig> allele could influence this phenotype separately from csra.

the colony opacity-enhancing ihfa mutation increased siderophore and attenuated luminescence of isolates that harbored csra mutant alleles
the primary ihfas <dig> suppressor mutation in strain vcw2e <dig> had no restorative effect on luminescence, and only slightly increased siderophore production and growth , but analysis of gaca csra suppressor mutants either harboring or lacking the ihfas <dig> mutation  revealed a striking pattern. most ihfas <dig> mutants surpassed wild type for siderophore activity and all three mutants with a greater increase in siderophore than luminescence levels harbored the ihfas <dig> allele. in support of this conclusion, a suppressor harboring an ihfas <dig> mutation and a csra allele with a predicted r6l substitution  produced more than twice as much siderophore as a suppressor with the same csra allele without the ihfas <dig> mutation . three triple mutants also surpassed wild type for growth yield . luminescence was attenuated in triple mutants compared to double mutants with the same csra alleles .

as a part of the heterodimeric integration host factor  protein, ihfa is a global regulator that bends dna and facilitates recognition and binding of regulatory proteins thereby influences diverse functions  <cit> . because the gaca ortholog of legionella pneumophila represses ihf  <cit> , reduced function of ihf does provide a simple explanation for suppression if that hierarchy were conserved in v. fischeri and some gaca mutant defects were due to overproduction of ihf and enhanced regulatory protein binding. if this hypothesis is true, few defects  of gaca mutants resulted from a lack of ihfa repression alone. alternatively, the spontaneous ihfas <dig> mutation may only modestly alter ihf function, which would be expected for an important global regulator.

the associated phenotypes of the ihfas <dig> allele are consistent with a role for ihf in co-activation of the lux luminescence operon, and co-repression of the iuc siderophore biosynthetic operon through its ability to enhance the binding of regulatory proteins related to these traits. because there is an established precedent for ihf mediating activation of csrb gene homologs in other species  <cit> , the reduced luminescence of csra mutant strain harboring the ihfas <dig> allele suggests ihf could promote csrb <dig> and csrb <dig> gene expression and positive regulation of lux independently of gaca activation of these genes. however, other mechanisms for ihf activation of lux are possible. in vibrio vulnificus ihf works in partnership with the litr ortholog  to activate virulence-associated vvpe  <cit>  suggesting ihf activation of luminescence in v. fischeri could occur through the promotion of binding of the quorum sensing regulator litr thereby enhancing expression of luxr and in turn the lux operon. the effect of ihfas <dig> on siderophore activity was consistent with several studies that report transcripts related to iron acquisition are increased by ihfa mutations  <cit> . the ferric uptake regulator, fur, and arca are the most likely candidates for the co-repression of siderophore with ihf, as other studies report ihf enhancement of aerobic fur repression, and in the absence of fur enhancement of anaerobic repression by arca  <cit> . additional studies to determine whether these or other mechanisms are at play in ihf activation and repression are warranted.

newly identified patterns of altered function from comparison of the effects of spontaneous csra mutations with those achieved by alanine scan in csra of escherichia coli
a previously applied alanine-scanning mutagenesis that was performed with the e. coli csra gene, used to examine the relative contribution each amino acid residue to csra protein function  <cit> , provides an invaluable comparator to our spontaneous suppression screen. our complementary screen differs in that all potential amino acid substitutions are possible, even the single native alanine residue that was not altered in the alanine scan. in our screen, an a36s substitution caused a 20-fold increase in luminescence and restored siderophore activity indicating the highly conserved a <dig>  positioned into the hydrophobic core of the csra homodimer, could be critical to protein folding and 3- dimensional stability  <cit> . even the conservative substitution of this alanine with the non-polar and fairly compact valine  altered csra function . also, only mutations that improve growth would likely improve fitness. thus, mutations that map to non-conserved regions that do not contribute to critical protein folding, dimerization, or rna binding were not recovered, as described previously with the lack of c-terminal truncations. finally, the screen also dictates that mutations that further impair fitness of the double gaca csra mutant would not be recovered. for example, if the csra protein was essential, then none of the spontaneous mutations should eliminate csra function. the lack of mutations in highly conserved residues of functional domains, especially for the two guanidine residues of the gxxg ha motif, the absence of frame-shift mutations , and the detection of a csra transcript in the promoter-deletion mutant with one of most dramatic suppressor phenotypes implies no mutant recovered harbors a null allele and supports our interpretation that csra may be essential under the conditions of this screen in v. fischeri. until recently, csra was not thought to be essential in most bacterial species  <cit> ; however, among the many published csra mutants, several have insertions near the c-terminus of the protein  <cit> , and such mutations could alter rather than eliminate activity. one report now suggests that csra is conditionally essential in e. coli  <cit> .

the suppressor screen recovered  <dig> mutants with mutations that effected the two predicted regions essential to csra function, that were confirmed by the alanine scan  <cit> . seven were substitutions in amino acids in conserved region  <dig> that is essential to csra function , and a single predicted amino acid insertion in the less conserved region  <dig>   <cit>  . two possible explanations for the relatively low recovery of suppressor mutations mapping to region  <dig> are that there are more neutral amino acid substitutions in this more variable region whereas any non-neutral mutations may generate null alleles. another explanation is that amino acid substitutions in region  <dig> are well tolerated, and few impair csra function enough to confer suppression. targeted mutagenesis may elucidate whether one of these possibilities is true, although this would be best accomplished through heterologous expression in e. coli, given the difficulties in generating a csra null mutation in v. fischeri and the impaired growth that multi-copy csra confers of the wild-type es <dig>  <cit> .

suppressors with csra mutations in r <dig> had dramatic phenotypes, implying it is especially critical to csra function and is in agreement with the alanine mutagenesis screen in e.coli  <cit> . the csra r6a mutation in e.coli positively affects expression of all transcripts measured, including highly enhanced glgca and pgaa expression, and modest increase of flhdc expression  <cit> . to reduce the confounding phenotypes already described, our focus was only on suppressor mutants lacking the ihfas <dig> primary mutation, leaving three different suppressors available for comparison at this site. the r6c substitution enhanced levels of both siderophore and luminescence . whereas r6l, which is likely a more neutral substitution as both amino acids contain charged side chains, had a similar effect on luminescence, but only restored siderophore activity to wild-type levels; thus, this substitution conferred less impairment on csra regulation of siderophore activity. the r6s substitution also resulted in wild-type luminescence implying repression of luminescence was not substantially impaired by this mutation, but siderophore activity increased to 3-fold over wild-type, indicating a greater dysfunction of siderophore repression. that different amino acid substitutions at the same position could influence relative regulation of two different traits, likely through different target transcripts, would not have been revealed by an alanine scan and the basis of these differences warrants further investigation.

in e.coli, alanine substitutions in some regions of csra had differential influence on certain transcripts, rather than generally affecting function  <cit> . substitutions in residues 18– <dig>  and 31– <dig> differentially affected biofilm formation, and 11– <dig> and  <dig> differentially affected glycogen accumulation and motility  <cit> . focusing on only mutants lacking the ihfas <dig> mutation, there were five suppressors with csra mutations in the biofilm-specific residues and one with a mutation in the glycogen/motility specific residues identified in the e. coli csra. all six of these mutations resulted in moderate to severe dysfunction of luminescence regulation . among the phenotype-dependent residues identified, two mutations falling in the biofilm-specific residues, 31– <dig>  were among the nine suppressors with fully restored or increased siderophore activity. thus, the previously identified biofilm-specific residues appear to contribute substantially to siderophore regulation in v.fischeri. mutations that we propose decreased levels of wild-type csra  and all c-terminal alterations , had only moderate effects on siderophore activity suggesting these did not interfere as much with siderophore regulation as they did with luminescence regulation.

no suppressors were recovered with csra mutations in any of the positions where alanine substitution in e.coli affected csra levels as would happen if they decreased the stability of the transcript or protein triggering more rapid turnover  <cit> . alanine substitutions at positions  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> lowers csra levels, however the mutants have wild-type levels of activity  <cit> . our results implied that if substitutions of residues other than alanine at these positions also reduce production, they do not impair function enough to confer suppression. approximately  <dig> positions in csra cause a decrease in its production when substituted with alanine and also decreased activity  <cit> . three suppressors in position  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were recovered indicating non-alanine substitutions at these same sites similarly impaired activity.

a csra suppressor mutation restored squid colonization ability, but only modestly enhanced luminescence in situ compared to in vitro
to evaluate the ability of the suppressor mutations to restore colonization of and luminescence in squid light organs, two csra suppressors, one that modestly reduced csra activity based on its phenotypes  and one that dramatically reduced csra production that also harbored the ihfas <dig> allele , were evaluated for colonization along with wild-type , gaca mutants  and ihfas <dig> suppressor . the Δgaca, the gaca::tnkmsup and the gaca::tnkmsup mutants were unable to colonize squid in two replicate experiments . only wild-type and strain vcw9f <dig> ) with modestly reduced csra function and no ihfas <dig> mutation colonized squid and achieved the same colonization rate assessed at 24 h. these data indicate that the ihfa mutation alone does not restore phenotypes responsible for squid colonization deficiencies conferred by the gaca::tnkm mutation, but may also allude to ihfa function in colonization. certainly, the observed luminescence attenuation could impact sustained colonization, although this trait is not necessary for initiation measured here  <cit> . but, an ihf binding site is predicted in the syp locus, which is responsible for the symbiotic polysaccharide, an essential component of a successful initiation, suggesting a possible link of this regulator to squid colonization  <cit> . elucidation of the role of ihf in colonization is certainly warranted by this study. the inability of the suppressor that dramatically reduced csra function to colonize could imply that even though gaca likely antagonizes csra, its activity is important during some of the colonization process. that only the modestly suppressed gaca mutant  was able to colonize squid and only a weak suppressor allele has been recovered from squid light organs  provides some support for this interpretation in that these mutants retain relatively more native csra function based on their in vitro phenotypes . other unique suppressors from light organ populations were not available for comparison, as they were not recovered over the ten year period of this study. this was likely in part due to care with preparing inoculum once the suppression phenomenon was observed. but given the ease at which suppressors are derived and recovered in culture, their absence from animal studies does agree with the conclusion that csra plays a positive role during colonization. finally, even though strain vcw9f <dig> has ~ <dig> times greater luminescence than es <dig> in culture, it has only modestly, and not significantly, enhanced in luminescence in light organs . that loss of csra does not enhance luminescence to the same degree in light organs that it does in culture suggested csra is repressed in squid compared to culture.table  <dig> ability of suppressor mutations to restore colonization and luminescence in situ



astrain number text is colored for easy identification of derivative gaca mutant background as in table 1



bthe combined data from two replicate experiments containing a total of  <dig> squid for each treatment is reported where colonization was determined by detectable luminescence, and confirmed by destructive plating of light organ homogenates


crelative luminescence  is the luminescence/cfu of each individual squid normalized to the average value of all es <dig> colonized squid ± se



CONCLUSIONS
the csra homologs have been described in many bacterial species where they affect behaviors essential for host association, as now inferred in v. fischeri as an intermediary of gaca regulation of multiple symbiosis-related traits  <cit> . particularly focused in vitro analysis of the csra protein in a few target species such as e. coli has provided insight into structure-function of this post-transcriptional regulator  <cit> . this study complements those in that the nature of the selective screen allowed the evaluation of effects of a wider array of accessible mutations that alter function and expression. we expect several mutations identified in this screen will provide targets of interest for further analysis in other species where full null alleles can be generated, which has not yet been possible in v. fischeri. although those other systems facilitate such analysis, there are still limitations for extending the in vitro analysis in model organisms such as e. coli to biologically relevant models for animal infection where these regulatory cascades play a role. for v. fischeri, the traits under control of the gaca-csra cascade facilitated the colonization process of an accessible host, and revealed subtle differences  in the host compared to in vitro analysis. expanded analysis will likely identify new regulatory partners and mediators of the cascade, such as ihf identified in this screen. upon identification of the regulatory targets of csra that controlled siderophore activity and luminescence, both of which are established as important in this symbiotic model, the potential differences in affinity for targets may be elucidated both in vitro and in vivo. thus, this study sets the stage for further analysis of the regulatory hierarchy and regulation in a natural host context that cannot be fully extrapolated from in vitro results alone but at the same time, builds upon the wealth of knowledge gained from its study in model laboratory systems.

