BACKGROUND
high throughput technologies to accurately profile the transcriptome have been the major thrust of modern systems biology  <cit> . based on the premise that co-expressed genes and/or closely interconnected proteins are more likely to be related to a particular biological function, researchers have made an effort to identify groups of genes, called modules  <cit> , to gain a better understanding of the biological system of interest. early attempts in building such gene modules depended primarily on the co-expression property of genes  <cit> . combining gene expression with protein-protein interaction data greatly expanded the modules and in some cases enhanced the functional association of modules  <cit> . although gene expression and protein interaction information have been used in constructing gene modules, these approaches have not taken advantage of the vast amount of knowledge accumulated about gene annotation/function. therefore, these approaches would not be expected to be maximally effective in constructing modules with strong association to biological functions  <cit> .

recently, the concept of semantic similarity, which was developed for and used in the field of natural language processing  <cit>  has been applied to analyze gene ontology terms and used to predict and confirm protein functions and interactions  <cit> . wang et al.  <cit>  developed a gene ontology   <cit>  structure-based measure to quantify semantic similarity between individual terms as well as genes and showed the advantage of using semantic similarity in organizing complex biological terms.

we postulated that the direct incorporation of semantic similarity based on go annotation could significantly enhance the construction of biologically meaningful gene modules which have strong associations with known biological functions. we have therefore developed ssim , to integrate various gene-gene pairwise relationships including similarity measures based on go biological process  annotation of genes, gene expression pattern, and protein-protein interaction information. the integrated information is then used to group genes into modules using affinity propagation  <cit> . affinity propagation is a clustering method that does not use pre-selected centers for clustering, instead it generates exemplars that best represent a group of data points, in this case genes, by considering all similarities between pairs of data points and testing all data points as potential exemplars. a group of data points that have the same exemplar can then be considered to be in a cluster. the modules generated by ssim are found to be more significantly and specifically associated with biological functions than the results obtained from two methods, module analysis via topology of interactions and similarity sets   <cit>  and interaction component models for gene modules   <cit> .

RESULTS
matisse was originally evaluated using the expression information of  <dig> osmotic stress-associated genes in yeast and ~ <dig>  yeast protein interactions. icmg was tested with a slightly smaller set of osmotic stress-associated genes and using a different set of protein interaction data . matisse also adapted a strategy to generate connected modules by including information from genes that are not in the original selected gene set, referred to back nodes  <cit> . icmg focused on the information within the set of selected genes only.

to compare and evaluate the performance of ssim, we analyzed the same datasets used in matisse and icmg studies . since matisse and icmg used probabilistic approaches to optimize the construction of gene modules, the inferred connections and number of modules could vary in each run. to obtain the number of modules for comparison, matisse was executed  <dig> times as described  <cit> , which yielded the median number of gene modules of  <dig> for both datasets. icmg was then also executed  <dig> times with a fixed number of modules at  <dig>  for ssim, we adjusted the preference value to obtain the same number of modules .

semantic similarity-integrated approach for modularization  generates functionally relevant gene modules
go enrichment analysis with statistical testing such as fisher exact test was the most commonly used approach to evaluate the functional association of individual gene modules. a low p-value between a gene module and a go term would imply a strong association of the module with the specific biological function represented by the term. since ssim integrates semantic similarity of go bp  terms in gene module construction, it is expected to have a better go enrichment performance compared to other methods. therefore a different annotation scheme, mips funcat  <cit> , which is independent of go, was also used to evaluate the functional associations of gene modules.

for a given significance level, the number of modules enriched with at least one annotation term and the number of annotation terms enriched in at least one module are referred as specificity and sensitivity  <cit> . for each method, the sensitivity and specificity were calculated and summarized into a measure of functional enrichment, an f-measure defined as f =  <dig> × sensitivity × specificity/  <cit> . note that the ratio of modules enriched with at least one annotation term  might be also expressed as precision. the results from ssim showed better functional enrichment significance  for mips funcat annotations  than other methods . icmg gave comparable results to ssim, whereas matisse showed lower performances in terms of both sensitivity and specificity. this could be due to a constraint on the size of the modules  and the addition of back nodes  in matisse.

to further evaluate the overall functional enrichment performance from the three different methods, semantic similarity between the terms and the shortest paths of the terms to the root  were investigated . if enriched terms were closely related to each other  and were far away from the root in go hierarchy , they may reveal more specific and detailed biological functions. enriched go terms associated with the modules from ssim have higher average semantic coherency, which measures how enriched go terms are coherent in terms of semantic similarity, and comparable depth relative to other methods .

ssim produces modules with strong functional association and high expression homogeneity
we also investigated the homogeneity of gene expression profiles and topological connectivity of modules generated by three different methods using average pearson correlation as well as average clustering coefficient  <cit>  of genes within the same module. as shown in figure  <dig>  for both datasets, ssim and matisse yielded modules with similar levels of expression homogeneity and topological connectivity while icmg produced modules composed of densely connected genes with poorly co-expressed profiles.

this finding also suggests the possibility of using ssim as a tool to explore gene regulatory networks since genes with similar expression profiles are commonly co-regulated  <cit> . notably, the study conducted by ulitsky and shamir  <cit>  indicates that modules generated by random sampling of genes with sufficient network connectivity could give favorable topological properties and functional enrichment results, but with much lower expression homogeneity. this implies that significant go enrichment results for gene modules might be obtained by chance if we just considered topological connectivity of genes; thus, additional criteria such as gene expression homogeneity must be used to ensure the reliability of functional association for gene modules.

for a given number of modules, the ssim approach seems to generate gene modules with better functional association and higher correlations in their expression homogeneity. for example, one of the icmg modules  shared a large portion of genes with two modules generated by ssim  . the go terms enriched in the icmg module  <dig> implicated two biological functions, "transport" and "lipid biosynthetic process" while in ssim, the two functions were separated into two different modules, module  <dig> and  <dig>  with much higher functional association  and expression homogeneity .

ssim can be used to reveal the hierarchical structure of gene modules
to compare the efficiency of constructing gene modules with different algorithms, we have used a fixed number of modules . in ssim, a larger preference value of affinity propagation  <cit>  means that every gene is more likely to be an exemplar of a module , which would produce a large number of modules composed of highly similar genes in terms of integrated similarity and allow us to view the system in detail. a smaller preference value would generate fewer modules which offer a broader, less detailed overview of the system. this implies that ssim can also be used as a tool to generate a functional hierarchy of gene modules by virtue of using semantic similarity. as an example, we applied the ssim approach to a matisse dataset with a wide range of preference values and chose three sets of modularization results with  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> modules  to illustrate the hierarchical structure of gene module generated by ssim. figure 4a shows that large-size modules obtained from a smaller preference value were hierarchically decomposed into smaller modules using a larger preference value. as an example of the hierarchical structure of gene modules generated with ssim using different preference values, one of the module obtained from the "12-module set" representing various "transport" functions is split into two groups, based on the membership of "18-module set", showing slightly different expression profiles. one of the two groups from the "18-module set" is further divided into two smaller groups based on "37-module set", which further stratify the "transport" function into protein and ion transport .

extension of the module identified by ssim approach
suppose that we have information about a set of genes u and thereby choose a subset v as genes of interest to be used to construct gene modules. the remaining genes , where v ∪vc = u and v ∩vc = ø, are generally not considered in constructing gene modules. however, the genes in vc might have many interactions with the genes in gene set v and potentially provide important information in representing the biological function of the constructed modules. such information can be incorporated by including these genes in vc using a module extension procedure . as an example, one of the modules identified by ssim  had  <dig> genes representing functions related to "cell cycle". the addition of  <dig> neighboring interconnected genes from v that were not in the initial gene list vc increased the significance level of enriched go bp terms and the average clustering coefficient from  <dig>  to  <dig>  .

ssim can be used to reveal biological processes involved in complex disease
the recently described gene networks involved in prion disease model was a significant development in the advance of systems biology  <cit> . it demonstrated the value of constructing gene networks to reveal biological processes involved in this complex disease. the study analyzed gene expression profiling results from several different experimental conditions and time points for prion disease animal model. a set of roughly  <dig> differentially expressed genes  that were common to different experimental conditions  was identified from these analyses. these degs were first classified by go annotations, then hand-curated and assigned into different gene networks based on functional enrichment results and prior knowledge of the genes. additional non-differentially expressed genes were also included to complete and illustrate the functionality of the networks. it was surprising to find that the pathogenesis of prion disease can be largely explained by only four major networks: prpsc replication and accumulation, microglial and astrocytic activation, synaptic degeneration, and neuronal cell death  <cit> . genes in these four networks are involved in proteolysis and lipid metabolism for prpsc replication and accumulation network, immune responses for microglial and astrocytic activation network, mitochondrial dysfunction and apoptosis for neuronal cell death network, and transcription-related function, intracellular signal transduction and ion transport-related function for synaptic degeneration network.

to test the feasibility of using ssim in complex disease analysis, the same set of genes used in the prion network construction was fed into ssim. a total of  <dig> gene modules were obtained and they could largely subsume into the four larger manually generated networks previously described . for example, modules  <dig> and  <dig> contain a total of  <dig> genes that are highly associated with lipid metabolism and proteolysis based on go bp enrichment result, which almost completely recapitulate the key nodes involved in prpsc accumulation network. in addition to the modules related directly to the four reported networks, ssim also suggested processes involved in tissue remodeling such as actin cytoskeleton organization , angiogenesis , multicellular organismal development  and cell differentiation  might also be involved in the progression of prion disease. we will conduct more detailed network analyses with ssim using prion disease datasets including the comparison between different incubation times, host strains, and infectious agents, since this preliminary study agrees well with the manually constructed networks.

for each module, the number and the proportion of genes corresponding to prion subnetworks are shown. since some genes are involved in multiple subnetworks, the row-wise summation of proportions may exceed 100%.

CONCLUSIONS
in this report, we have proposed and demonstrated a new approach, semantic similarity-integrated approach for modularization , for inferring biologically meaningful gene modules. the ssim method integrates various gene-gene pairwise similarity information obtained from gene expression profiling results, protein interactions and go annotations to construct gene modules. we showed that gene modules generated by ssim gave higher specificity with stronger association with biological functions based on the assessment of go and mips annotation terms.

since ssim is based on pairwise similarity values of genes, there is room for further improvement by integrating additional quantitative similarity measures. for example, go semantic similarity of other categories  and cellular component ) or newly developed semantic similarity measures  <cit>  can also be used. in addition, different clustering algorithms can also be used to enhance the construction of gene modules. the evaluation and comparison between various gene pairwise similarities and clustering methods will be interesting to explore in the future.

we have also demonstrated the ability to use ssim to uncover the hierarchical structure of gene modules, i.e. hierarchical association and dissociation of modules at different levels of functional detail. this would allow us to gain a systematic understanding of a given biological system. when some genes are excluded from the set of selected genes  due to marginal expression changes or for other reasons, the module extension procedure adapted in ssim can incorporate them and increase the functional interpretability of gene modules without sacrificing the statistical significance of functional association of gene modules. although a similar approach has been used in other studies  <cit> , the effect of network extension on functional association of gene modules has not been evaluated carefully in those methods.

even though tools to construct gene modules have been developed, they have been mainly applied in datasets from relatively simple model organisms  <cit> . the ssim performed well not only with the dataset from yeast, but also with a much more complicated dataset, the prion disease mouse model. gene modules from ssim effectively recaptured the manually constructed key networks described in prion disease, and also revealed new processes that might also be involved in the disease development. our results suggest the ssim approach can quickly infer gene modules with coherent biological meaning and thereby accelerate systems biology studies in complex diseases.

