BACKGROUND
neisseria gonorrhoeae is an obligate human pathogen with no known environmental reservoirs. it can be isolated from gonorrhoea patients in clinical samples in which obligately anaerobic bacteria are abundant  <cit> , suggesting that gonococci encounter and survive without oxygen in their natural habitat. clark and her colleagues have shown that gonococci can grow anaerobically using a truncated denitrification pathway in which nitrite is reduced to nitrous oxide, catalysed by the copper-containing nitrite reductase, ania, and the single subunit nitric oxide reductase, norb  <cit> . nitrite reduction is severely repressed by oxygen, but is induced during anaerobic growth by the global transcription factor, fnr , and by a two-component regulatory system that we designated narq-narp  <cit> ).

until complete genome sequences became available in the last ten years, it was commonly assumed that obligate pathogens rely less on transcription control than more versatile bacteria that occupy a variety of niches outside of their mammalian hosts. with reference to n. gonorrhoeae, this impression was reinforced by the fact that ccp  is the only gene other than ania that is known to be regulated by the gonococcal fnr, and by the widespread distribution of repeat dna sequences that promote a high frequency of genetic variation-based expression control resulting in gene silencing, phase variation, and antigenic shift. the availability of the complete genome sequence and pan-neisseria microarrays provide an opportunity to test these assumptions directly by comparing the extent of the n. gonorrhoeae fnr regulon with that of the recently-published e. coli fnr regulon  <cit> . as full expression of ania in the gonococcus and both of the major nitrite reductases in e. coli all require a functional two-component regulatory system , we have also investigated the similarities and differences between the narqp systems of these bacteria.

RESULTS
microarray analysis of the gonococcal fnr regulon
to determine the range of functions regulated by fnr in n. gonorrhoeae, the fnr+ parental strain, rug <dig>  and its isogenic fnr mutant, rug <dig>  were grown in poorly aerated cultures until oxygen became limiting and ania expression had been induced . the fnr+ parental strain grew exponentially until the nitrite had been reduced. in contrast, the fnr mutant grew at a constant rather than an exponential rate that was similar to the oxygen-limited growth of the parental strain in the absence of nitrite . to distinguish between genes differentially expressed in response to growth rate from those regulated directly by fnr in response to oxygen limitation, rna was extracted from the fnr+ parental strain grown in the presence or absence of nitrite, and from the fnr mutant grown in the presence of nitrite. these rna preparations were analysed using two pair wise comparisons: fnr+ gonococci growing exponentially in the presence of nitrite compared to the fnr mutant; and fnr+ gonococci growing in the absence of nitrite compared to the fnr mutant. data were analysed according to fold-change  and a student's t-test, using a cut-off p value of  <dig> , reflecting the fact that six biological replicates were used in this experiment. fourteen transcripts were more abundant in the parental strain than the fnr mutant, while six were more abundant in the mutant, suggesting fnr repression . five of the transcripts were more abundant in the fnr+ strain during growth in both the presence and absence of nitrite, suggesting direct fnr regulation. the most up-regulated transcripts encode a short transcript of unknown function , and a putative iron uptake outer membrane protein designated ompu  . also activated were the nitrite reductase gene, ania , ngo <dig> encoding a highly conserved hypothetical protein ; and ngo <dig> encoding the res subunit of a type iii restriction-modification system similar to the ecopi enzyme . nine further transcripts were more highly expressed in the fnr+ strain compared to the fnr mutant, but only during growth in the presence of nitrite. these transcripts are possibly regulated in response to growth rate rather than by fnr. only one of these genes, ngo <dig>  encoding a putative merr-family transcription regulator, was also more highly expressed in the fnr+ strain grown in the absence of nitrite , but the regulation of this gene was not as statistically significant .

most down-regulated by fnr was the ngo <dig> transcript encoding a putative phosphotransferase , followed by two genes implicated in nitric oxide metabolism, dnrn , and norb . two transcripts were less abundant in the parental strain during growth in the presence of nitrite: cysteine synthetase ; and glnq  encoding a component of an abc-type amino acid transporter . the transcript for a neisseria-specific protein encoded by ngo <dig> was more abundant in the mutant only in the absence of nitrite . these data are summarized in table  <dig> 

the results of the microarray experiments can be interactively interrogated in an on-line graphical gbrowse database at , where the fold ratio, number of observations for each gene, student's t-test, cyber-t p-values, xng and ngo annotations, and the microarray probe locations can be visualized, and searched using chromosomal locations, gene names, or gene identifiers. the results from each experiment can be viewed individually or in combination to compare the results, and users can add their own local annotations. the results of these experiments can also be seen in direct comparison with the expression data obtained in a previous microarray study addressing expression associated with narpq  <cit> .

bioinformatic and chip analysis of promoters of genes differentially expressed in the fnr mutant
putative fnr binding sites with at least a 7/ <dig> match to the e. coli consensus, ttgatnnnnatcaa, were identified within  <dig> base pairs upstream of the translation start codon of eleven of the genes revealed by the microarray experiments to be differentially expressed in the fnr mutant and its parent . a strain containing a chromosomal fnr-3xflag fusion was constructed , grown microaerobically both in the presence and absence of nitrite to the late exponential phase, dna-binding proteins were cross linked to the chromosome, the bacteria were lysed and chromosomal dna was sheared. anti-flag antibodies were used to immunoprecipitate fnr-dna complexes, which were de-crosslinked and the dna released was purified. the quantity of each promoter fragment in the immunoprecipitated dna pool was measured by realtime pcr, relative to the fnr-independent hpt promoter. promoter fragments enriched 60% or more in at least two independent experiments scored positive .

only one of the fourteen genes potentially activated by fnr had previously been reported to be fnr-dependent: ania, encoding a nitrite reductase  <cit> . consistent with the microarray data reported above, fnr binding to pania was confirmed by chip, providing a positive control for the chip data. the chip experiments also confirmed fnr-binding to the promoter regions of the most highly fnr-activated transcript  and ompu. although the ompu promoter has no recognisable fnr binding site, multiple potential half-sites are present in the promoter region. conversely, even though open reading frames ngo <dig> and ngo <dig> have potential fnr binding sites upstream, fnr binding was not detected by chip. this emphasises that caution is required when drawing conclusions from data based upon either of these techniques alone.

proteomic analysis of the fnr regulon
a study of protein expression in fnr+ and fnr gonococci revealed fewer differences than were identified in the microarray study. comparison of the cytoplasmic proteins of the fnr+ parental strain, rug <dig>  and the fnr mutant, strain rug <dig>  grown in the presence of nitrite revealed no significant differences in protein expression . in contrast, three membrane proteins were more abundant in the fnr+ strain: nitrite reductase, ania; nitric oxide reductase, norb; and the septum site-determining cell division protein, mind  <cit> . although norb transcription is independent of fnr  <cit> , more norb accumulated during nitrite reduction by the fnr+ strain than in the fnr mutant. the explanation for this apparent contradiction is that transcription from the norb promoter is induced by no  <cit> , so because ania is not synthesised in the mutant, no no would be generated to activate the expression of norb. as the microarray data did not identify mind expression to be activated by fnr, the apparent differential expression of mind protein, revealed by proteomic analysis, is more likely to be due to a growth rate effect than to a direct effect of fnr.

effects of iron deprivation and peroxide stress on an fnr mutant
in light of the altered expression of the genes associated with iron transport  it was determined whether fnr is important in metal ion uptake. the ability of a gonococcal fnr mutant to survive metal ion limitation was tested. microaerobically grown fnr mutant and parent were treated with  <dig> μm dipyridyl, a chelator of iron and manganese ions. viable counts made at regular intervals for up to one hour showed there was no significant difference in survival between the fnr+ and fnr gonococci.

considering that genes predicted to be involved in defence against ros  or induced upon exposure to ros  were observed to be regulated by fnr, the ability of an fnr mutant to survive oxidative stress was tested. oxygen-limited cultures of gonococci, both the fnr mutant and the parental strain, were subjected to  <dig> mm hydrogen peroxide. viable counts taken at intervals up to one hour showed, as with the metal chelation experiment, no significant difference in survival between the fnr+ and fnr bacteria.

why cytochrome c peroxidase was not identified as being fnr-regulated by microarray analysis
expression of the cytochrome c peroxidase is activated by fnr in response to oxygen  <cit> . mature ccp protein was detected by staining gonococcal whole cell or membrane proteins separated by sds-page for haem-dependent peroxidase activity. however, in the present microarray study, fnr-dependent expression of the ccp gene was not observed because of the low level of expression of ccp. the quantity of ccp transcript was not sufficient to generate a statistically significant signal above the background signal of the slide, and was filtered out at the pon filter stage of data analysis.

to confirm that the ccp gene is regulated by fnr, and to compare the relative activity of the ccp and ania promoters, n. gonorrhoeae strains rug <dig>  carrying a chromosomal ania::lacz fusion, and jcgc <dig> & jcgc <dig>  fnr+ and fnr derivatives carrying ccp::lacz, were grown microaerobically in gonococcal broth  in the presence and absence of nitrite and assayed for β-galactosidase activity after  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hours of growth . far less β-galactosidase activity accumulated in the ccp::lacz fnr mutant strain than in the fnr+ strain, and the β-galactosidase activity of the fnr+ strain was higher in the absence than in the presence of nitrite. during growth in the absence of nitrite, at an od <dig> of around  <dig>  , fnr activated pccp 24-fold. these data support the previously reported observation that ccp expression is repressed by the presence of nitrite in an fnr+ strain  <cit> . furthermore, expression of ccp was observed to be fnr-dependent in quantitative real time pcr experiments in which transcript levels in fnr mutant and wild-type strains were compared. whereas in the parental strain ccp expression was induced 18-fold during oxygen limited growth, there was no induction of ccp expression in the fnr mutant strain. these data confirm that, while the ccp gene is not included in the list of fnr-activated genes from the microarray data due to low expression levels, the ccp promoter is activated by fnr. in addition, the ccp promoter was enriched in chip experiments, so was shown to bind fnr in vivo. however, these control ccp experiments illustrate a rarely documented weakness of microarray experiments, namely the problem of false negative results that, due to over-stringent use of statistical analysis, might lead to under-estimation of the number of differentially expressed genes. it also illustrates the utility of an analytical approach that incorporates exclusion of data for transcripts that do not generate detectable signals; so that those genes below the detectable thresholds are readily identified, rather than using 'flooring' or other methods for filling in low intensity or empty microarray data fields.

the gonococcal narqp cannot complement an e. coli narqp mutation
the microarray data revealed fundamental differences between the fnr regulons of e. coli and n. gonorrhoeae, not least in that the gonococcal fnr regulon is very small compared with its e. coli counterpart. however, in both organisms, expression of the major nitrite reductases is co-activated by fnr and a two-component regulatory system, narq-narp, that bind to similar target sequences located at almost identical positions relative to the respective transcription start sites . we have previously demonstrated that a single amino acid substitution is sufficient to enable the gonococcal fnr to complement an e. coli fnr mutation. it was therefore of interest to determine whether the gonococcal narq-narp could complement e. coli mutants defective in both narxl and narqp.

the gonococcal narqp genes were expressed in e. coli under the control of the e. coli fnr promoter from plasmid pgcnarqp, and the ability of the gonococcal narqp proteins to activate the e. coli nirb promoter was assessed  <cit> . expression of the e. coli nitrite reductase nirbd is activated by fnr in response to oxygen limitation and by narqp in response to the availability of nitrate or nitrite  <cit> . e. coli strains jcb <dig> , jcb <dig> , jbc <dig> , and jcb <dig> transformed with pgcnarqp were grown anaerobically in the presence or absence of  <dig> mm nano <dig> or  <dig> mm nano <dig> and β-galactosidase activities measured .

in e. coli strain jcb <dig>  the nirb promoter is activated in response to both nitrite and nitrate. activation in the presence of nitrite is reduced in strain jcb <dig>  which lacks narxl. in the narxlqp strain jcb <dig>  nirb activity is very low in all three growth conditions, since narqp is required for activation in the presence of nitrite or nitrate. when transformed with pgcnarqp, strain jcb <dig> has similarly low β-galactosidase activities in all three conditions. expression of the gonococcal narqp genes from pgcnarqp was verified by rt-pcr . therefore, it was concluded that gonococcal narqp cannot complement an e. coli narxlqp mutation at pnirb.

ligand sensing and signal transduction characteristics of the gonococcal narq
only a very limited range of genetic techniques are available to investigate sensor kinases and response regulators by site-directed mutagenesis and gene deletions in the gonococcus. however, as some sensor kinases have been shown to phosphorylate response regulators of a heterologous host  <cit> , the ability of gonococcal narq to phosphorylate the e. coli narp protein was assessed to investigate the ligand sensing and signal transduction characteristics of the gonococcal narq and narp proteins. strain jcb <dig>  and jcb <dig> transformed with pbadgcq, expressing gonococcal narq, each co-transformed with prnw <dig> carrying napf::lacz, were grown anaerobically in the presence or absence of nitrate and nitrite and their β-galactosidase activities determined . the narp-dependent napf promoter was not activated during growth in the presence of nitrite and nitrate in strain jcb <dig>  since the narq sensor kinase was not present and narp was unable to become phosphorylated, but was activated constitutively in strain jcb <dig> expressing the gonococcal narq from pbadgcq. the explanation for this observation is that the gonococcal narq was constitutively phosphorylating the e. coli narp protein, which was activating transcription. this was the first indication that the gonococcal narq sensor kinase might be ligand-insensitive and constitutively active in e. coli.

expression of the e. coli fumarate reductase operon, frdabcd, is activated by fnr in response to oxygen limitation but repressed by narl in response to the availability of nitrate or nitrite  <cit> . due to the absence of a 7-2- <dig> inverted repeat sequence , narp is unable to bind at this promoter  <cit> . if the gonococcal narq is constitutively active, it should also be able to activate e. coli narl and hence repress transcription at pfrd. strain jcb <dig>  and strain jcb <dig> transformed with pbadgcq expressing gonococcal narq, were grown anaerobically in the presence or absence of nitrate and nitrite and their β-galactosidase activities were determined . the frda promoter was activated in all three conditions in strain jcb <dig>  but was repressed in all three conditions by strain jcb <dig> expressing the gonococcal narq from pbadgcq, as expected if the gonococcal narq was continually phosphorylating the e. coli narl protein and therefore constitutively active in e. coli.

mutations in the p-box of e. coli narq do not alter ligand specificity
previous studies have revealed residues in a periplasmic region of the e. coli narq and narx proteins, the p-box, that are important for ligand sensing and discrimination between nitrate and nitrite  <cit> . only ten of the  <dig> residues that comprise the gonococcal p-box are the same as those of either the e. coli narq or narx proteins. four residues are proposed to be important for ligand discrimination in e. coli narx ; substitutions at any of these residues result in narx proteins with altered ligand sensing characteristics  <cit> . of these four, only r <dig> is conserved in the gonococcal narq. the residue in gonococcal narq corresponding to r <dig> is a lysine; an r54k substitution in e. coli narx results in a ligand-insensitive phenotype. to determine whether the differences in the p-box of gonococcal narq determined nitrite specificity, the e. coli narq p-box was mutated to resemble the gonococcal p-box . mutated narq proteins were expressed in e. coli strains mutated in narx and narq and their ability to activate nirb::lacz or repress frda::lacz chromosomal fusions was assessed using β-galactosidase assays . substitutions in both single and multiple residues resulted in narq proteins that were inactive and ligand insensitive, a "locked-off" phenotype.

discussion
contrasts between the n. gonorrhoeae and e. coli fnr and narp regulons
the first conclusion from this study is that the n. gonorrhoeae fnr and narp regulons are both much smaller than their e. coli counterparts. constantinidou et al.  <cit>  estimated that at least  <dig>  and possibly a many as  <dig>  e. coli operons are regulated directly by fnr, including  <dig> that are induced, and  <dig> that are repressed: the fnr regulon of the pathogenic e. coli o <dig> is of a similar size . the corresponding figures for the gonococcus are that at most  <dig> transcripts are induced by fnr, and  <dig> are repressed. based upon dna sequence analysis and chip experiments, even this might be an over-estimate of the genes that are directly regulated by fnr. however, it is similar to the  <dig> transcription units recently proposed to be activated by fnr in the closely related pathogen, neisseria meningitidis  <cit> . these authors derived a consensus sequence for meningococcal fnr-binding sites that differed at one position from the consensus fnr-binding site in e. coli. however, three lines of evidence indicate that the consensus gonococcal fnr binding site is identical to that of e. coli fnr:  there is a perfect match to the e. coli consensus sequence in the regulatory region of the n. gonorrhoeae transcript that is most dependent upon fnr;  overton et al.  <cit>  showed that a single amino acid substitution, s18f in the n-terminal domain, which is located well away from the dna recognition helix, enables the gonococcal fnr to activate a range of fnr-dependent promoters as effectively as the e. coli fnr, suggesting that they have similar site specificities; and  unsubstituted gonococcal fnr can function as a repressor at e. coli fnr-binding sites, again suggesting that they have similar, or even identical, specificities  <cit> .

the ccp promoter was not identified in the microarray study to be part of the fnr regulon, raising the question whether other members of the gonococcal fnr regulon had been missed because they also are expressed at a level below the threshold set in this analysis. however, close inspection of the raw data failed to reveal additional candidates that, like ccp, were false negatives. nevertheless, the ccp example provides clear evidence that false negative results, like false positive results, can be a problem in microarray analysis.

we recently showed that the list of transcripts differentially expressed in a gonococcal narp mutant and its parent is even smaller than the corresponding list for the fnr regulon, and inverted repeat sequences similar to the binding site for e. coli narp were readily identified in only four promoter regions  <cit> . the n. gonorrhoeae narp is only distantly related to the e. coli narp or narl , so although gonococcal narp can recognise and bind to the same inverted repeat sequence as e. coli narp, it is not surprising that it cannot functionally complement e. coli narxl or narqp mutants. apart from genes involved in denitrification, only two transcripts encoding proteins of unknown function were regulated by narp, unlike in e. coli in which there is an extensive regulon of genes involved in anaerobic metabolism that are repressed by nitrate-activated narp  <cit> .

the proposal that narq from n. gonorrhoeae is a ligand insensitive sensor kinase locked on in its kinase mode is also fully supported by experiments presented in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  consistent with the fundamental differences in nitrate and nitrite sensing between the two types of bacteria. e. coli narq is exquisitely sensitive to nitrate, but two orders of magnitude less sensitive to nitrite  <cit> . in contrast, gonococcal narq is insensitive to both nitrate and nitrite, and induction of ania transcription in the presence of nitrite requires inactivation of the repressor, nsrr, not by nitrite but by the product of nitrite reduction, nitric oxide  <cit> . as gonococci lack the alternative electron transfer pathways that in e. coli are subject to narp repression and that they are unable to metabolise nitrate, it is entirely consistent that they also lack a nitrate-sensing two-component regulatory system. consequently, data in table  <dig> show that gonococcal narq can constitutively phosphorylate e. coli narl or narp. conversely, amino acid substitutions that make the p box of e. coli narq more like that of the gonococcal narq simply inactivate signal transduction , as had been found in previous detailed site-directed mutagenesis experiments of e. coli narx  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
both e. coli and n. gonorrhoeae are gram-negative human pathogens that show adaptation to, and are able to live in, anaerobic niches as part of their normal colonization-transmission cycles within the host. both species utilize a common regulator, fnr, in the control of this response. however, this study shows that whereas a wide range of responses and physiological adaptations are coordinated by this fnr in e. coli, the adaptations are far fewer and are specifically and primarily focussed upon the immediate metabolic needs for utilising alternate electron acceptors under anaerobic conditions in n. gonorrhoeae. as such, while this regulator controls what appears to be a fully integrated response in e. coli, in n. gonorrhoeae the response is essentially independent of the other physiological changes required for adaptation to anaerobic growth. furthermore, differences between the ligand sensing and signal transduction capabilities of the e. coli and n. gonorrhoeae narq-narp proteins were revealed. this illustrates fundamental differences between the way in which environmental responses are controlled and integrated in these two species, and highlights the importance of specific investigations of species with different adaptation strategies.

