BACKGROUND
pterobranchia are a small, specialised group of marine suspension-feeding animals. despite rich fossil record, only some  <dig> extant species have been described, which are subdivided into three genera, rhabdopleura, cephalodiscus and atubaria  <cit> . one questionable species from the genus atubaria  is described, which lives solitary  <cit> . species of rhabdopleura and cephalodiscus live in secreted tubes in colonies  <cit> . although pterobranchia comprise only few extant species, they represent an important deuterostome lineage. usually they are grouped to the solitary-living enteropneusta, forming together the hemichordata . because the hemichordata unite features of the remaining two major deuterostome subgroups, chordata and echinodermata, the phylogenetic position of pterobranchia is crucial for understanding the evolution of chordate and deuterostome body plans.

despite their evolutionary importance, only ribosomal sequence data were analysed for phylogenetic reconstruction of the pterobranchs  <cit> . these analyses support the monophyly of hemichordata and a close relationship with echinodermata, forming the ambulacraria  <cit> . however, results within this group are conflicting. the 28s rdna sequence analyses suggest reciprocal monophyly of enteropneusta and pterobranchia while the analyses of the 18s rdna sequences support a branching of pterobranchia within enteropneusta.

a frequently used molecular marker for reconstruction of the phylogenetic relationships is the complete mitochondrial genome . the typical metazoan mitochondrial genome is a circular dna molecule ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> kb in size and comprises a more or less conserved gene content of  <dig> protein-coding genes, two ribosomal rna  genes and  <dig> transfer rna  genes  <cit> . the complete genomes allow phylogenetic analyses of both sequences and gene order. the complete mitochondrial genomes are well characterised from vertebrata , cephalochordata  <cit> , tunicata , and the five recent echinoderm subgroups . the mitochondrial genome was also determined for the enigmatic worm-like xenoturbella bocki supporting a close relationship to deuterostomia  <cit> . with the exception of the highly derived tunicata, mitochondrial genomes of deuterostomia are similar in architecture  <cit> . however, variability has been found in the genetic code caused by different assignments of four codons . since the metazoan mitochondrial translation system comprises a reduced trna gene set of usually  <dig> trna genes, each trna gene has to recognize different codons , which often differ only in the 3rd codon site. the influence of the 3rd codon site on the translation efficiency is still under discussion  <cit> . the "theory of anticodon sequences with highest versatility" postulates that the anticodon sequence of a trna gene pairs equally effectively with all recognized codons  <cit> . alternatively, the "theory of codon-anticodon adaptation" suggests that the anticodon sequence of a trna gene is adapted to the most frequent codon among all the recognized codons  <cit> . as most metazoan mitochondrial genomes show an at-rich main-coding strand  <cit> , the trnas preferentially have gnn anticodons for nny codons, unn for nnr codons, and also unn for the four-fold degenerate codon families  <cit> . this is in congruence with both theories . the strand-specific nucleotide bias may have arisen by the asymmetrical replication of the circular mitochondrial genome which exposes stretches of a dna strand for a longer time as single-stranded than other parts, accumulating adenine and guanine nucleotides more faster  <cit> . however, some mitochondrial genomes possess an inverse strand-specific mutational pattern showing a gt-rich main-coding strand, e.g. branchiostomia  and crinoidea , which is usually explained by an inversion of the replication direction of the mtdna  <cit> .

in contrast to these well characterized genomes, only three enteropneust genomes are known from hemichordata. the two balanoglossus genomes exhibit similarities to vertebrata and echinodermata  <cit> . the analyses of the genetic code suggest assignments as found in echinodermata, although two important codons are missing   <cit> . the genome of the enteropneust saccoglossus kowalevskii was not described in detail, but the published annotated sequence shows a derived gene order and a different assignment of the codon aaa compared to the echinoderm genetic code . however, this assignment in the genome of s. kowalevskii  also occurs in other invertebrate mtdnas.

we determined the first mitochondrial genome of a pterobranch, rhabdopleura compacta, and compared the genome architecture and the genetic code to other deuterostome and metazoan genomes. the genome of r. compacta shows an unusual strand-specific bias, which strongly affected the protein sequences, and suggests an inversion of the replication direction. this precluded the phylogenetic reconstruction of deuterostomia including pterobranchia by protein sequence analyses. the order of protein-coding genes of r. compacta is similar to the hypothetical ancestral arrangement of deuterostomes but is also not informative for phylogenetic reconstruction within the deuterostomia. the codon-anticodon distribution and the codon assignments in the pterobranch genome reject an adaptation of anticodon sequences to the most frequent codons, but give strong support for selection to an efficient trna translation system with anticodon sequences showing highest versatility. features of its trna system support the grouping of ambulacraria .

RESULTS
general features of the mitochondrial genome of rhabdopleura compacta
the mitochondrial genome of r. compacta comprises a  <dig>  bp long circular dna molecule with a slightly higher at-content  than enteropneust genomes . it shows one of the strongest strand-specific biases of metazoan genomes with high amounts of thymine  and guanine  but low amounts of adenine  and cytosine  on the main-coding strand causing strong negative at- and positive gc-skews . the main-coding strand bears several oligot-stretches with lengths of six , seven , eight  and nine nucleotides , while the longest stretch of  <dig> t's is found only once. the large amount of thymine leads to a higher total at-content, although the gt-content is also markedly increased in all rhabdopleura mt genes compared to closely related taxa .

the genome contains all genes typical for metazoa, i.e.,  <dig> protein-coding, two rrna, and  <dig> trna genes . all protein-coding genes start with atg or gtg and end with a complete stop-codon with the exception of cox <dig> and nd <dig>  both genes overlap with downstream trna genes suggesting an incomplete termination codon "t" as described in ojala et al.  <cit> . the atp <dig> protein is unusual: about  <dig> residuals of the c-terminus are missing. in contrast, additional parts within the protein sequences are detected within atp <dig>  and nd <dig> . all protein-coding genes are located on the same strand and furthermore, the strand-specific nucleotide skews are predominantly found in protein-coding genes . moreover, the oligot-stretches are frequently located in protein-coding regions. the longest t-stretch is located within the coding-region of cox <dig> leading to four phenylalanine residues in series within an evolutionary conserved phenylalanine-rich domain.

the  <dig> trna genes have been identified based on the predicted cloverleaf secondary structure. the increased gt-content has also been observed in the rrna and, to a lesser extent, in the trna genes . the two rrna genes have been detected by alignments. their boundaries have been recovered only for the 12s rrna, whereas the 16s rrna has been determined by the flanking trna genes. the 12s rrna is  <dig> bp in size and similar to the 12s rrna of the enteropneusts  showing  <dig> - 42% sequence identities. the 16s rrna  is much shorter than the enteropneust sequences  but exhibits  <dig> - 42% sequence identity with them. the exact ends of the 16s rrna is uncertain, the gene is possibly surrounded by short uas .

surprisingly, only 1% of the genome consists of uas and there is no large uas region at all. the longest uas region spans  <dig> bp and is located between the atp <dig> and nd <dig> genes .

strand-specific nucleotide biases
almost all metazoan mitochondrial genomes present obvious strand-specific at- and gc-skews  which is usually explained by the  strand-displacement mechanisms inherent in the replication of mitogenomes  <cit> . vertebrate genomes present pronounced at- and gc-skews on the two strands having an ac-rich main-coding strand  . this strand-specific mutational bias is explained by the asymmetrical replication. replication starts from two distinct replication initiation sites for the gt-rich  strand  and the ac-rich  strand   <cit> , respectively. while the replication of the genome starts on orih, the replication of the light strand starts later on oril, when the replication fork from orih has passed this point  <cit> . the two strands are therefore single-stranded for different lengths of time. in mammalian genomes, the oril is located 2/ <dig> apart from the orih exposing always the same strand as single-stranded. further, the time of the single-stranded state increases from the orih to the oril showing shortest time on oril, longest time of single-stranded on orih and long time of single-stranded in the remaining 1/ <dig> part  <cit> . the faster accumulation of guanine and thymine nucleotides in single-stranded dna then leads to the observed strand-specific at- and gc-skews  <cit> .

however, investigations on mammalian mtdnas suggest possible alternative l-strand syntheses  <cit>  or additional replication modes, which might be tissue- or stage-specific  <cit> . these could substantially reduce the time of single-stranded compared to the conventional strand-displacement mode.

the strand specific accumulations of the guanine and thymine nucleotides in the genome of r. compacta show typical mutational pattern as proposed by the strand-displacement mode. in particular, the / ratios in protein-coding sequences shows a gradient along the genome of r. compata  in congruence with the conventional strand-displacement mode. the lowest / ratios are found between the genes nd <dig> and cytb, suggesting that the oril is located in this region since the shortest time of single-strandedness should cause the lowest bias. the / ratios increase from cytb to nd <dig>  while high ratios are recovered between nd <dig> and nd <dig> . the high ratios suggest that orih is located close to the end of the nd <dig> gene. both oril and orih have to be expected within genes because large unassigned sequences  that could contain regulatory elements are missing in the genome of r. compacta.

assuming that there are competing modes of replication for metazoan mitogenomes, the extreme strand specific nucleotide bias in r. compacta might indicate that the strand-displacement mode is more dominant than in closely related species. however, the basal protostome clades platyhelminthes and chromodorea exhibit a similarly strong strand specific nucleotide bias as r. compacta , and similar replication modes might be used in these taxa.

the strand specific mutational bias in r. compacta is inverted on the main-coding strand compared to most other deuterostome genomes . this may be explained by an inversion of the direction of replication which has been described for crinoidea  <cit> , a subgroup of the echinoderms, and several other, unrelated taxa  <cit> . only few gene inversions are found in the genome of r. compacta compared to genomes of vertebrata  or to the enteropneust balanoglossus  suggesting that the inversion of regulatory elements lead to the inverted replication direction.

genetic code and the trna system
all codons are present in the protein-coding genes of r. compacta, including the codons taa and tag as stop codons. most assignments of the amino acid codons could be determined on conserved sites within a metazoan alignment using gendecoder v <dig>   <cit> , whereas five codon assignments could be recovered only with weak support . two of them could be well determined based on weakly conserved or variable sites: ucc  and aaa  while only uncertain results were obtained for the codons auc, ugc, and cuc. however, the codons auc and ugc present the reverse complement of the anticodon sequence of the trnaile/gau and the trnacys/gca, which support the assignment as ile and cys, respectively . the cuc codon specifies 27% as ile, 24% as phe, and 23% as leu. due to the assignment of cuc as leu in all bilaterian genetic codes deposited in ncbi database, this assignment was also assumed for r. compacta .

the total number of codons is shown. the assignment of each codon was detected within a metazoan alignment using gendecoder server v <dig>   <cit> . the reverse complements of the anticodons are marked by asterisks, deviations from the versatility rule  <cit>  are underlined. one codon  could not be determined with certainty.

the codon usage in the mitochondrial genome of r. compacta shows a strong preference of synonymous codons ending with thymine or guanine , which is in contrast to most vertebrate mtdnas  <cit> . moreover, the nucleotide composition of the trna genes is adapted to the increased gt-content , but most anticodons of the trna genes still show the typical sequence of other metazoan genomes  <cit>  having anticodons gnn for nny codons, unn for nnr codons and also unn for four-fold degenerate codon families . therefore, the reverse complements of the anticodon sequences show usually the low frequent codons  rejecting an adaptation of the anticodon sequences to most frequent codons . in contrast, this strongly supports that an effective translation system is based on anticodon sequences of trna genes with highest versatility to all recognized codons independent of their frequency  <cit> . 

three deviations from the anticodon system with such highest versatility are found in the genome of r. compacta  which are also recovered in some other deuterostome genomes and which are all correlated to codons with different assignments . 

 the anticodon sequence for met is derived as it shows the reverse complement to the aug codon instead of the aua codon. this is found in most metazoan genomes and may be important for an effective translation of the start codon aug . the aua codon shows different assignments within deuterostomia. in all echinodermata, the three enteropneusta and in r. compacta, the aua codon is assigned as ile  while it encodes met in chordata . since no change in the anticodon of the trnaile is found, the additional recognition of the aua codon by the trnaile should be based on other mechanisms which may have arisen in the lineage leading to the ambulacraria. 

 the trnaser/gcu shows also no changes in the anticodon sequences within deuterostomia and recognises the agt and agc  codons within highest versatility. due to the missing of a trna gene for the codons aga and agg , these codons are partially also recognised by trnaser/gcu. the pairing of the anticodon sequence of trnaser/gcu to the codon aga may be possible under special conditions; whereas the recognition of the agg codon is assumed to be more complicated  <cit> . within deuterostomia, only the genomes of echinodermata show obviously an assignment of ser for all four codons. the pairing of the agg codon to the trnaser/gcu in echinoderms is explained by a guanosine methylation on the anticodon sequence that enables this pairing  <cit> . the genomes of chordata and tunicata possess a different assignment of both codons  which is based on an additional trna gene for gly in tunicata  <cit>  and a unique pathway to recognize these codons as stop codons in chordata  <cit> . in the genome of r. compacta, the codon aga assigns ser while the codon agg is reassigned to lys . 

 the assignment of the codon agg as lys is supported for the genome of rhabdopleura by eight highly conserved sites  and two weakly conserved sites , but has not been detected in other deuterostome mtdnas. however, several taxa within arthropoda also have an assignment of agg for lys. all these genomes and the genome of r. compacta present an unusual anticodon sequence of trnalys showing the sequence "cuu" instead of "uuu"   <cit> . only the second codon position of the codon agg mismatches to the anticodon sequence trnalys/cuu and may enable the codon reassignment to lys. notably, the arthropod lineage shows also mtdnas with trnalys/cuu or trnalys/uuu but missing the reassignment. the distributions of the anticodon sequences within arthropods suggest an ancestral mutation in the trnalys but could not support  an ancestral assignment of agg as lys  <cit> . therefore, several independent back-mutations to the usual anticodon sequence "uuu" and several reassignments of agg to lys may have occurred  <cit> . similar to this, the genomes of echinodermata and the enteropneust balanoglossus spp. have also the derive anticodon sequence "cuu" while the genome of the enteropneust saccoglossus shows the usual anticodon sequence of "uuu" . all these genomes lack the reassignment of agg to lys. furthermore, the translation efficiency for the codon aaa by the trnalys/cuu could be reduced due to deviation from the highest versatility in the 3rd codon site  and may have caused the lack of the aaa codons in the genomes of balanoglossus  <cit>  as well as the reassignment of the codon aaa to asn in echinoderms  <cit> . the recognition of the codon aaa by the trnaasn/guu in echinoderm genomes may be based on a further mutation on position  <dig> in the anticodon loop of the trnaasn  <cit>  which is missing in pterobranch and enteropneust genomes .

the variable codon assignments within mtdna of deuterostomia and selected anticodon loop sequences  are shown. the entire genetic codes available at the web site http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/taxonomy/utils/wprintgc.cgi are given by the codon table number . amino acids are shown in the 3-letters-abbreviations. low frequent codons are given by cursive amino acid abbreviations while unpredictable or completely missing codons are shown by dash.

in summary, the distribution of the trnalys anticodon sequence within deuterostomia and the reassignments of the codon aaa  and agg  suggest a trnalys/cuu as an apomorphic character for the taxon ambulacraria . furthermore, our data support the codon reassignments as a two-step-process: the first step was the reduced recognition in mtdnas of ambulacraria as a consequence of a mutation in trnalys/cuu abandoning aaa and the lack of a suitable trna for codon agg. these reductions paved the way for adaptations in two other trnas to recognize these codons: agg by trnalys/cuu in r. compacta and aaa by trnaasn/guu in echinodermata. both steps were forced by an effective translation system in congruence to the "modified ambiguous intermediate theory of codon reassignment"  <cit> . the alternative "codon capture hypothesis of codon reassignment"  <cit>  assumes mutational pressure in the first step leading to codon losses in the genome. this seems to be unlikely because the genome of r. compacta presents a strong mutational bias in all protein-coding genes, but no codon is missing.

protein-coding genes
the gt nucleotide composition has an important influence on the protein composition of nuclear genomes  <cit> . similarly, the mutational bias in the genome of r. compacta strongly influences the protein sequences, even if highest gt-bias is detected in the third codon position . the gt-rich main-coding strand of r. compacta exhibits all protein-coding genes showing an increase of gt-rich codons at the expense of ac-rich codons. this leads to unusual amino acid composition in all proteins . the abundance is increased for phe, gly, val, trp which all are encoded by exclusively gt-rich codons . in contrast, the amino acids thr, pro, asn, his, and gln are decoded solely by ac-rich codons and are decreased in their abundances in the proteins of r. compacta compared to the proteins of closely related species .

this strong bias within the amino acid sequence hampered the phylogenetic analyses of the protein-coding genes leading to extreme long branch lengths . both ml and the bayesian approaches resulted in a meaningless sistergroup relationship of r. compacta to the echinoderm subgroup ophiuroidea, hence rejecting a monophyletic echinodermata and hemichordata . while the monophyly of echinodermata is well supported by several other analyses  <cit> , the mitochondrial genomes of ophiuroidea show an accelerated evolutionary rate  <cit> . thus, the grouping of r. compacta and ophiuroidea most likely is caused by a long branch artefact due to the unusual protein composition. however, the protein composition of r. compacta suggests a long time of adaptive evolution under the same mutational pressure.

gene order evolution
the mtdnas of most deuterostome groups show similar gene arrangements, especially the order of the protein-coding genes. the consensus gene order of vertebrate genomes is assumed to represent the ancestral arrangement for deuterostomia, if not for metazoa  <cit> . only the genomes of tunicata show unique gene arrangements  featuring all genes on one strand and having unusual high rearrangement rates within the group . the mitochondrial genome of r. compacta presents a new gene arrangement showing high differences in the trna and rrna gene order compared to the assumed ancestral deuterostome as well as to the known hemichordate arrangements .

with regard to the order of the protein-coding genes the arrangement of balanoglossus  appears to represent the ancestral state within hemichordata, since only one translocation of cytb or nd <dig> from the vertebrate/cephalochordate arrangement has to be hypothesized .

within hemichordata, two rearrangements are necessary to interconvert the basal balanoglossus gene order into that of saccoglossus kovalewskii . the gene order of r. compacta needs three steps to be derived from the ancestral balanoglossus order  . however, these rearrangements have to be addressed as autapomorphies and thus, no synapomorphic characters could be detected in gene order evolution within hemichordata, which would allow phylogenetic reconstruction within the group.

notably, the gene order of r. compacta can be derived directly from the assumed basal deuterostome arrangement  by the same number of three rearrangements, which however would render hemichordata paraphyletic .

although the ancestral arrangement of the fragment containing nd <dig> and nd <dig> cannot be surely determined  <cit> , the echinoderm genomes show an apomorphic translocation of the nd4l gene, which is not recovered in any other deuterostome genome .

CONCLUSIONS
the unusual mitochondrial genome of r. compacta features a strong, reversed asymmetrical mutational constraint compared to most other deuterostome genomes. this may have arisen by an inversion of the replication direction in the lineage leading to r. compacta and by an adaptation to this bias in the protein sequences. due to this bias, phylogenetic analyses of protein-coding genes failed. however, the trna system supports the monophyly of ambulacraria, comprising hemichordata and echinodermata by the synapomorphic characters trnalys/cuu and the assignment of ata as ile. the strong strand-specific mutational bias in the genome of r. compacta allows further important insights in the evolution of the trna system. the observed codon usage and their anticodon sequences strongly support a selection pressure to an efficient translation system possessing anticodon sequences which pair most easily with all recognized codons, independent of their frequency  similar to most trna genes of fungal mtdnas  <cit> . mutations in the anticodon sequence changing the recognition efficiency could lead to a bias in the codon distributions and could cause the deletion of codons from the genome. furthermore, similar mutations in the anticodon sequence could cause similar adaption processes in the trna translation system as found in the convergent assignment of agg as lys in the genome of r. compacta and some arthropod genomes. our analyses support the disappearance and reassignment of codons in response to a selection pressure for an efficient translation system as described in the "modified ambiguous intermediate theory of codon reassignment"  <cit> .

