BACKGROUND
the occurrence of homoplasy is problematic in phylogenetic reconstruction and the tracing of morphological evolution  <cit> . this is particularly the case when the evolution of a homoplastic trait is perceived as relatively complex and therefore deemed unlikely to have evolved more than once. a classic example that has sustained nearly two centuries of controversial and often heated debate is the character of marsupial syndactyly. this is commonly defined as a peculiar phenotype in which digits ii and iii of the marsupial foot are tightly connected by a common sheath of skin at least to the base of the intermediate phalanx  <cit> . the trait occurs in all species of two australasian marsupial orders , peramelemorpha  and diprotodontia . together, these two clades represent nearly 50% of marsupial species  <cit> , diprotodontia being the most ecologically and locomotorily diverse extant marsupial clade  <cit> .

marsupial syndactyly was one of the first characters used for marsupial classification,  <cit> . it has been reasoned that a character as complex as syndactyly could have only evolved once within marsupials  <cit> , and peramelemorphs and diprotodontians were commonly grouped in the clade of syndactyla  <cit> . famously, this was at odds with the division of marsupials based on dentition into "diprotodont"  and "polyprotodont" clades . however, with the advent of molecular systematics, it became widely accepted  that diprotodontia and peramelemorpha are not sister groups  <cit> . as figure  <dig> shows, this arrangement favours homoplastic origins of syndactyly in peramelemorpha and diprotodontia  <cit> . however, there have also been suggestions that syndactyly may be plesiomorphic for larger marsupial clades, and has subsequently been lost in some clades  <cit> .

as a matter of course, it has been assumed that marsupial syndactyly arose under selective pressure, but what the functional relevance of syndactyly is has never been convincingly argued. a number of researchers suggested that the comparatively small size  of syndactylous digits in most species is related to arboreal locomotion in putatively arboreal ancestors of the syndactylous clades  <cit> . this scenario has been contested because arboreal diprotodontia have particularly strongly developed syndactylous digits  <cit> . a second hypothesis suggests that the function of syndactylous digits as "grooming digits" confers a selective advantage  <cit> . however, grooming organs are common among placental mammals without comparable extensive transformations in pedal morphology  <cit> . as such, the adaptive implications of marsupial syndactyly remain elusive. however, it has never been considered that it is a unique phenomenon with implications transcending its local importance. no extant tetrapod clade displays a trait which, without a clear-cut locomotor function, impacts as heavily and consistently on autopodial morphology of an ecologically diverse order. such exceptions have the potential to inform our understanding of evolutionary and developmental patterns of tetrapod autopodial evolution  <cit> , but little empirical information exists on syndactyly, which stems mainly from a few older dissection-based studies  <cit> . as such, syndactyly displays some intriguing but largely unexplored characteristics. for example, syndactyly is not an exclusively soft-tissue related condition but majorly affects the digits . the characteristic morphology of digits ii and iii suggests that they evolve as a distinct unit within the syndactylous foot  <cit> , but this has never been tested. the result of the unusual anatomy of syndactylous digits is that digit iii never forms the main axis of the foot in syndactylous marsupials  <cit> , which is rare among tetrapods  <cit> . instead, the marginal digits iv and v are extensively developed, while digits ii and iii are considered "reduced"  <cit> . nevertheless, locomotion in syndactylous marsupials  is more diverse than in all other marsupials and many placental orders, catering for plantigrade terrestrial walking and bounding, grasping arboreal locomotion, and the unique hopping gait of kangaroos; this is also reflected in pedal diversity . however, patterns of functional adaptation in the syndactylous foot and particularly of digits ii and iii remain to be explored. marsupial syndactyly is also apparent very early in pedal development, which has lead to the as yet untested suggestion of heterochronic change of foot development in syndactylous species  <cit> . this is an interesting suggestion because heterochronic change in early ontogeny can help to explain evolutionary transformations of morphological traits  <cit> . lastly, contextualisation of syndactyly in an evolutionary framework is to date impossible because the evidence regarding its distribution has not been comprehensively assessed; two lines of evidence have been deemed important in this respect. a range of didelphid species have been termed "incipiently syndactylous" . this has been considered evidence that syndactyly may be more plesiomorphic within marsupials than has been generally recognized  <cit> , although the existence of incipient syndactyly has been contested  <cit> . contrary to this hypothesis, it was suggested that tarsal/metatarsal articulation patterns in peramelemorphs, which differ from the plesiomorphic mammalian condition, are a consequence of convergent acquisition of syndactyly  <cit> .

characterizing syndactyly
this study approaches marsupial syndactyly from several angles. first, we test the notion that digits ii and iii evolve as a distinct unit within the syndactylous foot. this is done through assessment of inter-digit integration patterns of morphometric measurements across the diversity of syndactylous marsupials, using a comparison of variance/covariance and correlation matrices. a morphometric approach is also taken to explore the impact of marsupial syndactyly on pedal diversity and functional adaptation. in addition, comparative analysis of ossification sequence in the digits  <cit>  is employed to assess the proposition that syndactyly arises through heterochronic change in pedal digit development  <cit> . lastly, a review and acquisition of new broad-scale comparative data on external didelphimorph pedal digit morphology, as well as marsupial tarsal articulations, are employed for empirical qualification of previous hypotheses regarding incipient syndactyly and the influence of syndactyly on tarsal morphology.

using this combination of morphometric, external morphological, and ontogenetic approaches, we address issues regarding the nature, origins, and evolutionary implications of marsupial syndactyly: what are the evolutionary characteristics of digit relationships in syndactylous marsupials? are these patterns related to heterochronic changes in pedal digit development? does syndactyly impact on pedal diversity and functional adaptation? does a reassessment of traditionally used indicators of syndactyly result in a better understanding of its evolution? the results are synthesized into an integrated view of marsupial syndactyly as a unique phenomenon in tetrapod autopodial evolution.

RESULTS
correlation matrix comparisons
morphometric raw data are shown in additional file  <dig>  variance/covariance  and correlation matrix correlations are listed in table  <dig>  matrix repeatabilities  are mostly over  <dig> , suggesting low sampling error. one exception are the repeatabilities for v/cv matrices of digits ii and iii which are considerably lower . this is likely an underestimate since the lower repeatabilities for these digits lead to over-adjustment of their raw v/cv matrix correlations  to a correlation value over  <dig>  the highest matrix correlations reported by both analyses are those between digits ii and iii. medium to high correlations are reported for comparisons of digit v with all other digits, while matrices of digits iv compared with digits ii and iii have the lowest correlations. variance/covariance matrix correlations are consistently higher that correlation matrix comparisons, except in comparisons between the syndactylous digits. this difference might be due to the scaling effect on the non-size adjusted data resulting from division by the standard deviation in the correlation approach  <cit> .

the correlations between raw lengths are significantly stronger between phalangeal elements of digits ii and iii compared to those of digits ii or iii with digits iv or v . regressions of raw measurements of corresponding digit elements show that this is due to a virtually isometric relationship between digits ii and iii as evidenced by regression slopes close to  <dig>  with very low regression errors. same-element regressions between all other digit combinations are considerably different in slope, with larger errors .

regression results of raw length regressions between corresponding digit elements. note that elements of digits ii and iii are close to identical in length in all species as shown by intercepts near  <dig> and slopes close to  <dig> with very little error. this is also reflected in tight correlations between digits ii and iii, which are nearly all significantly stronger than any other between-digit correlations . r, pearson correlation coefficient; dz, difference of z-score transformed correlations; p, significance.

locomotor indices
the kruskal-wallis tests of single-digit comparisons suggest highly significant differences between all locomotor types and all predictor ratios . the post hoc wilcoxon tests are generally significant between all pairwise group comparisons. the results suggest that arboreal species have longer and more gracile phalanges , as demonstrated by higher phalangeal indices, metatarsal slenderness ratios , distal srs, and proximal srs of digits iv and v compared to quadrupedal terrestrial ones. metatarsal srs are highest in peramelemorphs and macropodoid species, reflecting their elongate metatarsals .

kruskal-wallis tests of locomotor index ratios in digit pairs shows that most between-digit relationships are significantly different between locomotor types. exceptions are ratios between digits ii and iii, and all between-metatarsal ratios. the follow-up wilcoxon test  is significant for most inter-digit relationships between all three groups, reflecting the markedly different relative digit lengths in species of different locomotor type.

digit ossification sequences
ossification ranks for each species are presented in additional file  <dig>  in non-syndactylous marsupials, phalangeal elements of one row  occur simultaneously in digits ii-iv . in syndactylous marsupials , the majority of phalangeal row ossification sequences are disassociated in time: digit iv is earliest to ossify in a row, in most cases simultaneous with or followed by digit v. then follow ossification of digits ii and iii . ossification onsets for digit i are slightly more variable, and metatarsals ossify at the same time in all species except for cercartetus concinnus . parsimov analysis of the ossification data, using the consensus of acctran and deltran optimized apomorphy list inputs, identifies two heterochronic shifts responsible for the rank changes: firstly, an acceleration of intermediate phalanges of digits iv and v with respect to proximal and intermediate phalanges of digits ii and iii , and secondly, acceleration of distal phalanges iv and v with respect to distal phalanges ii and iii.

tarsal bone anatomy and "incipient syndactyly"
all marsupial species examined, except peramelemorphs, show metatarsal-tarsal articulations that correspond to the plesiomorphic mammalian pattern . digits ii and iii articulate with the mesocuneiform and ectocuneiform bone, respectively, in all marsupials, while in peramelemorphs, digit iii articulates perceptibly less with the ectocuneiform. digit iv is mostly supported by the cuboid in all species except peramelemorphs, where it is supported partially by the ectocuneiform and cuboid bones . however, in wombats and a range of macropodoids there is also considerable contact between digit iv and the ectocuneiform . within peramelemorphs, there is some variation as to the degree to which the ectocuneiform is included in support of digit iv. this seems to be related to locomotor mode, as the most extensive contact is in the cursorial bilbies, macrotis lagotis and the extinct chaeropus ecaudatus. digit v is supported by the cuboid in all species.

species for which claims of "incipient syndactyly" were found in the literature are listed in table  <dig>  visual investigation of study skins of didelphimorph marsupials show that in most species, all middle digits  are highly similar. in some didelphimorphs, digits ii and iii are more gracile than digits iv and v, and more similar to each other , but never as distinctly so as in syndactylous marsupials. in no case are digits ii and iii fully webbed, except in the fully webbed feet of chironectes minimus and in the foot of notoryctes typhlops, whose digits i-iv are webbed.

discussion
the origins and evolution of marsupial syndactyly have been debated for more than  <dig> years, although little observational information has been collected. it may be that the distinctive overall anatomy of syndactyly resulted in the perception that it is distinctive enough not to require further research. however, the results of this study indicate that marsupial syndactyly has a unique evolutionary and developmental background which has previously been largely ignored. a synthesis of results from this study takes the implications of this unique phenomenon beyond its traditional role as a purely phylogenetic problem.

unique integration in the syndactylous foot
the near-identity of correlation matrices of digits ii and iii, combined with strict raw measurement isometry of their digit elements across species, suggest that the syndactylous digits are highly constrained with respect to each other across the diversity of syndactylous species. this is congruent with the fact that the phalangeal skeleton of the syndactylous digits is visually undistinguishable. this is reminiscent of a definition of identical digits by tabin : " empirically, a digit is considered to have the same identity as a second digit 'x' if, when examined in isolation by a morphologist, the first digit would be labeled as being a digit 'x'". such a condition has few counterparts in extant tetrapods. among cases of marsupial-like syndactyly reported in placentals, only that in digit iii and iv in three closely related species of otter shrew  is directly comparable  <cit> ; note that the reportedly syndactylous siamang gibbon symphalangus syndactylus has digits of different length  <cit> . to our knowledge, conditions resembling marsupial syndactyly are also unknown in extant amphibians or sauropsids  <cit> . it could be argued that digits iii and iv of hoofed placentals  could be comparable in their similarity to marsupial syndactyly. however, autopodia of hoofed placentals follow a well-documented pattern of increased central digit emphasis in fore-and hindlimbs which is restricted to cursorial mammals  <cit> . marsupial syndactyly is not comparable since it is restricted to the foot and morphologically and functionally diverse, and does not correspond to any obvious locomotor adaptation.

syndactyly does not constrain functional adaptation of the foot
autopodial anatomy in tetrapods is strongly tied to locomotor function  <cit> , and this is reflected in greater variation in autopodial anatomy compared to more proximally situated limb elements  <cit> . extensive locomotor adaptation within pedal digits is evident from the matrix comparisons involving digits ii or iii versus iv and v. digit and phalangeal proportions correspond with those generally predicted for mammalian autopodia  <cit> : arboreal species have higher phalangeal indices and phalangeal slenderness ratios, while species with exclusively terrestrial locomotion have shorter phalanges and more sturdy phalangeal proportions. between-digit ratio differences also reveal considerable differentiation of digits with respect to each other  according to locomotion. although not morphometrically assessed, digit i also follows widely recognized patterns of functional adaptation  <cit> : it is strongly developed and opposable in the arboreal possums and koalas, and reduced or absent in the hopping or bounding kangaroos and bandicoots, which is consistent with patterns of marginal digit loss observed in cursorial, bounding and hopping mammals  <cit> .

the fact that syndactylous digit proportions differ significantly between locomotor groups supports the hypothesis that they evolve as a unit subject to selection pressures. this complements the results of dissection studies which show that the muscles operating the syndactylous digits are as well developed and functional as in non-syndactylous species . in this respect, length similarity of syndactylous phalangeal elements may hold an important implication for their mobility: because the digits are tightly appressed under a common skin sheath and bound by connective tissue  <cit> , their capacity to flex and extend depends on alignment of the joints along a plane that allows them to move together.

it is notable that proportions and morphology of all pedal digits in macropodoids  and peramelemorphs are highly similar . this includes an enlarged digit iv as the main axis of the foot, a slightly smaller digit v, very thin and gracile digits ii and iii, and reduced or absent digit i. this convergence is interesting because emphasis of central digits often coincides with evolutionary trends in placentals towards cursoriality or bounding locomotion  <cit> . tyndale-biscoe  <cit>  suggested that syndactyly arose as an adaptation to cursoriality or bounding in peramelemorpha and diprotodontia. this is unlikely if it is true that the ancestors of both clades were arboreal  <cit> . conversely, however, the functional loss of a digit in syndactylous feet may have favoured the evolution of the bounding or half-bounding habit in both clades.

syndactyly may not be a functional-adaptive trait
the few studies that have been concerned with the origins of syndactyly have invoked functional-adaptive scenarios for their appearance, either as grooming organs  <cit>  or as an adaptation to arboreality  <cit> . however, marsupial syndactyly does not resemble any autopodial adaptations ever evolved in mammalian autopodia. the characteristics of syndactyly are unique among terrestrial mammalian orders . the coinciding heterochrony and integration in syndactylous digits also cannot be explained by simple processes of locomotor adaptation, particularly because these patterns are conservative across the considerable diversity of locomotor types in diprotodontia. rather, syndactyly may represent a constraint that the foot is adapted to. under this scenario, digits iv and v, which are always well developed, compensate for the "unification" of the two syndactylous digits. an interesting further implication of viewing syndactyly as a constraint would be a new view of the perceived "reduction" of the syndactylous digits, which has been taken to be a hallmark of syndactyly  <cit> . if digits ii and iii were constrained to evolve as a single digit and functional unit, it would be expected that the most advantageous dimensions of this complex would be that of a single digit, which is indeed reflected in the dimensions of the syndactylous complex  <cit> . this would also explain why the much-noted "reduction" is not a general feature of marsupial syndactylous digits. for example, in most arboreal species the syndactylous digits are well developed . in fact, the syndactylous digit complex in wombats is longer, although not wider, than digits iv and v , which is congruent with their digging habit  <cit> . as such, there is evidence to suggest that the "reduction" of digits is not an intrinsic property of syndactyly, but may be it's consequence.

character distribution of syndactyly
the question as to whether marsupial syndactyly arose once or twice has been discussed extensively, mainly because convergent origins of this perceivedly complex character have been deemed unlikely  <cit> . a sister group relationship between peramelemorpha and diprotodontia, and as such a single origin for syndactyly in these two clades, can be ruled out based on the latest phylogenies. however, it has been suggested that syndactyly may be in fact homoplastic within a larger marsupial clade  <cit> . support for this notion comes from possible tracks of a syndactylous marsupial from the cretaceous of british colombia  <cit>  and, tentatively, from the late cretaceous of western colorado  <cit> . moreover, claims of "incipient syndactyly" in some south american didelphimorphia and the marsupial mole notoryctes typhlops have been considered evidence of an older origin of syndactyly. extensive connection of digits ii and iii by skin was only observed in the fully webbed feet of the semiaquatic yapok chironectes minimus and the mostly webbed feet of notoryctes typhlops, but digits ii and iii and their elements do not resemble each other and are not closely appressed  <cit> . the sporadic occurrence of digits ii and iii which are shorter than digit iv in some didelphimorphs is not unusual for mammals. it is neither as highly conserved as syndactyly in diprotodontia and peramelemorpha, nor does it resemble it to a great degree. it is possible that the shorter length of digits ii and iii in these species is due to their mostly arboreal or scansorial habit  <cit> , which commonly coincides with short medial digits  <cit> . the results of this study therefore suggest that syndactyly is convergent in diprotodontia and peramelemorpha, and is not plesiomorphic for marsupials.

scenarios for the origins of syndactyly
given the extensive similarities of peramelemorph and diprotodontian syndactyly, the convergent evolution of this trait in the two clades appears unlikely to have occurred at random. it is possible that convergence of syndactyly constitutes a case of parallelism which develops through similar or identical developmental pathways  <cit> . this would suggest that that there is a greater likelihood of syndactyly evolving in peramelemorphs and diprotodontians due to shared ancestral developmental patterns. occurrence of full syndactyly in early marsupials and/or metatherians, as has been suggested based on cretaceous tracks  <cit> , is also conceivable under this scenario.

how syndactyly could establish itself twice, and the nature of the developmental changes involved, are difficult to establish in the absence of a functional-adaptive scenario. however, the results of this study provide circumstantial evidence that allow the position of hypotheses for further testing. integration and isometry of digits ii and iii can be explained in two ways; firstly, as an adaptation to a bounding of digits by skin, and secondly, as the result of a change in ontogenetic patterns that "synchronized" the morphology of the syndactylous digits. under the first scenario, syndactyly would have established itself as a malformation, possibly during a time when the ancestral populations were undergoing a bottleneck event  <cit> ; the length isometry of the digits could have arisen because this allowed the digits to function as a unit . however, this includes the unparsimonious scenario of a malformation establishing itself in two unrelated marsupial populations, with subsequent highly similar morphological outcomes. also, if syndactyly were just a skin fusion of the digits, this would not explain the ossification heterochrony that coincides with syndactyly in diprotodontia and peramelemorpha.

the second scenario, positing an ontogenetic pattern change, may be more parsimonious and is favoured by some of the evidence from this study. if the morphometric integration of digit elements is intrinsic to syndactyly through an ontogenetic constraint, the establishment of syndactyly as a non-adaptive trait is less improbable because, as discussed above, it effectively retains the capacity of digit flexion and extension. as such, syndactyly would only represent the loss of a single digit, rather than the incapacitation of both digits as in soft-tissue syndactyly of the human hand  <cit> . digit loss is common in mammals, although marginal digits are usually affected  <cit> . with functional syndactylous digits, the net loss of a single digit may have had a mild impact, compared to a loss of flexing capacity, as is the case in syndactylous human hands. this may have aided the spread of marsupial syndactyly through the ancestral populations.

phenotypes resembling marsupial syndactyly in that the digits display identical morphologies have existed in some of the earliest tetrapods such as acanthostega; this similarity has been ascribed to identical patterns of morphogen expression in the digits  <cit> . identical digits have also been created through biochemical manipulation of developing autopodia of mice, chicks, and frogs  <cit> . these experiments largely involve alteration in the expression or concentration of morphogens . it is notable that many of these are intimately associated with retention of the inter-digital membrane as it occurs in syndactylous marsupials. as ossification heterochrony and integration of digits ii and iii hint at ontogenetic changes in these two digits, it should be tested whether the switch to syndactyly involves a naturally occuring change in one of these pathways. should this be the case, it would be predicted that the ancestral phenotype of syndactyly arose rapidly and was largely similar to that of the more plesiomorphic syndactylous marsupials today. this would provide an avenue for rapid origin of fully integrated, and as such fully functional, syndactylous digits. it would also explain the lack of intermediates of syndactylous feet in extant or extinct marsupials and the heterochrony observed in this study. a similar scenario has been argued by sears  <cit>  with respect to the origin of bat wings, explaining the conservative size relationship of digits across bat species, as well as the lack of fossil intermediates of bat wings, with a localized change in bmp expression patterns.

tarsal-metatarsal articulations are not impacted by syndactyly
the generalized pattern of tarsal-metatarsal articulations throughout marsupials is that digit i articulates with the ectocuneiform, digit ii with the mesocuneiform, digit iii with the ectocuneiform, and digits iv and v articulate with the cuboid bone. this pattern is highly conserved among marsupials and is already present in the oldest metatherian tarsus known to date, belonging to sinodelphys szalayi  <cit> . woodburne and case  <cit>  argued that differences of tarsal/metatarsal arrangement in diprotodontia and peramelemorpha suggest convergent evolution of syndactyly in these clades. however, the results of this study disagree with woodburne and case's  <cit>  reports in several points. their claim that the endocuneiform is lost in macropodoids cannot be confirmed , and no evidence was found to support a "lateral dislocation" of peramelemorph metatarsals with respect to tarsals. indeed, no difference in articulation patterns of peramelemorphs compared to other marsupials was noted, other than that pertaining to digit iv. given the conservatism of tarsal anatomy with respect to metatarsals ii and iii across all marsupials, it seems that syndactyly is a phenomenon exclusively confined to digit morphology and has no impact on tarsal morphology. the peramelemorph tarsal arrangement also appears in hoofed placentals, where it is considered to represent an adaptation to the emphasis on the central digits  <cit> . it is noteworthy that kangaroos, whose plesiomorphic locomotion patterns resemble those of peramelemorphs  <cit> , also show a tendency towards increased contact between metatarsal iv and the ectocuneiform. this suggests that the extensive contact between metatarsal iv and the ectocuneiform in peramelemorphs is related to a stabilizing re-arrangement, rather than a result of syndactyly.

marsupial and human syndactyly
marsupial syndactyly derives its name from a congenital malformation in humans, and has been treated as directly comparable  <cit> . human syndactyly is an overarching term for a diverse congenital condition which always involves incomplete digit separation during early development due to a lack of inter-digit membrane cell death, or through synostoses  <cit> . marsupial syndactyly only corresponds to a mild subtype of syndactyly termed "zygodactyly"  <cit> . however, in its worst form human syndactyly can involve synostoses of the majority of digit elements  <cit> . contrary to a popular notion in the field of marsupial systematics  <cit>  the genetic background of syndactyly is complicated and only known for a few of the over  <dig> types  <cit> . it is notable that even the mildest forms of syndactyly in the hand lead to incapacitation of grasping capability of the affected digits and require surgical treatment, although they are rarely separated in the foot  <cit> . human syndactyly is only partly heritable, and within families where syndactyly is passed on, it manifests variably in terms of severity, the limb affected, and number of digits involved  <cit> . the present results reveal that marsupial syndactyly is a highly specific phenotype that does not compare to human syndactyly more than superficially because marsupial syndactyly is entirely heritable and highly conservative in its manifestation. as such, the term "syndactyly" is slightly unfortunate for the unique condition found in marsupials, and has in the past lead to the uncritical assumption that the two conditions are directly comparable. it may be desirable to clearly distinguish between the two conditions by consistently referring to marsupial syndactyly as such, or introducing a new term  altogether.

CONCLUSIONS
the diverse methods employed in this study have provided novel insights on the phenomenon of marsupial syndactyly. the results demonstrate that the syndactylous digits of marsupials evolve as a unit which is subject to functional adaptation like the remaining digits of the foot. the strong integration between the two digits may be due to a change in early developmental patterning, as the ossification heterochrony between syndactylous compared to non-syndactylous species suggests. no evidence was found for incipient syndactyly in other marsupials, but the ossification similarity of pedal digits in diprotodontia and peramelemorpha suggest an underlying developmental parallelism. we argue that locomotor adaptation is not likely to be the cause for syndactyly; based on our results, we suggest a scenario in which syndactyly arose as a single change in digit ontogeny that amounted to the loss of a single digit, rather than incapacitation of both digits through skin webbing. we also show that syndactyly is restricted to peramelemorpha and diprotodontia, and has no influence on tarsal bone arrangement in either clade. together, the results change the relevance of marsupial syndactyly from being an enigmatic phylogenetic character within marsupials to a rare transformation of digit morphology whose molecular background has the potential to provide important insights into the patterns of digit evolution.

