BACKGROUND
interspecific hybridization as an evolutionary force has a mixed chronicle in the literature. despite important early work  <cit> , the image of hybridization in evolutionary literature has only recently changed from that of a predominantly destructive force to a more balanced view, giving due credit to hybridization as a potential catalyst of phenotypic evolution and indeed diversification. not only have cases of hybrid speciation been demonstrated conclusively both in plants and animals  <cit> , but hybridization is now implicated in the generation of whole adaptive radiations in plants  <cit> , animals  <cit>  and prokaryotes  <cit>  . besides the general surge of genetic variation ensuing from the admixture of divergent genomes  <cit> , and the acquisition of specific adaptive traits through lateral gene transfer  <cit>  and introgression  <cit> , another potential outcome of hybridization that may facilitate adaptive diversification into new directions is the occurrence of qualitatively or quantitatively novel phenotypes referred to as transgressive segregation. transgression describes the phenomenon that segregation variance in hybrid offspring can result in phenotypes with extreme trait values exceeding the range of parental trait values in either the positive or negative direction  <cit> . agricultural breeding programs have long benefited from transgressive phenotypes as a means to improve cultivars but studying the adaptive potential of transgression in evolutionary research is only a recent development. transgression can in principle affect any quantitative trait and has been demonstrated for morphological traits , physiological traits , life history traits , and behavioural traits . for instance, parnell et al.  <cit>  recently described a mechanism whereby hybridizing cichlid species with different morphologies but similar functions are likely to produce functionally transgressive progeny.

previous work on the genetic basis of transgression indicates that it is most often caused by the action of complementary genes between qtl loci that carry alleles of opposite signs in the parents but sum up to larger or smaller trait values compared to the parents when combined in a hybrid genome  <cit> . one interesting prediction emerging from this, especially put forward by rieseberg et al.  <cit> , is that the amount of transgression should increase as a function of the genetic distance between the parental lines. this is because the number of loci for which the parents have fixed alleles with opposite effects should increase with time since isolation during the divergence of species, which would thus result more frequently in complementary gene action.

besides genetic distance, transgression is predicted to also be affected by the phenotypic similarity of the parents  <cit> . transgression and phenotypic differentiation have been suggested to be inversely correlated such that phenotypically similar species produce more transgressive hybrid offspring than phenotypically dissimilar parents  <cit> . this is because large phenotypic differences between two species may often result from divergent directional selection, a process expected to eventually lead to the fixation of alleles with the same sign across all qtl within a species, and mostly opposite signs between the species. this would produce f <dig> offspring heterozygous at most of these loci. although some f <dig> progeny may then have qtl combinations that could exhibit complementary gene action, this will unlikely produce transgressive trait values. in other words, during evolution under divergent selection, opportunity for transgression decreases due to a loss of the required kind of genetic variation. conversely, if the parents show rather similar phenotypes, despite considerable genetic distance, this indicates the action of stabilizing selection. the genetic basis for transgression is then more likely given because stabilizing selection leads to alternating fixation of alleles with negative and positive trait values, and the sequence of fixation of alleles with either sign at different qtls will by chance be different between isolated populations. in agreement with this prediction, a study on transgression in hybrids between two cichlid fish species revealed novel phenotypes only in traits with a selection history other than consistent directional selection  <cit> . to the extent that phenotypic and genetic divergence between species are correlated, the effects of phenotypic differentiation can potentially confound or cancel out the predicted relationship between genetic distance and transgression  <cit> .

despite the knowledge of the genetic basis of transgression, tests on the effects of genetic and phenotypic distance on transgressive segregation remain inconclusive  <cit> , mostly because the few existing studies covered only small or unknown ranges of genetic distance and were not designed to test the two predictions introduced above. only recently, a comparative study  <cit>  using data on plant and animal hybrids found evidence that distantly related species more often produce hybrids with extreme trait values than closely related species.

here, we produced seven interspecific crosses using african haplochromine cichlid fish covering a wide range of pairwise genetic distances and phenotypic distances. we set out to test 1) if transgression occurred in f <dig> and f <dig> hybrids, 2) if the amount of transgression was predictable from genetic distance between the parental species, and 3) if transgression was predictable from the phenotypic differentiation between the parental species. we raised f <dig> hybrids, f <dig> hybrids, and the corresponding homospecific control crosses until sexual maturity under controlled laboratory conditions. the amount of transgressive segregation per cross type was quantified using landmark-based geometric morphometric methods and a thin-plate spline procedure. genetic distances between parental species were estimated using mitochondrial d-loop sequences from genbank and three different molecular clocks were applied to convert distances into absolute divergence time. multi-trait phenotypic distances between the parental species were estimated using mahalanobis distances calculated from geometric morphometric data.

RESULTS
transgressive segregation in hybrids
thirty f <dig> hybrid families from seven different cross types and three families of each of the nine homospecific crosses were obtained . transgressive phenotypes were found in all hybrid cross types  albeit not in every family . on average, f <dig> hybrids exceeded the phenotypic range of the parental species by 14% ± 13% . this average was calculated across all cross types and across all axes of shape variation, weighted by the percent variance each axis explained.

the number of photographed and measured individuals per family is shown in brackets. sex-reversed crosses of the same cross type are indicated by 'a' and 'b'.

time
internal clock
the total amount of transgression  occurring on the major axes of phenotypic shape variation is shown separately for f <dig> and f <dig> hybrids. also reported is the proportion of transgressive families obtained per cross type .

1note that these distance estimates are likely overestimates of genetic distance between species. distances are based on sequence differences between mitochondrial d-loop haplotypes, but these species have highly incomplete haplotype lineage sorting. hence any distance obtained from a small sample of sequences is likely to overestimate species distance

forty-one f <dig> hybrid families from six different cross types were obtained . transgression was observed in all cross types  albeit not in every family . f <dig> hybrids exceeded the phenotypic range of the parental species on average by 21% ± 12%. the amount of transgression and variance explained by each pc axis for both f <dig> and f <dig> hybrids is shown in detail in additional file  <dig> 

in all f <dig> and f <dig> hybrid cross types, there were significant differences between families in the distribution of phenotypes in morphospace. manovas with family as factor and all relevant pcs as response variables suggested that within each cross type, at least one hybrid family was significantly different from another family along at least one axis of shape variation . however, transgression analysis revealed that on average 75% of all f <dig> families  and 84% of all f <dig> families  contained transgressive phenotypes demonstrating that transgressive segregation was not caused by single-family effects .

transgressive segregation as a function of genetic distance
uncorrected pairwise p-distances between species pairs, calculated from d-loop sequences, ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig> . depending on the molecular clock used, this translates into a range of absolute time since speciation from several thousand years to  <dig> / <dig> / <dig>  million years .

in f <dig> hybrids, testing genetic distance as a predictor for the total amount of transgression  resulted in a u-shaped relationship although this was not significant  =  <dig> , f <dig>  =  <dig> , p =  <dig> ; figure 2a). large amounts of transgression were observed in hybrids between both closely and distantly related crosses  with a near absence of transgression  in crosses of intermediate genetic distance.

in f <dig> hybrids, transgression significantly increased with genetic distance  with a minimum of 6% transgression in closely related crosses and a maximum of 39% transgression in distant crosses.

transgressive segregation as a function of phenotypic differentiation
according to our prediction, transgression should decrease as a function of phenotypic dissimilarity between the parental species. testing phenotypic distance  as a predictor for the amount of transgression  did not result in a significant relationship in f <dig> hybrids  nor in f <dig> hybrids .

we further tested if phenotypic and genetic divergence between the parental species were correlated. although we found a positive trend, the relationship was not significant  due to one outlying data point .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
studies on interspecific animal and plant hybrids have demonstrated that hybridization frequently gives rise to phenotypic novelty. one source of such novelty that may facilitate adaptive evolution is transgressive segregation which refers to the occurrence of hybrid phenotypes that express trait values exceeding the phenotypic range of both parental species combined  <cit> . evidence supporting the notion that transgressive ecomorphological and ecophysiological trait values can generate functional novelty that permits colonizing previously underutilized peaks on a fitness landscape comes from detailed work on helianthus sunflowers. this work conclusively demonstrated how transgression in key ecological traits can allow hybrids to invade an ecologically and spatially distinct niche and in turn escape the homogenizing effects of gene flow from parental species  <cit> .

here, we used african haplochromine cichlid fish from two large adaptive radiations  and two riverine species that are related to the radiations  to test if the amount of transgression in interspecific hybrids increased as a function of genetic distance between species. we made seven different cross types from different species combinations representing five different genetic distances, covering absolute divergence times of between a few thousand years to  <dig> / <dig> / <dig>  million years depending on the molecular clock used . one of these crosses  was between two riverine species of the genus that was ancestral to the two large african radiations. using geometric morphometrics on the multi-trait phenotypes we quantified and compared shape variation in f <dig> and f <dig> generation hybrids and in the two corresponding homospecific control crosses.

we predicted to observe an increase of transgression with increasing genetic crossing distance in both f <dig> and f <dig> hybrids. in f <dig> hybrids, the increase may be predicted to be less steep than in f <dig> hybrids because  only dominant genetic effects can contribute to complementary gene action, while in f <dig> hybrids, additive genetic effects also contribute. we found that transgressive segregation was frequent and that extreme trait values were produced in each f <dig> and f <dig> cross type. the amount of transgression observed in f <dig> hybrids increased linearly with time since speciation  confirming our prediction. however, in the f <dig> hybrids, large amounts of transgression were expressed in hybrids between both closely and distantly related species but transgression was nearly absent in hybrids of parents with intermediate genetic distances, resulting in a u-shaped relationship between transgression and divergence time .

while the increase of transgression in f <dig> hybrids of distant crosses can be explained by a higher frequency of epistatic interactions and dominant genetic effects, the large amount of transgression observed in f <dig> hybrids of closely related species was unexpected. models of complementary gene action in transgressive segregation usually assume that parental species are fixed for qtl alleles. it is possible that the closely related species in our experiment produced transgressive f <dig> progeny because the parents were heterozygous at some qtl. this is possible because all our closely related species had sympatric distribution ranges within lake victoria where interspecific hybridization may occasionally occur  <cit> . alternatively, overall increased hybrid vigour, accompanying increased average heterozygosity in the f <dig> hybrid generation, may have led to larger and hence transgressive trait values in more vigorous individuals of crosses between closely related species. generally, the relationship between offspring vigour and the genetic distance between their parents is predicted to be dome-shaped  confirmed by both experimental  <cit>  and theoretical work  <cit> . this is thought to be due to the effects of inbreeding depression at small distances and the effects of genetic incompatibilities, the break-up of co-adapted gene complexes, epistatic interactions and underdominance  at larger distances. hence, the fitness peak will typically reside in the region representing intraspecific between-population matings. if, however, speciation was recent - as in the case of rapidly radiating species flocks - the intrinsically determined fitness peak  may well be shifted to overlap with the interspecific region. on this note, it would be useful to determine the genetic distance where the increasing effects of genetic incompatibilities and the decreasing heterosis effects typically cancel out, to assess if this may have caused the depression in the amount of transgression at intermediate genetic distances in f <dig> hybrids observed in our experiment.

we further found that the degree of phenotypic differentiation of the parental species in our experiment was not predicted by genetic distance. this is in agreement with a recent comparative genomic analysis of lake malawi cichlids showing that cichlid species can be phenotypically and behaviorally diverse while showing levels of genome-wide differentiation not larger than typically observed between subdivided populations of the same species  <cit> . because phenotypic distance, in contrast to genetic distance, is predicted to have a negative effect on the occurrence of transgression, the effects of both variables can theoretically cancel out. we thus tested if transgression was also a function of the increasing phenotypic dissimilarity between species. contrary to our prediction, the amount of transgression in both f <dig> and f <dig> hybrids was independent of phenotypic differentiation . it is hence unlikely that the counteracting effects of phenotypic divergence in our experiment compromised the effect of genetic distance.

except for the three species crosses representing the lowest end of the genetic distance gradient in our experiment, most of the species we used are allopatric in the wild . they presumably acquired divergent phenotypes as a result different selection regimes in different environments, with perhaps contributions of drift, rather than due to consistent and strong disruptive selection on the same traits, which would have purged many of the antagonistic allelic effects within qtls. it is hence likely that alleles of opposing signs were preserved during the divergence of even the phenotypically most divergent species in our experiment, resulting in frequent opportunity for complementary gene action in their hybrids. the latter may explain why the amount of transgression is not a function of phenotypic divergence in our data set. our experimental design is not suitable to test the effect of a gradually increasing disruptive selection coefficient on the amount of transgression but this relationship is certainly worthwhile to be investigated in future experiments.

all factors considered it seems plausible that the observed increase in transgression with genetic distance in f <dig> hybrids is mainly the result of an increasing opportunity for complementary gene action and epistasis in hybrids between genetically more distant lineages. this is probably due to an increasing number of qtls for which the diverging species fix alleles with opposite signs, providing more frequent opportunity for transgression in interspecific hybrids .

implications of the observed positive relationship between genetic distance and transgression are particularly interesting where hybridization between distantly related lineages has taken place at the onset of rapid adaptive radiations. traces of ancient hybridization in phylogenetic reconstructions of several plants and animal radiations suggest that genetic exchange between at least two distantly related lineages occurred at the onset of radiations, and may have acted as a catalyst for the rapid phenotypic diversification of these groups  <cit> . the largest genetic distance between species in our experiment represents similar divergence times  to those estimated for the hypothesized, anciently hybridized ancestors of two major cichlid radiations . in fact, the astatotilapia calliptera × a. burtoni cross could be considered a simulation of what effect hybridization between the ancestors of these radiations would have had on phenotypic variation. these two species are phenotypically and ecologically very similar to the putative ancestors of the lake victoria region adaptive radiation  <cit> .

it is worth mentioning that many of the hybrids we obtained phenotypically resemble other species known from the cichlid radiations, an observation made before on other cichlid hybrid phenotypes generated in the laboratory  <cit> . for example, hybrids between p. chilotes and p. nyererei resembled the lake victoria species haplochromis sp. "thickskin" in overall body and head morphology, whereas hybrids between a. calliptera and p. nyererei resembled another lake victoria species  in coloration and body shape. these observations make it indeed plausible that hybridization between divergent genomes has contributed to the unusually rapid rates of phenotypic evolution in haplochromine cichlids. transgressive segregation potentially increases the working surface for selection well beyond that provided by standing genetic variation within just two generations. it can thus provide rapid momentum to the adaptive diversification of a group under multifarious selection by cutting the waiting time to new mutations. some hybrid species have indeed been shown to establish in new ecological niches in very few generations  <cit> . if transgressive segregation was an important contributor to the volume and extent of phenotypic diversification during adaptive radiations  <cit> , variation in the genetic architecture between lineages  might cause variation in the rates of adaptive radiation observed between lineages. this hypothesis is speculative at this moment and awaits rigorous testing.

