BACKGROUND
many forms of infection or tissue injury lead to activation of the complement system resulting in the cleavage of complement components c <dig> and c <dig> and generation of the anaphylatoxins c3a and c5a  <cit> . anaphylatoxins are responsible for recruiting and activating leukocytes, particularly phagocytic cells such as granulocytes and monocytes/macrophages and are involved in inflammatory, autoimmune and allergic diseases  <cit> . anaphylatoxins perform their functions by engaging specific receptors which are closely related members of the rhodopsin family of seven transmembrane-spanning g protein-linked receptors.

mc have long been described as effectors of ige-dependent immuneresponses that mediate immediate hypersensitivity reactions associated with allergic phenomena and host resistance to helminthic parasites, and are now also implicated in different autoimmune and inflammatory disease models  <cit> .

the signals controlling mc recruitment and migration within tissues are poorly understood, but anaphylatoxins are particularly attractive candidates as mc chemoattractants during inflammation. in humans, for example, skin-derived mc have been shown to be sensitive to c5a and c3a whereas mc from the lung were not  <cit> . studies with the immature human mast cell line hmc- <dig> even suggested c3a to be one of the most effective mast cell chemoattractants  <cit> . furthermore, anaphylatoxin receptor expression may depend on variations in the local microenvironment since synovial mc expressed c5ar exclusively in inflamed tissue of rheumatoid arthritis patients  <cit> .

the understanding of the pathophysiological and biochemical basis of the differential expression of anaphylatoxin receptors on mc subtypes is hampered by our scarce, sometimes controversial knowledge on the expression of anaphylatoxin receptors in rodent mc. whereas c5a was able to degranulate skin-derived murine mc, peritoneal mc were found to be unresponsive  <cit> . on the other hand, c5ar on peritoneal mc was observed to be instrumental in a mouse model of zymosan-mediated peritonitis  <cit>  whereas rat peritoneal mc degranulated in response to c3a and c3a by a receptor-independent mechanism  <cit> . clearly, studies of the interactions between mc and anaphylatoxins are still in their infancy despite their well-appreciated roles in allergy, infection and autoimmunity.

the purpose of the present study was  to investigate the impact of different modes of mc activation on the expression and function of anaphylatoxin receptors,  to compare precursor cell-derived mc generated in vitro with primary mc purified from the peritoneal cavity, and  to uncover differences in the expression profiles of c5ar and c3ar.

RESULTS
anaphylatoxin receptors on in vitro generated mc
murine precursor cell-derived mc cultured in the presence of il- <dig> and scf were investigated for anaphylatoxin receptor expression using specific mab against c5ar and c3ar, respectively. anaphylatoxin receptor levels were found to be below the theshold of flow cytometric detection on resting mc. however, mc stimulation for  <dig> h with the calcium ionophore ionomycin, the protein kinase c activator pma or ag  resulted in a distinct increase in surface c5ar levels but only a weak c3ar upregulation . a time course study revealed that stimulation of mc for  <dig> h with ionomycin, pma, or ag was not sufficient to elevate anaphylatoxin receptor levels whereas  <dig> h of incubation resulted in a prominent expression of c5ar .

c5a-induced mc functions
in a next step, we looked for functional consequences of c5ar upregulation. c5a was unable to induce calcium fluxes in resting mc but, following stimulation with ag  for  <dig> h  or  <dig> h , a distinct rise in intracellular calcium was observed. in line with this finding, stimulation with ionomycin  or ag   augmented mc chemotaxis toward c5a in vitro.

studying mc chemotaxis in an in vivo migration model, the distinction between c5a-induced mobilization of resting and activated mc was even more pronounced. pkh26-labeled mc were recruited into the peritoneal cavity by c5a injections exclusively after stimulation with ionomycin for at least  <dig> h  or with ag  for not less than  <dig> h .

preincubation of activated mc with c5a abolished the subsequent chemotactic response to c5a in vivo, most likely as a result of receptor desensitization . furthermore, anti-murine c5ar mab  <dig> abrogated in vivo migration of ionomycin-stimuled mc toward c5a  whereas anti-murine c3ar mab 1g <dig> did not. these experiments confirm the receptor-specific nature of c5a-induced mc mobilization in vivo.

in parallel to the rise in c5ar expression on the cell surface , pma-stimulated mc were also mobilized by c5a in vivo .

c3a-induced mc functions
after establishing the correlation between mc activation and upregulation of a functional c5ar, c3ar expression and function were also studied. in analogy to c5a, mc activation by ag  or ionomycin increased chemotaxis toward c3a in vitro . however, c3a proved to be less efficient  than c5a  and less potent  . the specificity of c3a-induced chemotaxis was demonstrated by preincubating mc with c3a which abrogated migration most likely as a consequence of c3ar desensitization. the low efficiency and potency of c3a as a mc chemotaxin was confirmed by our finding that c3a failed to mobilize activated mc in vivo  but, on the other hand, recruited human and murine macrophages . furthermore, c3a wa unable to induce intracellular calcium fluxes in activated mc, in contrast to c5a . proving the functional integrity of the c3a preparation used herein, c3a was found to be a potent inducer of chemotaxis and calcium release in j774a. <dig> macrophages .

scf-independent c5ar upregulation
to exclude an impact of scf treatment on c5ar expression, we generated mc in vitro by culturing bone marrow-derived precursor cells in the sole presence of il- <dig>  fig. 5a demonstrates that mc cultured in the absence of scf were also subject to upregulation of surface c5ar by stimulation with ionomycin, pma, or ag. c5ar on il-3-treated mc was functional since they vigorously migrated in vivo in response to c5a .

anaphylatoxin receptors on peritoneal mc
after establishing the correlation between c5ar expression and cellular activation in precursor cell-derived mc, we also investigated primary mc obtained from the peritoneal cavity. similar to in vitro generated mc, activation of peritoneal mc for  <dig> h with ionomycin  or ag   failed to induce c5ar surface expression. after  <dig> or  <dig> h of stimulation, however, c5ar expression was extensive whereas c3ar remained undetectable . c5ar and c3ar were also found to be prominently expressed on resting peritoneal macrophages  whereas no other cell type constitutively present in the peritoneal cavity expressed detectable amounts of anaphylatoxin receptors .

discussion
mc development is a complex process resulting in phenotypically distinct populations at different anatomical sites. in rodents, two mc subsets are discriminated on the basis of different staining characteristics called connective tissue-type mc  which are present in the skin and peritoneal cavity, and mucosal mc found in the intestinal or airway mucosa  <cit> . in humans, two potentially analogous mc populations have been defined on the basis of the protease content of their granules with mct containing tryptase and mctc tryptase plus chymase  <cit> .

murine ctmc from the skin appear to constitutively express c5ar as they were found to degranulate in response to c5a  <cit> . likewise, expression of a functional c5ar has been detected on human skin-derived mctc as opposed to mct from lung, kidney and intestine  <cit> . c5ar was also observed to distinguish the mctc from the mct type of human lung mc  <cit> . these findings suggest that c5ar is constitutively expressed in murine ctmc as well as in human mctc. however, mc phenotypes are also subject to change in the context of inflammation and infection  <cit> . for example, synovial mctc expressed c5ar exclusively in inflamed tissues of rheumatoid arthritis patients  <cit>  raising the possibility that c5ar expression could also depend on variations in the local microenvironment.

in the present study, precursor cell-derived murine mc were found to migrate towards c5a in vitro, confirming previous data  <cit> . on the other hand, surface c5ar on cultured, resting mc was below the theshold of flow cytometric detection which may explain why c5a failed to induce intracellular calcium fluxes and migration in vivo. however, activated mc were distinguished by a prominent c5ar expression and vigorous functional responsiveness to c5a in vitro as well as in vivo which required approximately  <dig> h of stimulation by ag , ionomycin, or pma. as the signaling cascade downstream of the high affinity receptor for ige, fcεri, also results in pkc activation and intracellular calcium fluxes  <cit> , it remains to be shown if other physiologic mc activators may stimulate c5ar upregulation as well.

scf which leads to the activation of muliple signaling pathways after binding to its receptor induces il-3-dependent mc to mature and acquire characteristics of ctmc  <cit> . our study demonstrates, however, that the capacity of precursor cell-derived mc to upregulate a functional c5ar was independent of scf-induced mc differentiation. this finding could indicate that the activation-induced neoexpression of surface c5ar on mc may not be restricted to ctmc. further detailed studies are needed to resolve this issue.

having established the correlation between mc activation and c5ar expression in precursor cell-derived mc, we also studied primary murine mc obtained from the peritoneal cavity which have characteristics of ctmc. originally, peritoneal mc were described to be unresponsive to c5a  <cit> . recently, however, a study utilizing genetically deficient mice suggested c5ar on peritoneal mc to be instrumental in a model of zymosan-induced peritonitis  <cit> . the evidence presented herein clearly indicates that resting peritoneal mc lack surface c5ar which is in accordance with the original finding of lim et al. . however, following stimulation with ag  or ionomycin, we found peritoneal mc to acquire an inflammatory phenotype distinguished by a prominent c5ar expression. thus, one may hypothesize that peritoneal mc gain responsiveness to c5a by c5ar upregulation as a consequence of zymosan-induced inflammation which is additionally characterized by the accumulation of c5a due to the vigorous activation of the complement cascade.

c3a was found to be a potent chemotaxin for hmc- <dig> mast cells  <cit> . however, this tumor cell line may not be fully representative for primary human mc since tumor transformation may substantially alter normal cell functions. investigating skin-derived human mc, hartmann et al.  <cit>  found that c3a chemoattracted only one out of two mc preparations whereas c5a was effective in both. likewise, el-lati et al.  <cit>  reported c3a to be a weak inducer of histamin release as compared to c5a. notably, rat peritoneal mc responded to c3a in a receptor-independent manner  <cit> . in agreement with these observations, we found murine peritoneal mc to lack surface c3ar, the expression of which, in contrast to c5ar, was not inducible by mc activation. furthermore, the activation-induced upregulation of c3ar in precursor cell-derived mc was low as compared to c5ar and c3a, in contrast to c5a, was unable to stimulate calcium fluxes in activated mc or mobilize these cells in vivo.

thus, our findings argue against a significant role for c3ar in mc-mediated pathogenesis. in accordance with this hypothesis, immune complex-induced skin injury and peritonitis were found to be dependent on mc and c5ar, but not c3ar or c <dig>  <cit> . it is important to note, however, that the results and conclusions of the present study exclusively refer to the mouse.

CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrates for the first time that ag-dependent as well as -independent activation induces an inflammatory mc phenotype which is distinguished by neoexpression of a functional c5ar as a novel effector mechanism in mc-mediated pathogenesis.

