BACKGROUND
large differences in the forces of evolution - mutation, recombination, selection, gene flow, and genetic drift - are known to occur between males and females . therefore, understanding the relative importance of evolutionary forces that shape patterns of sex-specific genomic dimorphism is essential to our understanding of the genetic basis of sexual dimorphism and sex-specific gene expression . recently, growing efforts have been invested on elucidating the fine scale genetic architecture of sexual dimorphism in complex phenotypes . however, little is known about the genetic architecture underlying sex-biased evolutionary processes at the genomic level , especially in the wild.

in most birds sexual differences in behaviour with respect to mating and dispersal practices are a rule rather than exception . likewise, sex-specific selection for example in the form of competitive exclusion of individuals of one sex during recruitment or establishment phases is a commonplace occurrence in birds , as is also sexual dimorphism in size  and plumage traits  <cit> . as a consequence, also sexual dimorphism in genomic architecture - including the extent of linkage disequilibrium  - is expected to occur both for selective and demographic reasons. while detailed understanding of the extent and patterns of ld in the two sexes is interesting in itself, this knowledge will also facilitate the choice of appropriate methodology for sex-specific qtl mapping in the wild. in addition, inbreeding avoidance, sexual conflict, and sex-biased investment at the population level can cause non-random mating resulting in differences in genotypic distribution between the sexes . to this end, a multilocus approach as used e.g. in drosophila, maize and humans  is a powerful way to disentangle the effects of sex-related evolutionary forces on genomic variation.

the siberian jay  is a passerine bird which has been subject to considerable ecological and evolutionary research during the past decades. it exhibits sexual dimorphism in morphological measurements  <cit> , nepotistic behaviour  <cit> , genetic structuring  <cit> , lifetime reproductive success and dispersal patterns . moreover, sex-specific genome-wide heterogeneity in recombination rates and linkage patterns for both autosomes and the z-chromosome have been recently detected  <cit> .

here, we adopted a genome-wide multilocus approach to examine the sex-specific genomic differences in siberian jays taking advantage of a total of  <dig> microsatellite markers genotyped in  <dig> males and  <dig> females. in particular, we analysed and compared z chromosomal and autosomal microsatellites to identify possible sex-specific processes that may have shaped genomic patterns of variability. we also investigated the possible sexual dimorphism in magnitude and extent of ld. in particular, using sex-specific linkage maps, we investigated the decay of ld with genetic distance in the sexes. the main objectives were to: 1) determine the pattern of variability and genetic differentiation between sexes in both autosomal and z-chromosomal loci; 2) investigate the potential signatures of natural selection related to sex on autosomal and z-chromosomal markers; and 3) investigate the differences in extent and pattern of ld between the sexes.

RESULTS
genetic diversity, differentiation and relatedness
locus specific heterozygosities and degree of genetic differentiation are shown in figure  <dig> and table  <dig>  a significantly lower average observed heterozygosity was found in males  than in females . the mean unbiased estimated heterozygosity for autosomal markers  was significantly  higher than that for z-chromosomal markers . fst values for individual loci among sexes varied from - <dig>   at sj <dig> on z-chromosome to  <dig>   at sj <dig> on autosome. overall genetic differentiation across all the loci was fst =  <dig>   between males and females, with fst =  <dig>   for autsosomal markers and fst = - <dig>   for z-chromosomal markers. across all the loci, the mean fis was  <dig>   over all the samples and deviated significantly  from zero, while being  <dig>   for males and - <dig>   for females. the average pairwise relatedness was  <dig>   for males,  <dig>   for females and  <dig>   for males and females combined .

* p <  <dig> 

evidence for selection between males and females
the fdist <dig> analyses identified eight loci as outliers showing footprints of natural selection between males and females at the  <dig> % significance level . of the eight significant loci, four were autosomal  with higher than expected fstvalues indicating directional selection, while four z-chromosomal loci  appearing in the lower tail of the fst distribution showed signatures typical of balancing selection .

a a, autosome; z, z-chromosome; lg, linkage group

* significant value of 5% level for the bayesfst method and  <dig> % level for the fdist <dig> method, and locus labels marked with asterisks if both methods indicate a significant result

bayesian fst-test based on a hierarchical regression model indicated three autosomal loci  as directionally selected and four z-chromosomal loci  to be under balancing selection . thus, seven of the loci  were picked up by both methods giving support to their status as outliers due to selection. in addition, locus sj <dig> can be seen as candidate affected by directional selection, but only one of the two tests supported this statistically.

out of the  <dig> microsatellite analysed, the four z-chromosomal loci  under balancing selection showed the lowest distribution of fst values in both tests being as negative outliers in the bayesfst results; whereas the other four autosomal loci under directing selection detected by one or both of the tests show the highest differentiation values in both analyses .

patterns of ld
* value in parenthesis are standard errors for d'.

we also compared the level of pairwise ld measured for z-linked markers as a function of genetic distance in males and females. the estimates of d'-values are significantly  lower in females  than in males . in both sexes, the d' decayed as a function of genetic distance. however, at the genetic distances ≤  <dig>  cm  a more rapid decay of d' was detected in females than in males . when logarithmic trend lines were fitted to the data of females and males, the coefficients of determination  were  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. we also detected significant  ld with d' >  <dig>  at all locus pairs among three adjacent loci , i.e. ld block, in both males and females .

gametic ld was also determined for the  <dig> nonsyntenic marker pairs in both females and males separately. for the nonsyntenic marker pairs d' varies between  <dig>  -  <dig>  in males and  <dig>  -  <dig>  in females . the mean d'-values were  <dig>   in males and  <dig>   in females , significantly lower than that for the syntenic marker pairs .

discussion
levels and patterns of genetic diversity, sexual differentiation and relatedness
both sexes of siberian jays exhibited substantial levels of genetic variation. more interestingly, males were significantly less heterozygous than females. this genome-wide pattern appears compatible with the female-biased dispersal in this species . also differential natural selection on the two sexes could contribute to this observation. for instance, more intensive within-sex competition could reduce genetic variability in males more than in females . our findings of lower levels of diversity in males and on the z-chromosome relative to the autosomes are concordant with results of previous studies based on nucleotide sequences or microsatellite variation in a wide range of species including the collared flycatcher  <cit> , chicken  <cit> , human  <cit> , house mice  <cit>  and drosophila  <cit> . indeed, many evolutionary models, such as recent population bottleneck and recurrent selective sweeps are expected to reduce the levels of z-linked  genetic diversity relative to autosomal variability .

we found evidence for a significant sex-specific pattern of population genetic structure at autosomal microsatellites. the observed genetic differentiation between males and females was unexpected given that males and females are from the same cohorts and share genealogies within the pedigrees: their autosomal markers are mixed at each generation. therefore, long-term evolutionary forces such as genetic drift or mutation could not generate autosomal genetic difference between sexes  <cit> . moreover, selective effects were rarely  detected in the autosomal microsatellites. thus, the short-term  effect of migration, for example the differential patterns of dispersal between sexes, appear to provide the most likely explanation. complete data on life-time reproductive success and dispersal history for a large number of males and females collected for over  <dig> years have revealed that natal dispersal distance was related to sex and dispersal-timing: females and early dispersers travelled on average farther than males and delayed dispersers . our genetic data also corroborate these findings, with a tendency for negative fis and lower genetic relatedness among females. the significant positive fis observed in males is consistent with this argument as well. alternative explanations for the sex-specific genetic differentiation would be differential viability, lifespan or hatching rate between sexes, which can lead to the allele frequency difference between females and males detected by fst . unfortunately, given the available data in the siberian jays, ascertaining the assumptions and quantifying the relevant parameters underlying these non-mutually exclusive hypotheses is difficult.

evidence for selective sweeps on the z-chromosome
we identified evidence for selection on the z-chromosomal  and autosomal  markers with two different methods. in general, the relative frequency of outliers was higher in the z-chromosome  than in the autosomes . several studies of avian genomes have indeed revealed differences between the z-chromosome and the autosomes in the rates of gene divergence , patterns of gene expression  and rates of gene movement between chromosomes , which may explain the different patterns of selection observed here. this observation is also compatible with theoretical expectation  and genomic evidence  for differential selection on autosomal and z-chromosomal  loci: the z-chromosome is predicted to experience selective sweeps more often than autosomal chromosomes . given the high levels and extent of ld observed in the population in general  <cit> , the observed pattern of a few positive autosomal outliers out of more than  <dig> autosomal loci seems more consistent with locus-specific effects due to local adaptation, rather than selective sweeps. it is also possible that false positives  resulting from some statistical stochasticity or bias are responsible for the observed autosomal outliers . however, the greater proportion of z-chromosomal negative outliers may be affected by chromosome-specific effects due to sex-related evolutionary forces, which would have affected the genome in a more extensive manner. of the loci detected to be subject to selection, three have been mapped to the chicken chromosomes . therefore, the loci provide good candidates for further investigations aiming to identify genes under sex-specific selection.

there are a number of sex-biased evolutionary forces  acting within wild birds that are known to have differential effects on loci with different modes of inheritance . in birds, females are the heterogametic sex  whereas males are homogametic . because deleterious mutations will be exposed to selection on the z-chromosome when being hemizygous in females, selection, in particular selective sweeps, may therefore favour reduced variation on the z-chromosome leading to a balanced polymorphism  <cit> . in the chicken, several lines of evidence suggest that selective sweeps could be a potent force in shaping z-chromosome variability . another potential explanation for the balancing selection between sexes on the z-chromosomal loci is a form of frequency-dependence selection. the selection on the sex ratio maintains males and females in the siberian jay population with a z/w sex chromosome system, which behaves like a single gene, as large parts of the chromosomes, including the regions containing the sex-determining region, do not undergo genetic crossing-over  <cit> . since long-term balancing selection is unusual even in the classic case of drosophila polymorphism  <cit>  and the evolutionary forces are believed to be short-term here, the balancing selection on z-chromosomal loci detected in this study should represent recent events. balancing selection may thus often occur, although the difficulties exist in detecting the 'real' signature due to artefacts in the statistical methods , and could be the basis for much quantitative variability, including variation in fitness  <cit> .

deviations from neutrality at the four z-chromosomal loci with both the neutrality tests might have been influenced by genetic hitchhiking due to selection acting at distinct but closely linked loci. significant evidence has been found for the balancing selection on major histocompatibility complex  genes in vertebrates including birds . however, the linkage of these candidate loci to any functional loci is currently unknown. therefore, although signatures of selection can be identified with the aid of microsatellites, microsatellites in general do not lend themselves well to studying the effects of natural selection. there are now many more tests for selection for coding and noncoding dna sequences which need to be first identified . thus, analyses of dna sequences have the promise to advance understanding of the different forms of balancing selection  <cit> .

mapping locations of the four z-chromosomal loci  indicated to be under balancing selection are situated in the middle of the chromosome, rather than the telomeric regions  <cit> . this aligns with earlier findings: selection is typically detected to act on markers in the center of z-chromosomes in birds, as opposed to the telomeric regions . this could be due to the generally higher recombination  rate between loci in the centromeric than in telomeric regions along the z-chromosome . alternatively, it could be also due to the fact that the pseudoautosomal region , which is hypothesized to share the properties of autosomes, is situated at one tip of the z-chromosome in spite of its varying sizes among species. thus, the two candidate loci  in the par were expected to be more similar in diversity and dynamics to autosomal loci than to z-specific loci. we speculate that the selection pattern of candidate loci in the par detected here may be influenced by linkage to z-specific loci , or for some reason experiences selection intrinsic to genes surrounding them in the region. similar evidence of a departure from a standard neutral model in par loci was also detected on the z-chromosome of the emu dromainus novaehollandiae  <cit> .

sex-specific patterns of ld and prospects for ld mapping within sex
considerable amounts of ld between loci were detected within each sex. although many forces can lead to the high levels and extent of ld, this finding as well as the long-distance ld can be potentially affected by the pedigree samples where many are full-sibs or half-sibs even within the same sex. however, since high levels of ld were still observed in the founders of the pedigree samples  <cit> , indicating the inference is likely to apply to the whole population too. a small effective population size and closely related individuals may lie behind the high ld observed in this study, which, nevertheless, do not necessarily affect much on the comparison of ld between the sexes. we observed significantly lower ld in females than males in terms of mean d' values for all the synetnic marker pairs and for marker pairs separated <  <dig> cm. female-biased dispersal, which may have resulted in the lower average pairwise relatedness and the lower inbreeding rate in females , can provide an explanation for this. moreover, the significantly higher genetic structuring of male population can also explain the higher ld in males.

we observed a higher level of ld for markers on the z-chromosome than autosomes in both males and females, indicating highly variable pattern and extent of ld across the genome. similar finding of higher ld for markers on the x-chromosome has been typically found in the x-y sex determination system e.g. in humans  and cattle . in addition to distinct selective or mutational forces, the higher level of ld on the z-chromosome is primarily thought to result from higher genetic drift because of its smaller effective size  as compared to autosomes. the fact that the increased levels of ld were also observed for markers located >  <dig> cm apart suggests that the factors are still operating or have been operating until recently . since recombination occurring between two sites will usually reduce the ld between them, the recombination rate is likely to be negatively correlated with the ld between the pair of sites. contrary to this expectation, in general lower recombination rate but lower ld was observed in females than in males in this study. the significantly lower levels of ld on the z-chromosome in females is mainly ascribed to the three sex-specific markers, which show relatively low ld but no recombination detected between the marker pairs .

the decay of ld in both sexes of the siberian jay population is very useful for high-resolution mapping in sex-specific association studies, provided that appropriate candidate genes are chosen. however, as observed in the samples including both sexes  <cit> , considerable, although relatively lower levels of ld were still observed between distantly linked markers as well as between many nonsyntenic markers within the sexes. the common occurrence of nonsyntenic ld evokes serious concerns about the generation of type i errors when using ld mapping as the only means to locate genes underlying sexually dimorphic traits in the population  <cit> . for this purpose, a new strategy of joint linkage and ld mapping in natural populations  <cit>  by use of an even higher density marker screening would be needed to avoid false positive results when mapping sex-specific or sex-biased genes in the population. previous studies reported that the z-chromosome harbours many qtls and genes affecting traits of ecological and evolutionary importance in birds. coupled with the ld blocks found, the higher level and decay of ld observed on the z-chromosome in each sex suggests that ld mapping may be possible on the z-chromosome in the bird population using low-density marker maps. in particular, the sex-specific ld mapping has the potential to be more effective in females due to the much more rapid decay of ld with distance.

CONCLUSIONS
to our knowledge this is the first study attempting to disentangle the sexual difference in genome-wide genetic architecture in a wild bird population. we observed a difference in genetic variability, natural selection and ld between males and females in a siberian jay population. several different evolutionary forces and demographic processes including differential dispersal rate, recombination heterogeneity and z-chromosomal genomic structure may underlie the observed genetic differences among sexes. our results suggest that the sex-specific ld mapping could be promising in this population and it would be advantageous to include z-chromosome markers. future theoretical work  and experimental research  would increase our understanding of the genetic basis of sexually dimorphic traits.

