BACKGROUND
toxoplasmosis is a worldwide spread zoonosis caused by the protozoan apicomplexa parasite toxoplasma gondii that imposes serious economic loss in livestock. it is also a concern in human health since about a third of the population is thought to silently carry parasites, which under immunosuppressive conditions, revert to replicative parasites called tachyzoites. subsequent uncontrolled expansion of the tachyzoite population is commonly responsible for cerebral, cardiac and pulmonary life-threatening diseases. because tachyzoites only multiply in a parasitophorous vacuole  that derives from the host cell plasma membrane  invagination at the time of entry  <cit> , tachyzoite invasiveness is thus a primary determinant of toxoplasma infection outcome. such strict dependence on host cells has impelled decades of research to decipher the molecular mechanisms of the invasion event and eventually to design anti-invasion strategies as pharmacological or immunological approaches to control infection and to prevent diseases  <cit> . other apicomplexa zoites, in particular the etiological agents of malaria, that is, plasmodium spp parasites, invade host cells and use a similar strategy to this end; therefore, the long-lasting interest in host cell invasion and the pressing need to progress in this research go much beyond toxoplasma.

while the active participation of a membrane-associated contractile system of apicomplexa zoites during host cell entry was emphasized in the 1980s  and later assigned to a conserved actin-myosin -based force , a contribution of the host cell through cortical actin dynamics has been more recently unmasked  <cit> . to establish an intimate contact with a permissive host cell, zoites secrete at their apical pole a protein complex from vesicles called the rhoptries  complex), that assembles as a ring into the host cell pm and beneath  and that connects with de novo-nucleated host cell actin filaments  <cit> . therefore, the current model specifies that zoites trigger the transient buildup of a unique tight interface, called a junction, between the two cells that serves as a door of entry and that seems optimally anchored to the host cell cortical actin cytoskeleton to act as a traction site for the parasite motor-based force production  <cit> . the t. gondii rhoptry protein toxofilin that loosens the host cell cortical actin meshwork at the onset of invasion has been proposed to promote local availability of actin monomers for actin assembly at the junction  <cit> .

although the recent localization of actin juxtaposed to the ron-positive ring in plasmodium merozoite invading an erythrocyte  is in line with the zoite motor force scheme, such observation has not been confirmed for t. gondii tachyzoites. in addition, the ‘force transmitting’ function of two molecules that back up the model by acting as physical bridges between the ron ring and the parasite motor, namely ama <dig> and the glycolytic enzyme aldolase  <cit> , has been recently questioned  while no other potential linkers to fulfill the role have been identified. moreover, an actin/myoa-independent mode of entry has been evoked as an alternative strategy since t. gondii tachyzoites devoid of actin or myoa showed unexpected residual gliding and invasive capabilities  <cit> . finally, recent theoretical modeling of erythrocyte invasion by plasmodium merozoite highlighted the possibility that host cell membrane projections induced by the parasite could promote its firm positioning on the red blood cell surface as well as its subsequent internalization, thereby shifting the model towards collaboration for force production between the two partners  <cit> . while traction forces between plasmodium sporozoites and substrates have been measured using reflection interference contrast and traction force microscopy  <cit> , no direct evidence for a traction force exerted by the zoite at the junction has ever been demonstrated for plasmodium or toxoplasma. these major flaws of the model are in large part due to the difficulty of tracing actin/myoa dynamics or junction components in live cells during the high-speed entry process, which lasts tens of seconds and involves tiny amounts of molecules.

in this context, we decided to inspect in detail the force origin and features powering parasite entry into the host cell by simultaneously tracking the tachyzoite apex, the tachyzoite-cell junction and the host pm during the penetration event. to this end, we used tachyzoites expressing a fluorescent functional ron <dig>   <cit>  that marks the junction site being the ron complex core component, which spans the host cell plasma bilayer  <cit> . kinematic analysis of parasite pre-invasive and invasive behaviors revealed a major scenario that includes  a minimal impulse of a few microns per second speed followed by  a brief decrease in motion coinciding with rons release and insertion into the host cell pm, and then  a rotational progression at a few tens of microns per second into the nascent pv while the junction remains quasi stationary. however, when parasites encounter some higher resistance that impedes progression or when the junction is not properly anchored, the latter flows retrogradely along the parasite surface and the host pm eventually encloses the zoite in a growth permissive pv. kinematic measurements during host cell entry strongly argue for a similar parasite driven force in static and capped junctions. importantly, when the junction is not well anchored to the host actin cortex the secreted ron <dig> molecules are displaced without the pm to the posterior pole and are then shed from the zoite, which as a consequence disengages from the host cell pm. accordingly, constitutively blebbing cells that display low cortex tension and high cortical actin dynamics provide the optimal conditions for stable junction and successful invasion. collectively, these data demonstrate that the zoite applies a motor force onto the ron2-containing junction that leads to invasion when the latter is properly anchored to the host cell cortex.

RESULTS
a minimum impulse of the tachyzoite is typically associated with penetration into host cells
pioneer video-microscopic and kinematic studies  <cit>  revealed three main types of t. gondii tachyzoite substrate-dependent movements, all associated with body rotation along the long axis. the helical and circular types of gliding ensure forward progression and depend on functional actin, unlike the stationary twirling motion  <cit> . the helical type has been proposed to also support cell invasion  <cit>  based on the observation that tachyzoites often glide toward host cells and invade them. interestingly, this helical gliding is also characteristic of tachyzoite motility in a three-dimensional environment  <cit> . in order to check whether gliding motion increases the frequency of penetration events independently of the need to find a host cell, we performed time-lapse spinning-disk confocal imaging of parasites incubated with monolayers of epithelial or fibroblastic cells, and we analyzed the pre-invasive behavior of tachyzoites. under these conditions, the probability of contact with a potential host cell was p =  <dig> for every parasite. we used fluorescent parasites that stably express gfp, which distributes in the whole cell, and we recorded spatio-temporal xyt coordinates of the parasite apex to reconstruct parasite trajectories prior to the penetration process using imagej software and the ‘manualtracking’ plugin. for the vast majority of invasion events , we found that immobile parasites initiated a pivoting movement prior to entry that we refer to as an ‘impulse.’ this impulse could be minimal without being associated with specific motion but it was often followed by a short helical twist or by a partial circular motion . apart from these impulses, circular and helical types of forward gliding, sometimes even within the same sequence, as well as twirling rotation were also found associated with cell penetration . the pre-invasive trajectories  and the time of entry diagnosed by the first detection of body constriction  are indicated on the time lapses. the last frames show the ongoing entry process and, thus, validate the pre-invasive status of the trajectories . graphs of the parasite speed prior to cell penetration reveal that in all cases, parasite speed reached a few microns per second . in line with a motile behavior facilitating cell invasion, we observed an increase in the rate of invasion of epithelial or fibroblastic monolayers when the motility of gfp-expressing tachyzoites was stimulated with the ‘motility enhancer compound,  <dig>  analyzed cells per assay and per condition, in duplicates), confirming previous reports  <cit> . collectively, these data suggest that a minimal impulse acts to prepare tachyzoites for invasion, possibly by promoting apex positioning, and/or rhoptry fusion  <cit>  to optimize subsequent release of the ron complex into the pm. accordingly, this minimal movement may relate to the marked apical reorientation step that was initially recognized in the sequence of red blood cell invasion by plasmodium merozoites  <cit> .figure  <dig> 
pre-invasive trajectories of gfp-expressing tachyzoites.  pie graph showing the distribution of each type of pre-invasive motion, the absolute numbers are indicated,  dic-gfp merged time lapses showing tachyzoite  impulse circular motion on top of hff cells , and minimal impulse on top of ptk- <dig>  and nrk  cells, and  circular gliding onto nrk cells , helical gliding onto ptk- <dig> cells  and twirling gliding onto m <dig> cells . the blue line reconstitutes the trajectory of the parasite apex; pink arrows define the junction; the last frame of each time lapse attests to tachyzoite entry; graphs show the tachyzoite speed over time and the pink arrows mark the starting point of the penetration event; all scale bars: 5 μm. dic, differentia interference constrast; hff, human foreskin fibroblasts; nrk, normal rat kidney fibroblasts; ptk- <dig>  rat kangaroo kidney epithelial cells.



a major burst of ron <dig> molecules traffics to the conoid tip and inserts into the host cell pm in a few seconds preceding penetration
during gliding motion, tachyzoites typically extrude their retractile apical conoid, otherwise enclosed in the cell cytoplasm  <cit> . in addition to promoting the release of micronemal molecules at the zoite surface, conoid repositioning might also facilitate rhoptry content release in the presence of potential host cells. the use of ron2-mcherry -expressing tachyzoites that properly target ron2mc to the rhoptries and to the junction , invade with similar kinetics  and display similar pre-invasive and growth behaviors as the ron2-expressing tachyzoites , allowed us to monitor in real time  the transit of ron <dig> molecules, likely with the other ron complex members within the rhoptries duct, and  the subsequent insertion of the ron2-ring in the host cell pm. during the movement that preceded all invasion events, we detected a major burst of ron <dig> secreted molecules trafficking to the tip of the conoid in the form of a dot that rapidly organizes into the host cell pm plane . the whole process lasted a few seconds  while it appeared slightly longer when host cells expressed at the pm the pip2-binding ph domain of phospholipasec  or a myristoylated and palmitoylated -modified gfp  . no such ron <dig> trafficking was ever observed in gliding tachyzoites on fcs- or bsa-coated coverslips even when conoid extrusion was induced by an exposure to ethanol or calcium ionophore as described in  <cit> . on several occasions, while two parasites were similarly gliding on top of the same cell, both extruding their conoid, one secreted ron <dig> and subsequently entered in the host cell while the other did not release ron <dig> but remained extracellular . collectively, these data support the view that  one or several distinct molecular interactions with the host cell surface specifically trigger the ron complex secretion, and  a one-shot secretion is used for junction assembly into the host cell pm.figure  <dig> 
ron2mcherry is properly targeted to rhoptries and released to the junction during invasion and ron2mc tachyzoites have normal pre-invasive and intracellular growth properties.  confocal imaging of two ron2mc tachyzoites in the course of entering into hela cells; . cells were labeled for the surface-exposed p <dig> t. gondii protein  prior to cell permeabilization and the host cell f-actin  after tx- <dig> cell permeabilization,  for the total ron <dig> protein a subset of which being localized at the junction  and serving as a marker ; the pink arrowheads point to the junction; note the overlap between ron <dig> and ron2mc in the rhoptry compartments and the junction as well as the recruitment of host cell f-actin beneath the ron-formed junction.  histograms comparing tachyzoites expressing untagged ron <dig>  or ron2-mcherry  tagged for: , the frequency of each pre-invasive behavior and  the frequency of pv containing  <dig>   <dig>   <dig> or  <dig> tachyzoites 28 hours post infection.  time lapses showing ron <dig> trafficking to the tip of the extruded conoid, followed by ron <dig> assembly into  the hff cell pm  merged signals,  the hela myr-palm-gfp-  and hela gfp-ph-plcδ-labeled pms  when indicated by a white arrowhead, the green line points to the position of the junction at the early and ending  times of cell penetration; all scale bars: 5 μm. dic, hela, human epithelial cervical cancer cells; hff, human foreskin fibroblasts; myr-palm, myristoylated and palmitoylated; pm, plasma membrane; pv, parasitophorous vacuole; ron, rhoptry neck.



the ron2-positive junction is capped with the host pm to the parasite rear pole when forward motion into the cell is interrupted
in order to analyze parasite motion after junction assembly, we tracked the spatial position  of both the parasite apex and the ron2mcherry-positive junction from the time of ron <dig> release into the host pm until the detection of a ron <dig> thick speck at the rear pole that typically precedes pv closure . analysis of the trajectories retrieved from the xy coordinates highlighted two situations: the first, and largely dominant one, when the tachyzoite continuously progressed into the forming pv to complete entry , which was associated with a limited or no displacement of the ron2-labeled junction . graphs quantifying the parasite  and the junction  speeds for each time lapse attest the negligible speed of the junction during parasite penetration. as expected, when we precisely tracked the host pm movement at the entry site using host cells that express a fluorescent pm marker, we observed a full overlap with the ron2-labeled junction position over time , thereby demonstrating that the latter was stably anchored in the pm and underlying complex. aside from this scenario, we also observed that tachyzoite progression can be interrupted  as assessed by the sharp drop in parasite speed . concomitantly, the junction coupled to the host pm was then capped backward  with an increase in junction speed observed in the corresponding graphs. we have therefore referred to these events as ‘capped junction’ .figure  <dig> 
ron2-expressing tachyzoites enter through a stable  or capped  junction. dicmcherry  time lapses showing the penetration of tachyzoites into  hff , hela ,  myr-palm-gfp- hela cells ,  ptk- <dig> , hff ,  myrpalm-gfp- hela ; the blue and pink lines depict the trajectories of the parasite apex and the ron2- marked junction , respectively; pink arrowheads define the first and last signs of the junction; graphs on the right show the tachyzoite  and the junction  speeds over time; the pm movement during cell penetration is tracked with the yellow lines ; all scale bars: 5 μm. dic, hela, human epithelial cervical cancer cells; hff, human foreskin fibroblasts; myr-palm, myristoylated and palmitoylated; pm, plasma membrane; ptk- <dig>  rat kangaroo kidney epithelial cells; pv, parasitophorous vacuole; ron <dig>  rhoptry neck.



importantly, junction capping during entry led to parasite growth within the pv . we next quantified in various cell types the amount of stable versus capped junctions and discriminated for the latter case, between early and late junction capping . interestingly, we noticed a significant increase  in the frequency of events with capped junctions when parasites invaded nrk and hff fibroblasts as compared to hela and ptk- <dig> epithelial cells  and the highest proportion was obtained with hff cells. consistently, kinetic analysis revealed that the average speed of the zoite during the internalization step was highly significantly lower for the capped junction than for the static junction, and the extent of reduction depended on the time at which the parasites were immobilized ). importantly, by carefully examining the kinematics of typical junction capping sequences, we validated the hypothesis that the average speed of zoite progression can be considered as ‘similar’ to the speed of junction retrograde movement , thereby arguing against a significant variation in the force produced during host cell entry in both situations. collectively, these data strongly favor the idea that all parasites apply a mechanical force onto the junction regardless of the scenarios and suggest that the events of ‘junction capping’ correspond to situations of space constraints that hampered parasite forward progression and/or of weaker junction anchorage to the host cortex. in line with this scheme, the junction was immediately seen to translocate over the parasite body until the pm enclosed the zoite at the time the latter was forced to stop prematurely because of an obstacle such as a pv-containing parasite  .figure  <dig> 
variation in the frequencies of stable versus capped junctions during cell entry by ron2mc-expressing tachyzoites.  time lapse of a gfp-tachyzoite using a capped junction to invade a nrk cell and further multiplying inside a competent pv, the parasite apex  and the junction  trajectories are shown, the pink arrowhead points to the junction site, white arrows mark the two daughter cells formed in the pv at about seven hours post-invasion; graph showing the tachyzoite  and the junction  speeds over time during the entry event with a capped junction.  pie graphs showing the distribution of stable , capped  and end-capped  junctions in epithelial and fibroblastic cells. the absolute numbers are indicated; note the significantly higher frequency of all capping events in fibroblasts.  scatter graph showing the average speed as a function of time for each stable  or capped  junction-associated event; note the highly significant differences in speed  and time  between the two types of junctions.  time lapses showing tachyzoites that hit an already internalized parasite, which is marked with a white star during penetration into a hff cell. the blue and pink lines reconstitute the trajectories of the parasite apex and the ron2-labeled junction  respectively; pink arrowheads define the first and last signs of the junction; graphs on the right show the tachyzoite  and the junction  speeds over time; note that the junction capping coincides with the time when parasites were forced to stop; all scale bars: 5 μm. hff, human foreskin fibroblasts; nrk, normal rat kidney fibroblasts; pv, parasitophorous vacuole; ron <dig>  rhoptry neck.



kinematic modeling during cell penetration reveals typical changes in body curvature that are linked with two parasite rotations independently of junction scenario
fluorescence emission in gfp-expressing tachyzoites appeared heterogeneous within the cell body revealing contrasted staining of sub-cellular vesicular like structures while fluorescent mcherry signals were restricted to rhoptries or pre-rhoptries. working as reference points, these features provided a direct way to visualize the rotation of the parasite during entry that was initially described as a screw-like motion  <cit> . in order to study this motion, we manually tracked x and y cartesian coordinates of the parasite apex during cell penetration . then we plotted each coordinate position  and y = f) and the xy trajectories ) as functions of time and we searched for the best curve adjustment using the matlab software . for each invasion event, the curves typically showed two inflection points and were found best fitted by fourth degree polynomials . next, we computed the radius of curvature  of the osculating circle to the xy trajectory at each time point because we observed that the zoite initiates entry with a circular movement and a given body curvature which changes while it rotates along its axis . a positive curvature described by an upwardly convex surface at the parasite specifies a given body curvature orientation whereas a negative one points to an upwardly concave surface that defines the other orientation, and the rc values describe the rotation by which the moving organism changes its direction. to better visualize the change in parasite curvature orientation, we assigned two different colors  to the two opposite signs in the rc graphs and positioned the shift with blue arrows. while the trajectory analysis of events associated with a static junction revealed a shift in rc  that corresponds to the change of the curvature orientation accompanying the screw-like motion, another rc shift  was observed at the end of the trajectory and correlated with a second not yet identified rotation. this rotation exhibits different amplitudes depending on the event  and can be nicely observed with the change in plane of the rhoptry signal . this kinematic analysis of the tachyzoite motion clearly provides the description of the phases associated with entry until pv separation. importantly, since the curvature shifts were detected not only when the parasite progresses through a static junction but also when it was stopped as a result of bumping into an obstacle or of facing denser cortex , we concluded that the same molecular mechanisms control the parasite contribution during entry with the static and capped scenarios.figure  <dig> 
modeling of the tachyzoite trajectory during cell penetration highlights a change in body curvature and a final rotation independently of cell type and junction behavior. time lapses of: gfp tachyzoites entering in  a m <dig> cell with a stable junction,  ron2mc tachyzoite entering with a capped junction in a hff cell,  a ptk- <dig> cell with a capped junction,  Δ toxofilin ron2mc tachyzoite entering with a capped junction in a hff cell. the lines define the parasite apex trajectory  and final rotation ; white curve arrows show the rotation direction while blue arrows indicate the change in body curvature, all scale bars: 5 μm. below each time lapse is presented the corresponding graph:  of the x and y coordinates separately as a function of time, of the xy coordinates y = f that represents the tracked trajectory , all with their respective best fitting polynomial curves , and of the radius curvature  as a function of time for which the change in line color matches with the sign of rc over time. the blue arrows mark the time of rc shift;  left graphs show the tachyzoite speed over time with parasite apex  and junction  trajectories, pink arrows indicate the starting and ending time points; right graphs display the rc as a function of time. hff, human foreskin fibroblasts; ptk- <dig>  rat kangaroo kidney epithelial cell; ron <dig>  rhoptry neck.



deficient anchorage of the junction favors junction-pm capping but also leads to invasion failure, a situation exacerbated with parasites lacking the host cortical actin depolymerizer, toxofilin
we have already shown that 1) the host cortical actin meshwork  is locally disassembled to create the appropriate space for tachyzoite progression and 2) de novo actin assembly is required for junction anchorage to the cortex  <cit> . we have proposed that the actin binding protein toxofilin  <cit> , which is secreted at the site of entry and enhances actin turnover, promotes the rapid production of actin monomers that instantaneously fuel actin assembly that ensures junction anchorage  <cit> . therefore, in the absence of toxofilin, we expected a weaker anchoring of the junction and, in turn, an increase in the frequency of penetration events associated with retrograde displacement of the junction. to test this hypothesis, we engineered parasites lacking the full coding sequence of toxofilin  and carrying the ron2mcherry insertion at the endogenous locus , and we monitored the behavior of both the mutant and the parental toxofilin+ parasites. we found a significant increase in the number of junction capping events for the Δ toxofilin zoites when compared to the toxofilin+ only when entering in epithelial cells  . in the case of fibroblasts, these were already associated with a large proportion of capping events during entry of wild type parasites . movement of the host cell pm and junction capping were coupled as clearly seen in hela cells expressing a ph domain of plc-δ fused to gfp that binds to pip <dig> in the pm . moreover, analysis of kinetic parameters during penetration for each event showed that the duration  and the zoite average speed  did not significantly differ between wild type and mutant parasites for the capped junction scenario. of note is the slightly longer process observed for the Δ toxofilin when compared to the toxofilin+ parasites  in the case of the static junction scenario . crucially, junction and pm capping were also seen after the tachyzoite pushed the pm outward to create an evagination that further retracted in the cell cytoplasm as a bona fide pv . the corresponding graph shows the speed of the zoite  during forward progression and the increase in the host pm speed  during junction capping.figure  <dig> Δ toxofilin parasites form more capped junctions than toxofilin
+
parasites.  pie graphs showing the distribution of stable , capped , end-capped junctions  and failed  events in epithelial and fibroblastic cells, the absolute numbers are indicated; note the increase in invasion failure when tachyzoites lack toxofilin and in capped junctions when they infect epithelial cells;  scatter graphs showing the speed as a function of time for toxofilin+ ron2mc  or Δ toxofilin ron2mc  parasites and for stable  or capped  junctions; note the significantly faster process when the toxofilin+ tachyzoites enter with static junctions;  dic-cherry  merged time lapse showing the capping of the ron2-labeled junction during entry of a Δ toxofilin ron2mc parasite in a hff cell;  dic mc  merged time lapse showing a Δ toxofilin ron2mc parasite penetrating into a gfp-ph-plcδ hela cell , the pink arrowhead shows the time when the parasite is enclosed in the host cell pm;  dic-mcherry  merged time lapse showing Δ toxofilin ron2mc entering in a myr-palm-gfp expressing hela cell ; pink arrowheads define the first and last signs of the junction; trajectories of: the parasite apex , the junction  and the pm  are shown; graphs on the right show the tachyzoite , the junction  and the host cell pm  speeds over time; all scale bars: 5 μm; note that in  the tachyzoite creates a host cell pm evagination when moving forward and then translocates the host cell pm at the time it stops progressing, all scale bars: 5 μm. dic, hela, human epithelial cervical cancer cells; hff, human foreskin fibroblasts; myr-palm, myristoylated and palmitoylated; pm, plasma membrane; ron <dig>  rhoptry neck.



in addition to the junction capping process that allows productive infection, in almost 20% of the events  we observed that the Δ toxofilin tachyzoites were unable to tract back the host cell pm once they were stopped in their progression. instead, they disengaged within minutes with a counter clockwise rotation from the pm invagination that concomitantly resorbed leading to ‘invasion failure’ . crucially, before parasites disengaged out of the pm inward fold, we observed rearward capping of the secreted ron <dig> material that accumulated as a posterior dot . examination of the parasite trajectory during failure revealed a directional change of the parasite but no shift in body curvature until it got out . however, few cases of a change in curvature before parasite withdrawal were observed and were always associated with a more advanced penetration process . first, these findings strengthen the model of ron <dig> connected to the parasite motor and accordingly of a zoite force applied at the junction, thereby underpinning the latter as a traction site for force production. secondly, they also strengthen the view that upon secretion into the host cell, toxofilin directs the fast coupling of actin disassembly at the cam and of actin assembly at the junction. finally, cases of invasion failures were rarely recorded with toxofilin+ parasites  with a frequency significantly lower when compared to Δ toxofilin parasites , and followed the same sequence as with the Δ toxofilin parasites . we showed here a tachyzoite with a piece of the residual body formed during intracellular replication  <cit>  that remained attached at its posterior end which 1) displayed a typical helical pre-invasive gliding, 2) released ron <dig> molecules into the host cell pm and 3) attempted to penetrate into a region of the cell with strong swelling activity. while this tachyzoite was unable to overcome the local strong antagonistic pressure  in the cell and, thus, to move forward, we could track the rearward capping of ron <dig> molecules and their trapping into the membranous piece of the residual body followed by the release of the whole material in the medium . these data highlight the invasion failure as a consequence of insufficient anchorage of the ron complex to the host cell pm and the underlying cortex.figure  <dig> 
entry failure is drastically enhanced in Δ toxofilin parasites.  time lapses showing the initial engagement of the Δ toxofilin ron2mc parasite into the forming pv followed by their withdrawal. the two top panels show the dic and fluorescent merged frames while the two bottom panels show the overlay between the parasite ron2mc  and hela cell myr-palm- gfp  signals; the pink arrowhead points to the start of entry and the blue line shows the initial forward trajectory of the tachyzoite.  zoom from  on the time the tachyzoite rotates and starts to disengage, the white line follows the trajectory of the rhoptry-associated signal and the curved white arrow indicates the counter clockwise rotation.  time lapse showing Δ toxofilin ron2mc parasite that releases ron <dig> into the pm and starts to penetrate  but eventually withdraws  while ron <dig> moves backwards along the parasite surface.  graphs corresponding to the time lapse  showing: the xy coordinates as a function of time  and the fitting polynomial curve , the path of the tachyzoite is labeled with arrows ; and the radius curvature  as a function of time.  time lapse showing failure to complete entry while a faint signal of ron2mc is seen capped backwards at the posterior end of the tachyzoite, the pink arrowheads indicate the junction while parasite forward  and backward  trajectories are drawn.  graphs corresponding to the time lapse  showing: the xy coordinates as a function of time  and the fitting polynomial curve , and the radius curvature  as a function of time; the rc shift is marked with a blue arrow.
entry failure by a toxofilin
+
tachyzoite. time lapse of a toxofilin+ ron2mc parasite releasing ron <dig> to assemble a junction  into an hff cell pm but then encountering a cell swelling area and failing to progress. a ron <dig> ring marked by a green arrow is concomitantly capped backwards, accumulates at the posterior and is subsequently released into the medium. the two top panels show the dic and ron2mc  fluorescent merged frames while the two bottom panels show the parasite ron2mc signal; all scale bars: 5 μm. dic, hff, human foreskin fibroblast; pm, plasma membrane; ron <dig>  rhoptry neck.



low cortex tension and high actin dynamics promote stable anchoring of the junction during entry by both toxofilin+ and toxofilin tachyzoites
since our data underline that junction capping and invasion failure were favored in cell regions of high cortex resistance and, in particular, when tachyzoites were genetically impaired in their ability to lower this resistance by disassembling actin filaments into monomers, we next hypothesized that in cells with low cortex tension and stiffness but with high amounts of cortical actin monomers, the parasites would have the greatest chances to smoothly move forward through an efficiently anchored junction into the forming pv. additionally, if this proves correct, the lack of toxofilin should not translate in invasion failure. to test these assumptions, we performed a kinematic analysis of penetration events using m <dig> cells that do not express the cortex actin cross linker abp- <dig>  and are consequently characterized by a low cortex tension and high cortical actin dynamics that translate into a high blebbing activity  <cit> . remarkably, we found that after ron <dig> secretion and junction assembly into pm, the vast majoriy of toxofilin+ tachyzoites formed a junction that remained static  which correlated with a significant drop in the frequency of capping junctions when compared to non-m <dig> epithelial cells . finally, this was also true in the case of Δ toxofilin parasites infecting m <dig> cells   but even more striking, was the significant reduction in the number of invasion failures  . of note, kinetic parameters showed a significantly shorter penetration process  with a slightly faster average speed  when toxofilin+ tachyzoites infected m <dig> cells but this was not true for Δ toxofilin tachyzoites . collectively, these data reinforced the view that toxofilin acts by reducing cortex stiffness and consequently by promoting firm local anchoring of the junction to the host cell pm and cortex. under this organization, the junction would be endowed with optimal mechanical properties to facilitate traction of the applied force.figure  <dig> 
capped junctions and invasion failures are significantly reduced for both toxofilin
+
and Δ toxofilin tachyzoites when entering in the Δ filamin a  cells.  time lapses showing a toxofilin+ ron2mc  and a Δ toxofilin ron2mc  tachyzoite entering in m <dig> cells; the pink arrowheads define the first and last signs of the junction; dic and mcherry  merged signals , ron2mc  and myr-palm-gfp  labeled host pm , the trajectories of the parasite apex , the junction  and the pm  are shown; graphs on the right show the tachyzoite apex , the junction  and the host cell pm  speeds over time; all scale bars: 5 μm;  histograms comparing the distribution of stable , capped , end-capped  junctions and failure  for toxofilin+ and Δ toxofilin tachyzoites when entering in m <dig> and non-m <dig> epithelial cells, the absolute numbers are indicated; note the prominence of stable junctions in all cases and the strong reduction in invasion failure, in particular for the mutant parasites;  scatter graphs showing the average speed as a function of time for toxofilin+ ron2mc penetrating in m <dig>  and non-m <dig>  cells and for Δ toxofilin ron2mc penetrating in m <dig>  and non-m <dig>  cells; note the slightly significantly faster process when the toxofilin+ tachyzoites enter m <dig> cells. dic, hff, human foreskin fibroblast; myr-palm, myristoylated and palmitoylated; pm, plasma membrane; ron <dig>  rhoptry neck. 



discussion
while host-cell invasion is a vital process for most apicomplexa parasites that has been explored for decades, the mechanistic model that prevailed all these years has recently shown its weaknesses and limitations. a primary issue concerns the relevance of the tight junction formed between the parasite and a permissive cell as a traction point for force transmission during cell invasion. we chose to re-examine this question using time-lapse imaging, tracking of the parasite apex and careful analysis of the kinematics of entry to quantitatively analyze invasion sequences under different parasite and host cell settings. first, we used toxoplasma expressing a fluorescent version of ron <dig>  the junction core component  <cit>  reported as crucial for invasion  <cit> . ron <dig> inserts into the host cell pm and bridges the two cells during invasion: while it firmly binds to the zoite surface-exposed ama <dig> protein, the role of this partnership has been controversial  <cit>  and will only be resolved with a full understanding of the junction function. the parasites encoding ron2mcherry in replacement of ron <dig> express a functional ron <dig>  <cit>  and behave similarly as the parental strain, thereby enabling us to document dynamically that a burst of ron <dig> molecules traffics from the rhoptry to the tip of the extruded conoid, and subsequently inserts into the host cell plasma bilayer to initiate pv folding. although ron <dig> trafficking was associated with parasite motion of a few μm/second, the ron <dig> insertion step into the host cell pm occurred when the parasite had almost stopped. next, simultaneous tracking of the zoite apex and the ron <dig> secreted subset informed on the fate of the junction during the penetration phase. this kinematic analysis revealed that the vast majority of zoites typically progressed forward into the nascent pv by passing the whole body through the junction at an average speed of about  <dig>  μm/second: in that situation, the junction’s spatial coordinates remained almost stationary, a feature consistent with a junction firmly anchored to the host cell-cortex and capable of sustaining a parasite motor propelling force. moreover, analysis of the parasite trajectories using maltlab software identified two changes in parasite body curvature in all penetration events, the second one ending the entry process. while the latter likely contributes to the fission process during pv separation, the first change in curvature corresponds to the screw-like behavior reported long ago  <cit> , probably directed by the peculiar microtubule network organization of the zoite. these features again support an entry process driven by the parasite force.

an additional line of evidence for a propulsive force came from the visualization of junctions being capped towards the rear end of the tachyzoite in about 8% to 20% events. when we simultaneously used live-fluorescent labeling of the parasite and the host cell, we observed that the secreted ron <dig> molecular subset and the host cell pm rearward capping movement were coupled to eventually enclose the parasite in a growth permissive pv. in addition, kinematic analysis of the parasite motion showed that the changes in rc were also conserved in these events. these findings indicate that while the ron <dig> was properly organized within the lipid bilayer, the anchorage of the junction was weaker than for the static one and made the whole junction and cell pm more amenable to displacement while the zoite continued to pull. indeed, the capping response precisely coincided with the arrest of the parasite on its way in, as exemplified by the tachyzoite hitting a pv-containing zoite. finally, based on the duration of the penetration phase, and the fact that the sum of the speed of the parasite and of the capped junction was comparable during both scenarios, we propose that the zoite tracts onto the junction similarly in all events while premature immobilization allowed the visualization of the traction activity. although it seems unlikely, the possibility theoretically remains that the capping of ron <dig> coupled to the cell pm would result from a still unknown host cell local response to the parasite-induced tension that would drag the junction and pm along the body to enclose the parasite without parasite motor requirement. however, this is even less likely if we consider the events where parasites progressed into the pm that did not invaginate but instead were pushed outwards , and thereby was not subjected to host cell viscosity/elasticity constraints. crucially, such membrane evagination could be associated with junction and membrane capping, a situation only explained by the parasite pulling onto the membrane and a weaker anchorage of the junction .

local higher resistance beneath the pm commonly results from denser/thicker cytoskeleton lattices and primarily from the contractile cortical actin-myosin meshwork. optimized atomic force microscopy  has indeed revealed the spatial inhomogeneity of viscoelasticity over a cell  <cit> . these relate to regions of distinct membrane and cortical tensions providing specific nanomechanical properties, and defined by cortex thickness, actin dynamic, actin crosslinking and contractility  <cit> . therefore, it is expected that, in the same cell, tachyzoites can penetrate by the classical forward progression and static junction or instead can trigger junction retrograde capping when they encounter a stiffer cortex area. in addition, we reported here that junction capping was more frequently observed in fibroblasts which display strong ventral and dorsal actin stress fibers that result in high membrane tension  <cit> . of note, the highest rate of capped junction was repeatedly observed with the hff cell line, which is the only growth limited cell line used throughout the study and, therefore, theoretically subject to aging. aging is typically associated with an increase in cortex stiffening known to arise from an altered polymerization of the cortical actin cytoskeleton  <cit> . conversely, in m <dig> cells that display a cortex of lower resistance since they lack the cortical actin cross-linker filamin, the entry with static junction was the rule including for toxofilin-deficient parasites  that lack the ability to loosen a thick actin lattice  <cit> . future studies on junction function will certainly gain from the increasing knowledge on membrane microdomains and nanoelastic properties at a single cell level. of note, coppens and joiner elegantly proposed in the early 2000s that cholesterol in the host cell pm is necessary to trigger secretion of bulb rhoptry products that associate with cell entry  <cit> . the rons discovery and their localization at the junction site  <cit>  with the availability of the ron2mcherry strain now allow assessing in real time whether the host cell pm cholesterol is required for proper  secretion of the ron complex,  insertion of this complex into the host cell pm or  anchoring function of the junction.

finally, key insights came from the observation of invasion failure, which while exceptional with wild type tachyzoites  is markedly increased in Δ toxofilin tachyzoites . while parasites were readily engaged in penetration, as judged by ron <dig> and pm folding, they failed to pull back the junction with the host cell pm after being stopped. instead, they slowly disengaged from the cell and could twirl or pause again as free parasites. these new observations first contradict the current statement that ron <dig> assembly and the so-called junction structuring in the host cell pm commit parasite to invasion  <cit> . secondly they clearly point to a role of toxofilin in providing the junction with the mechanical properties required for an efficient traction force. indeed, the significant decrease in the amount of Δ toxofilin mutants that failed to invade m <dig> cells agrees well with the necessity of both cortical disassembly and free actin availability, provided through the toxofilin activity to complete invasion. finally, when invasion aborted, a wave of ron <dig> molecules was capped towards the posterior end of the zoite where the material accumulated before being released in the medium. this is strongly suggestive of a motor engagement to the ron2-labeled junction on the parasite side. whether a default in actin-mediated anchorage of the junction affects the stability of the ron <dig> ring in the cell bilayer inducing ron <dig> dislodgment upon force application awaits confirmation.

CONCLUSIONS
this work provides a series of compelling evidence for the traction point property of the junction when the zoite applies a force, and is reminiscent of the focal adhesions acting as transmission sites for actomyosin-generated forces during cell motility onto a substrate. however, we are still missing the molecular identity of the functional junction to elucidate how force is exerted at this site. in this context, it will also be of future interest to dissect how the motor incompetent parasites can get access to the intracellular milieu including under constraints driven by three-dimensional tissue-like microenvironments, which strongly impact cell membrane and cortex mechanical properties. in addition, this work brings new tools to further investigate what is  the trigger and the mechanisms responsible for ron2/rons trafficking within the rhoptry neck and for their subsequent organization into the host cell lipid bilayer. the role of the conoid, a missing appendage in non-coccidian including plasmodium, in the rons organization during release and assembly should be examined in concert with the expected mechanical perturbations in the bilayer these should cause. such changes in membrane and cortex tension might drive various local membrane responses at the micro-domain scale, some being, then, side effects of the entry process per se. indeed, thin filopodia-like projections extending at the junction site along the tachyzoite were occasionally observed  although they differed from the membrane folds enwrapping the merozoite to provide force during red blood cell penetration  <cit> . it is noteworthy that plasmodium zoites do not express toxofilin homologues but since they also face the cortical lattice of the host cell during penetration, they might use alternative strategies to overcome this constraint. because the architecture of the red blood cell skeleton is quite different from those of nucleated cells, local targeting of a protein such as spectrin by the merozoite blood stage might be sufficient to trigger a cascade of events that leads to profound membrane and cortex rearrangements coincident with entry and underlying the characteristic echinocytosis process. moreover, the slender hepatic stage of plasmodium  might not need to loosen the cell cortex to the extent that the toxoplasma bulky tachyzoite does, or/and might use different pathways to this end, such as proteolysis of key actin-membrane adaptors. therefore, future comparative studies on the mechanisms by which plasmodium sp. and toxoplasma zoites infect host cells will undoubtedly highlight similarities and singularities in the fine tuning of the invasion strategies selected by the two parasites.

