BACKGROUND
venoms are usually complex mixtures of peptides and proteins colloquially known as toxins. these toxins can disrupt cellular functions or physiological processes, but venoms differ from poisons in that the venom must be delivered through specialised anatomical structures, such as fangs or stinging devices, that inflict a wound to the target prey or predator. this generally accepted definition includes also that toxins are biosynthesised and the venom is then secreted from specialised glands  <cit> . however, this definition falls short for a group of venomous invertebrates called the cnidarians that do not have any glandular tissues for toxin secretion. instead, venom is produced by the golgi apparatus of specialised cells called cnidocysts that are organised for toxin delivery by discharge of a secretory organelle called the cnida, which is unique to cnidarians and a defining characteristic of this phylum  <cit> .

cnidaria has two major linages; the anthozoa  and medusozoa, comprising the classes staurozoa , cubozoa , scyphozoa  and hydrozoa ; see  <cit>  for a recent review. human envenomation by cnidarians is common and, although seldom life-threatening, fatal contact with certain jellyfish such as the cubozoan chironex fleckeri  is well documented in both the scientific literature and lay press  <cit> . there have been numerous studies characterising the venoms of many animals, but until recently the toxin component and function of cnidarian venoms was poorly studied and near completely unknown  <cit> . still now, patterns for cnidarian venoms are variable and uncertain. we have previously used a high throughput proteomics approach to characterise putative toxins from the nematocysts  of the coral stylophora pistillata  <cit>  and the hydrozoan jellyfish olindias sambaquiensis  <cit> . the biological diversity and sequence similarity between these cnidarian toxins and those of completely unrelated higher animals were astounding, suggesting that at least some universal molecular processes leading to toxin diversification might be shared between basal metazoans and diverging lineages of venomous animals.

it is conventionally accepted that venom systems arose by a ‘birth and death’ process following convergent recruitment of ancestral genes that originally encoded non-toxic physiological functions  <cit> . these genes underwent duplication followed by rapid hyper-mutation independently in different animals to evolve proteins with cytotoxic functions when expressed in venom gland tissues  <cit> . adaptive selection has retained useful paralog genes, which in turn has given rise to larger toxin-specific gene families, for example: phospholipase a <dig>  serine proteases, c-type lectins and coagulation factor v, which are regularly present in many venomous animals . venoms diversified additionally as more species-restricted gene families, such as the snake three-finger toxins  <cit> , scorpion cysteine-enriched toxins  <cit>  and the conotoxins of marine cone snails  <cit> , evolved this ‘birth and death’ hypothesis has been refined recently, based upon genome sequence data analysis of predicted proteins from the non-venomous burmese python python molurus bivittatus  <cit> . using tissue specific gene expression profiling, evidence provides that some genes encoding physiological functions are orthologs of toxin encoding genes which are differentially expressed in many different tissue types of the python. specific recruitment of such orthologs into venom gland tissue followed by ‘birth and death’ evolution would result in paralogs where one copy would ultimately encode a toxic function. this explanation might, therefore, account for the large gene expansions seen in venom gland transcripts of xenophidian snakes  <cit> , as well as that observed in the genome sequence of the highly venomous king cobra ophiophagus hannah  <cit> . reverse recruitment of toxin encoding genes into non-venom gland tissue with reverse conversion of the gene products returning to a non-toxic physiological role has also been predicted from phylogenetic analyses  <cit>  as demonstrated by comparative transcriptome analysis of toxin gene paralogs in venom gland and other tissues of the venomous snake bothrops jararaca   <cit> .

comparative transcriptomics of venomous and non-venomous reptiles however, has cast doubt on the extent to which recruitment and reverse recruitment processes play in the evolution of venom systems  <cit> . the ‘restriction hypothesis’ confirms previous findings that toxin orthologs are expressed in many tissues of non-venomous reptiles, including salivary glands, suggesting that toxin orthologs have not been recruited but had already existed in glandular tissues . following gene duplication, paralogs can evolve so that expression of one copy, now encoding a toxic function, is restricted to the venom gland, whilst the original copy encoding a non-toxic physiological role remains expressed in other tissues  <cit> . the extent to which gene duplication has impacted on venom innovation has also been challenged because, although gene duplication in cone snail  <cit>  and snake toxins  <cit>  may occur at an enhanced rate, gene duplication in eukaryotes is generally considered a rare event  <cit> . in addition, evaluation of transcriptomic dataand sequence analysis of the duck-billed platypus  genome affirms that gene duplication did not contribute significantly to toxin diversification in this venomous mammal  <cit> .

other molecular processes that could lead to toxin diversification in lieu of gene duplications have been proposed. for example, although experimentally not proven, exon shuffling of primary mrna transcripts has been suggested as a mechanism to account for active site variation in amino acid sequences of venom gland serine proteases in the snake macrovipera schweizeri   <cit> . likewise, homologous recombination at the dna or rna levels may account also for sequence variation in class p-i and p-ii snake venom metalloproteinases  in bothrops neuwiedi   <cit> . however, such arguments have been based on mapping to sequences outside of known exon splicing sites in cdna encoding a different svmp class, which were obtained from the venom transcript of a taxonomically distant snake  <cit> . hence, the extent to which toxin diversification can be attributed to processes of gene recruitment and duplication, or indeed recombination and alternative splicing of dna or rna, remain largely unexplored. this is principally due to a lack of sequenced genomes of venomous animals from which either true gene duplicates can be identified, or onto which rna and peptide sequences can be mapped. in direct contrast, post-translational processes including amino acid modifications and protein splicing have been unequivocally established to increase conotoxin diversity in marine cone snail venoms  <cit> .

the sequenced genomes of three cnidarians are currently available; these are nematostella vectensis  <cit> , hydra magnipapillata  <cit>  and acropora digitifera  <cit> . there are numerous transcriptome libraries also for many cnidarians and, in addition to the nematocyst proteomes we have published  <cit> , the proteome of h. magnipapillata has likewise been reported that includes a description of putative toxins  <cit> . we have made freely available annotation of the predicted proteome of a. digitifera at zoophytebase . a search of this database revealed that the predicted toxins of a. digitifera are highly homologous to those toxins of many taxonomically distant venomous animals  <cit> . having existed since at least the pre-cambrian era, cnidaria are possibly the oldest lineage of extant animals to have evolved means to inject toxins into their prey  <cit> . if one assumes a single early evolutionary origin of toxin genes, cnidaria thus provide a unique ancestral anchor to explore the genesis of toxin innovation, which have evolved independently to radiate in other venomous animals  <cit> . to assess the extent to which gene duplication drives toxin diversification in the cnidaria, we herein compare the amino acid sequences of predicted toxins derived from the translated genome of a. digitifera to that of putative toxins observed by proteomic analysis of soluble proteins discharged from isolated nematocysts.

RESULTS
identification of potential toxin encoding genes in the a. digitifera genome
the translated genome of a. digitifera was searched for homology to known animal toxins in the uniprotkb/swiss-prot tox-prot dataset. the blast search used an e-value cut-off selection criterion of  <dig> e− <dig> that recovered  <dig> potential animal toxin homologs. to discriminate potential coral specific toxins from coral proteins with non-toxic physiological functions, these  <dig> hits were further filtered using an iterative five step process adapted from previously published methods for cnidarian toxin identification  <cit> . firstly, only sequences with reciprocal blast best hit  or relaxed rbbh  to sequences in the uniprotkb/swiss-prot tox-prot dataset with query coverage above 70 % were retained. secondly, blastp comparisons were performed against the entire uniprot database supplemented with additional cnidarian protein sequences  <cit>  and, against a customised database constructed using only cnidarian protein sequences contained within uniprot. only rbbh or relaxed rbbhs hits were retained having a cut-off e-value of less than  <dig> e− <dig> for sequences from both databases . thirdly, sequences were then manually validated for consistency, and all sequences giving higher scores to non-toxin protein family hits in the cnidarian supplemented uniprot database were discarded. fourthly, sequences with two or more potential transmembrane domains, or having domain architectures different from known toxins, and gene ontology  term assignments unlikely to be related to toxins were also excluded from further examination. finally, the retained sequences were compared by blastp to the translated a. digitifera genome, and those with peptide sequences coverage greater than 75 % and e-value homology below  <dig> e− <dig> were predicted to be bona fide coral specific toxins. a total of  <dig> potential toxins could be recovered following this five stage filtering process. these  <dig> potential toxins are shown in table  <dig>  together with a expectation of likely biological function by inference to a known animal toxin with closest peptide sequence homology. nearly a quarter  of the potential a. digitifera toxins shared most similar sequence homology to that of other known cnidarians toxins.table  <dig> predicted venom proteome of potential toxins from the translated genome sequence of acropora digitifera





identification of potential gene duplicates
evaluation of  the role that gene duplication plays in the evolution of toxin diversity requires phylogenetic analysis of sequence data to identify related paralogs from many closely related species. no such data exists for coral species; hence, potential gene duplicates were used as the most likely sequences to be best related to true paralogs. gene duplicates were identified using a newly developed hmm-hmm based hierarchical clustering tool called hhcompare. clustering was also performed using standard maximum likelihood and maximum parsimony phylogenetic methods. all three methods grouped together all of sequences related by identical function , although there was a slight difference in the number of groups generated by the different methods . tajima’s test of neutrality was performed on each group containing more than  <dig> domain sequences and, in all cases produced a d statistic greater or equal to  <dig>  indicating balancing selection. when taking the results from the three clustering methods together , the positioning of 36/ <dig>  sequences within specific groups inferred that these sequences had arisen following gene duplication events. these  <dig> sequences could be divided amongst  <dig> groups with predominantly cytotoxic or toxic protease activities. the remaining  <dig> sequences could not be grouped and were regarded as singlets, again with mainly cytotoxic activities, possibly involved in affecting haemostasis, immune function, neurotoxicity or toxin maturation.

identification of potential toxins in the proteome of a. digitifera nematocysts
mass spectral data of peptide fragments obtained from tryptic digests of soluble proteins extracted from discharged nematocysts were first matched for identity to the predicted toxins of a. digitifera . stringent identity criteria of two peptide matches at greater than 95 % sequence similarity were selected that gave just  <dig> homologous matches, representing 22 %  of the potential toxins in the translated genome sequence. a mascot search  of the spectral data for matches to the predicted proteome of symbiodinium clade b <dig> was performed to also identify any endosymbiotic algal peptide sequences with homology to predicted a. digitifera toxins. no potential contaminating symbiodinium clade b <dig> proteins were identified despite using a blast search with a stringent e-value cut off selection criterion of  <dig> e− <dig>  the venom toxins of a. digitifera had a relatively narrow profile of predicted biological activities such to include phospholipases and pore forming toxins, toxic peptides and peptides predicted to disrupt haemostasis or immune function. metalloproteases and other peptidases possibly involved in venom toxin maturation were also annotated as part of the expected toxin proteome. of the  <dig> peptides attributed to gene duplication,  <dig> were detected in the proteome which represented 50 %  of the total peptides in the expressed venom. manual validation of mass spectra for annotation of  <dig> potentially unique a. digitifera coral toxins was assessed by searching the pride proteomics data repository  for the dataset named ‘acropora_digitifera_toxins’, with sequences in fasta format are also available from zoophytebase .

discussion
toxin diversification in venoms is traditionally accepted to have arisen by convergent recruitment of genes that have evolved independently within the glandular tissues of diverse animal lineages, following common molecular processes of dna sequence duplication and deletion . yet, the concept that gene recruitment, sequence duplication and sequence deletion alone are sufficient to explain the surprising chemical diversity of toxins in venoms is increasingly being challenged as genome, transcriptome and proteome data from venomous animals are becoming available  <cit> . cnidaria is likely to be the most basal of extant metazoans to be venomous, so we used acropora digitifera for which we had already annotated the predicted proteome  <cit>  to evaluate the extent to which gene duplication could account for toxin diversification in this reef-building coral.

here, a blast homology search of the a. digitifera predicted proteome against the uniprotkb/swiss-prot tox-prot dataset, followed by a stringent five step process to exclude proteins with possible non-toxic physiological functions , uncovered  <dig> potential toxins with homology to higher animal toxins . this was a low number of potential toxin encoding genes in comparison to that of the two venomous vertebrates for which genome sequences are presently available. such, there were  <dig> potential toxin encoding genes identified by similarity to known toxins encoded in the genome of the duck-billed platypus ornithorhynchus anatinus  <cit> , and  <dig> predicted toxin encoding genes with homology to toxin families were identified in the genome sequence of the king cobra ophiophagus hannah  <cit> . however, there was a disparity between the higher numbers of predicted toxin encoding genes that had arisen from likely duplication events identified in this study  as compared to much lower numbers of gene duplicates in the duck-billed platypus and king cobra genomes. of the  <dig> platypus genes with significant sequence similarity to known toxins, only  <dig>  were likely to have evolved subsequent to a duplication event; this low number would suggest that the venom of the platypus is diversifying slowly and likely under negative selection. indeed, the  <dig> gene duplicates were not members of any major known lethal toxin gene families, and so the venom is unlikely to be under strong adaptive  evolutionary pressure, thereby producing venom of low potency  <cit> . this would agree with the likely purpose attributed to platypus venom, which is to incapacitate rather than to kill mating competitors  <cit> , a widespread common sexual selection pattern among mammals. in contrast, the  <dig> potential toxin encoding genes predicted in the genome of the king cobra have undergone massive expansion, with  <dig>  likely to have arisen following gene duplication. of these  <dig> duplicates,  <dig> were concentrated in just three major lethal toxin gene families, namely the three-finger toxins, phospholipase a <dig> and snake venom metalloproteinase enzymes  <cit> . this high number of gene duplications is consistent with natural selection for specific prey, which requires highly toxic and lethal venom that is evolving quickly to adapt to molecular co-evolution of prey resistance  <cit> .

evaluation of the role gene duplication plays in the evolution of toxin diversity in basal metazoa requires bioinformatics methods to identify putative gene paralogs. there are currently two standard approaches based on either comparing the positions of paralogs on phylogenetic tree relationships or by assessing the degree of identity between sequences using blast similarity searching methods. both methods require genomic, transcriptomic or proteomic data obtained from many closely related species in order to identify related paralogs. there are sequenced genomes only for three distantly related cnidarians available in the public domain, and so, tree and blast based approaches to identify paralogs is not dependable. currently available clustering methods such as cd-hit and blastclust  from the ncbi–blast package  <cit>  can be used to infer potential orthology, but do not provide an evolutionary perspective, and such fall short in precision because they use blast-like algorithms. comparison of similarity between groups of potential orthologs based on generating and then comparing hidden markov models  does allow inference of evolutionary distance. however, there are currently no tools available that compare hmms and then cluster orthologous proteins to allow potential paralogs to be detected within ortholog clusters. for this reason we have developed a new tool called hhcompare. it implements well tested hhsuit programs for hmm generation and hmm vs hmm comparisons  <cit> . hhcompare then uses iterative pairwise hmm vs hmm comparisons to generate related ortholog groups based on high hmm-hmm similarity  and then generates relationship trees to cluster the orthologous groups, thereby allowing potential orthologs in and between cluster groups to be detected. in this study, such a low e-value cut-off would only cluster extremely similar orthologous proteins, and so this approach was considered a proxy for likely gene duplication in the absence of sequences from closely related species. the strength of this clustering compared favourably against two standard methods of approach . the  <dig> predicted toxins encoded in the a. digitifera genome formed  <dig> clusters with two or more sequences and  <dig> singlets . this requires that an astounding 65 % of the predicted venom of a. digitifera had likely arisen subsequent to gene duplication, which is far greater than the total expansion of toxin genes reported in the king cobra venom . this degree of duplication is nearly equivalent to gene expansions reported for specific toxin families in other venomous animals. conotoxin genes are thought to be the most rapidly evolving in the metazoa with 70 % of the a-superfamily of conotoxin genes having been established by gene duplication  <cit> . in sharp contrast, genes encoding the sphingomyelinase d toxin in sicariid spiders are believed to be composed of only  <dig>  % of gene duplicates  <cit> . to our knowledge, a. digitifera has the greatest percentage of toxin encoding gene duplications yet reported in the genome of any venomous animal to date.fig.  <dig> gene duplication prediction by clustering of acropora digitifera predicted toxins. clustering was performed using the hhcompare tool and verified by maximum likelihood and maximum parsimony based methods. groups marked with * are detected by maximum likelihood and maximum parsimony based clustering, while groups marked ! were not detected. proteins highlighted in yellow were detected by high throughput mass spectrometric protein analysis of soluble proteins from discharged nematocysts.



to assess what adaptive selective pressures might drive and maintain such massive gene expansions in a. digitifera, the expressed venom proteome was determined empirically using high throughput mass spectrometric protein analysis. when matched predicted toxins against the translated proteome sequence, and surprisingly only 22 %  of the predicted proteome could be identified using strict spectral identification parameters. although peptides likely to be products from gene duplicates accounted for 50 %  of the toxic proteome, the high number of potential toxins not detected in the venom proteome might reflect poor promotor recognition and therefore weak expression of very recently duplicated genes such that protein abundance is less than the detection limits of the proteomics method  <cit> . such a high number of gene duplicates would suggest that the venom is evolving rapidly under adaptive, positive selection. however, with so many of the gene duplicates not seemingly expressed in the empirically determined proteome would, in fact, indicate contrarily that the venom of a. digitifera has low toxicity since it is evolving gradually under negative selection. this is in broad agreement with data comparing multiple alignments of amino acid sequences and calculations of amino acid substitution rates, particularly for the sea anemone peptide neurotoxins and pore-forming toxins, which show these cnidarian toxins are under negative selection and thus are highly conserved  <cit> . likewise, critical examination of the evolution of three species across cnidarian lineages , the scyphozoan jellyfish aurelia aurita and the hydrozoan hydra magnipapillata) agrees also with our data that venom of the anthozoan acropora digitifera  shows little evidence for diversification through positive selection  <cit> .

the putative biological activities of the toxins in both the predicted and observed a. digitifera venom were dominated by cytotoxic phospholipases and pore forming toxins . this is not unusual compared to the known or predicted pharmacological effects of toxins in other cnidarian venoms. for example, in anthozoans, of which sea anemone venoms are the most widely studied in all of the cnidaria, their venoms are composed mainly of pore forming toxins and peptide neurotoxins  <cit> . other anthozoan venoms are less widely studied, but our proteomic analysis of toxins from the coral stylophora pistillata  predicts that in this coral species venoms are also composed predominantly of cytotoxic peptides and neurotoxins  <cit> . the venoms of hydrozoans, such as those of the genus millepora  and hydra, are composed mainly of cytolysins, phospholipase and haemolytic enzymes  <cit> . a. digitifera does feed on microscopic phytoplankton and zooplankton, however, like all of the reef-building corals, a. digitifera has evolved an endosymbiotic metabolic partnership with photosynthetic dinoflagellates of the genus symbiodinium  which is essential for survival in the nutrient-poor waters of tropical marine environments  <cit> . the biological relevance of a largely cytolytic toxic arsenal could reflect a possible defensive role to deter fish predation and death by fouling organisms, including attack by coral-excavating sponges  which are strong competitors of corals for space on the reef shelf . biochemical studies to assign specific pore-forming activities to the a. digitifera cytolysins will require in future a comprehensive comparative review of pore-forming toxins in cnidaria to better understand the provenance and biological relevance of these toxins to the life history strategy of these animals  <cit> . it is a well-accepted concept that toxin gene acquisition follows duplication of genes encoding non-toxic physiological functions  <cit> . it follows that the toxin encoding genes that were considered as singlets in this study would have most likely have arisen following gene duplication that occurred in the very distant past such that strict evidence for duplication events could not be detected with the methods employed here. developing an evolutionary clock to determine if the timing of gene duplication events and emergence of specific toxin gene families is correlated with a transition of cnidarians from sessile animals in photo-autotrophic symbiosis to free living heterotrophic lineages is worthy of future research.

CONCLUSIONS
this is the first study to combine genome analysis and proteomics data to critically examine venom innovation in the cnidaria and the relevance of gene duplication in toxin diversification in particular. after filtering proteins with likely non-toxic physiological function,  <dig> potentially unique coral toxins have been described. exploring selection pressures and processes driving the evolution of venom is problematic in cnidaria since few genomes of related species have been sequenced. here we exemplify a new bioinformatics tool called hhcompare that overcomes the severity of this impediment. using this tool, predicted toxin encoding genes of the coral a. digitifera could be divided into orthologous groups that are the closest representation to gene duplicates currently possible, which is consistent with groupings determined by conventional phylogenetic methods. of the  <dig> toxins,  <dig>  are likely established by gene duplication, which represents the largest gene expansion as a percentage proportion of all toxin encoding genes identified in the genome in any venomous animal reported to date. only 22 % of these peptides were detected in the expressed proteome of discharged nematocysts, suggesting that the venom had evolved for predator defence rather than an offensive role for prey capture. biochemical validation of toxin activities is now warranted so that full annotation of a. digitifera coral specific toxins can be deposited in publically available protein databases. gene expansion by gene duplication appears crucial to toxin evolution in the basal metazoa such as exemplified by the cnidaria. factors influencing translation of these gene products to enhance venom potency provides a fascinating avenue for further study.

