BACKGROUND
the gene to structure endeavor faces intrinsic challenges at several steps in the experimental pathway. the primary challenge is expressing the great quantities of protein required to support structural studies, and this challenge can be magnified by the use and necessity of heterologous expression systems. while many research pursuits begin with protein purification, the extent of material required is a burden somewhat unique to protein crystallography. a second major problem of protein crystallography is identifying a suitable protein construct, given that small changes in the protein can have profound effects on crystallization  <cit> . these two problems are related since small changes in the protein construct can also have profound effects on the level of protein expression, solubility, and diffraction quality of protein crystals obtained. one recent report notes that construct engineering can double the number of targets expressing soluble protein in a heterologous system, and can provide a fourfold increase in the likelihood of obtaining well-diffracting crystals  <cit> . these aggregate improvements can enable extensive crystallization trials.

it is well known that codon utilization is highly biased and varies considerably among various organisms and codon usage is considered a key determinant of eventual heterologous protein expression  <cit> . codon bias in genomes can be defined as the unequal usage of synonymous codons in known or predicted open reading frames . codon-usage patterns are related to the relative abundance of trna isoacceptors, and genes encoding highly expressed proteins show differences in their codon usage frequencies  <cit> . extensive research by karlin and sharp have demonstrated that highly expressed genes in e. coli and other bacteria have a significant bias towards certain subsets of codons  <cit> . moreover, bacteria and unicellular eukaryotic organisms seem to have codon biases that are highly correlated with measured isoaccepting trna levels  <cit> . in general, where it has been measured, higher eukaryotes also appear to have codon biases that complement the abundance of isoaccepting trnas  <cit> .

it is generally thought that codon usage alters peptide elongation rates, however codon-usage patterns can also improve the fidelity and kinetic efficiency of translation  <cit> . since the level of isoaccepting trnas in e. coli are correlated with codon bias, it is likely that the presence of rare codons has a negative impact on expression of heterologous genes. it is also likely that the kinetics of translation are improved by more closely matching the codon usage of a recombinant gene product to the usage of the expression host  <cit> . apart from the nonrandom use of codons, it has also been noted that codon/anticodon recognition is influenced by sequences outside the codon itself, a phenomenon termed codon context  <cit> . there is, for example, an occurrence bias between specific adjacent codon pairs and these biases are different for highly expressed versus low expressed proteins in e. coli  <cit> . clearly, there are still a number of mysteries in the subject of codon bias and codon context. taken together these results also emphasize how difficult it is to create "codon optimized" genes for expressing proteins since the rules are complex and not yet fully defined.

as noted recently, more empirical evidence about protein expression from engineered genes is still needed, and efforts are being made to database the outcomes of gene engineering  <cit> . there remain a variety of other factors that should be considered when engineering synthetic genes and the details of "optimal" gene design continue to evolve  <cit> . for example, the synthetic gene sequence should not only contain the proper codon bias and codon context, but should also not result in mrna secondary structures that may inhibit translation  <cit> . additional considerations such as unusual sequence repeats, and cryptic regulatory sequences  can impact the fidelity and yield of protein expression  <cit> .

large scale projects in genomic sequencing and protein structure determination are producing enormous quantities of data on the relationships between 2d gene sequence and 3d protein structure. moreover, such efforts are providing experimental data on success factors at every step in the gene to structure research endeavor. this wealth of information should be used in a feedback cycle to facilitate the design and production of genes and protein constructs that are engineered for the successful production of functional protein samples for structural studies. fundamentally, this goal represents a bioinformatics software challenge.

to better address this issue in the context of synthetic gene design, we have created a protein construct design interface for gene composer which distills protein structure information from pdb files and comparative sequence information into a graphical user interface that allows the user to simultaneously analyze known protein structures, together with homologous target protein sequences for which derivative constructs can be designed. this interface allows the user to simultaneously understand sequence conservation, ligand contacts, and known or predicted structural elements to define candidate protein constructs for crystallization and then design harmonized nucleic acid sequences to express those proteins.

to demonstrate the utility of this approach, we have used gene composer to design protein constructs, as well as the synthetic gene sequences to express those proteins. we compared the resulting protein expression level to full length proteins expressed from native genes. we initially chose to examine proteins from three different sources  in two different heterologous expression systems . the results show that gene composer designed proteins and their corresponding engineered genes can be expressed at significantly higher levels than native genes. in addition, the results show that using gene composer to design protein constructs can significantly improve the likelihood of obtaining protein crystals.

RESULTS
construct design using gene composer™ software
in order to compare protein expression from engineered genes vs. native genes we chose to examine genes with significantly different g:c content and codon usage bias. we examined three globular proteins from three phylogenetically disparate sources including: ftsz, the cell division protein from b. subtilis; ns5b, the rna-dependent rna polymerase from hepatitis c virus; and p38α, a human protein kinase. using gene composer software, we made an alignment of each protein with published structural information, as well as the sequences of several homologous proteins for which structural information is not available. these alignments provided insights into the conservation of amino acid sequences and the known structure of homologous proteins that can be combined to engineer superior protein constructs for expression testing and crystallization trials. as an example, the protein alignment viewer of ftsz  shows that the first eleven n-terminal amino acids of b. subtilis ftsz are not conserved among several closely related species . in addition, the homologous n-terminal region of aquifex ftsz  is present but disordered in the crystal lattice . together, this information suggests that this n-terminal region is not important for the function and structure of b. subtilis ftsz, and that removal of this region could improve protein expression. a similar analysis of the c-terminal region of ftsz showed that a c-terminal region  was not conserved and not present in several other constructs used to generate ftsz crystals . based on this analysis we defined a truncated form of b. subtilis ftsz spanning residues ala12-ile <dig> .

a similar analysis was performed with ns5b and showed that c-terminal residues were not conserved and not visible within the electron density maps of several crystal structures. from this analysis, we identified a c-terminal truncation spanning residues 1– <dig> for expression testing. finally, an analysis of p38α showed that residues across the entire protein were relatively highly conserved and almost all residues could be visualized in published crystal structures. based on these results, we did not create a truncated form and only attempted expression of the full-length protein.

at this point, each target was moved into the gene design module  of gene composer™. for engineered genes, the nucleic acid sequence was determined by back-translation from the amino acid sequence. as previously described  <cit> , multiple factors were incorporated in the final design including e. coli codon usage, overall g:c content, potential mrna secondary structures, presence of out-of-frame stop codons, removal of cryptic shine-dalgarno sequences, removal of repeated strings of the same nucleic acid sequence, as well as the silent introduction and removal of select restriction sites to facilitate cloning. for native genes, the wild-type sequences were input with no sequence alteration. the resulting full length engineered genes and native genes express identical proteins, and were cloned into identical expression vectors.

protein expression in e. coli
in order to determine if the use of phylogenetic and structural information to design modified protein constructs and engineering of the nucleic acid sequence resulted in improved protein expression, we compared the level of protein expressed from the engineered synthetic genes to proteins  expressed from native sequences under identical conditions. it has been well demonstrated that expression conditions  can have a profound effect of the level of protein expression and it is certainly possible that some or all of these variables could be optimized to alter the relative expression levels between the engineered proteins; however we first chose to compare the expression under a single condition. this condition was based on an analysis of expression conditions used by multiple high throughput protein structure initiative centers and we believe a typical representative of a common "first pass" expression condition .

the results in figure  <dig> show that the amount of soluble protein produced by the gene composer engineered genes for all three targets are either equal to or greatly improved over the level of protein expressed from the native gene. this improvement was most dramatic in the case of ftsz where gene engineering resulted in a 12-fold increase in the amount of soluble protein from the same weight of cell paste . the deletion of n-terminal and c-terminal residues did not significantly improve expression relative to the full length ftsz protein . the expression of p38α from the synthetic gene was also significantly improved  relative to expression from the wild-type p38α gene. it is important to emphasize that synthetic gene engineering using gene composer does not always result in improved protein expression, and there was no clear improvement of expression of ns5b compared to native ns5b. we also compared the expression of four different human gpcr membrane proteins from engineered and native genes: human adenosine a2a receptor , human adrenergic, beta- <dig> receptor , human tachykinin receptor  <dig> isoform long , human galanin receptor type  <dig> . these gpcrs were expressed as n-terminal mistic fusions  <cit> , and in all cases the level of expression from the engineered gene was the same or slightly higher when compared to expression from the native gene .

crystallography and structure determinations
in order to determine if proteins expressed from the synthetic genes could be used successfully in protein crystallization experiments, we scaled up the expression and purified full length and truncated forms of ftsz. the purified proteins were concentrated and used in a series of random sparse matrix crystallization screens. for the full-length ftsz protein, we established  <dig> random sparse matrix sitting drop crystallization trials, but did not observe any crystallization hits after monitoring trials for one month.  <dig> different random sparse matrix crystallization trials were established with the truncated construct  and  <dig> different crystallization hits were observed following  <dig> week of monitoring. representative examples of these crystal hits are shown in figure  <dig>  based on the quality of crystal morphology and initial diffraction screening experiments, we focused on a single condition  and harvested crystals that diffracted x-rays to  <dig> Å resolution. the structure  was solved by molecular replacement as described in the materials and methods.

ftsz formed orthorhombic crystals and contained two molecules in the asymmetric unit related by a non-crystallographic 2-fold axis . non-bonded contacts at the ncs dimer interface are formed between the backbone oxygen of lys  <dig> and the side chain of asn  <dig> as well as glu  <dig> and glu  <dig>  the latter are formed via water mediated contacts. the structure was traced from ala  <dig> to phe  <dig> of ftsz for both subunits. although guanosine diphosphate  was not added during the purification or crystallization, analysis of the nucleotide binding pocket following refinement revealed prominent difference density  consistent with the presence of gdp. the presence of gdp in the active site of ftsz has been observed before  <cit>  and suggests that the crystallized protein is functional. gdp forms direct non-bonded contacts with the t <dig> loop  and t <dig> loops  . the latter corresponds to the tubulin signature motif  which is involved in phosphate binding  <cit> . these domains are in similar orientations to domains previously described  <cit> .

it has been shown previously that nucleotide exchange occurs readily and has negligible conformational effects in certain ftsz structures <cit> . to determine if this was the case for the b. subtilis ftsz structure, crystals of ftsz:gdp were soaked in the presence of gtp-γ-s. the crystals  tolerated the soaks well and diffracted to the same resolution  as ftsz:gdp crystals. similar to ftsz:gdp, this structure  was traced from ala <dig> to phe <dig>  however, the residual electron density at the c-terminus of subunit b was weak and the purification tag could only be traced to leu <dig>  also, residues lys <dig> and gly <dig> on chain b were disordered and were not modeled. examination of the difference electron density revealed that subunit a contained gtp-γ-s as there was clear density for the γ-phosphate. however, the gdp in subunit b was not exchanged as evident by difference density which was consistent with gdp. interactions with gtp-γ-s and ftsz are similar to those observed in the ftsz:gdp structure except that the γ-phosphate forms contacts with ala <dig> and ala <dig> of the t <dig> loop.

two additional crystal forms were obtained in the presence of lithium sulfate. a primitive tetragonal form, ftsz:so <dig>  was found to contain a single sulfate bound in the nucleotide pocket . this sulfate ion occupies position similar to that of the β-phosphate of gdp and gtp-γ-s observed for ftsz:gdp and ftsz:gsp. not surprisingly, the sulfate ion forms non-bonded contacts with residues in the t <dig> and t <dig> loops. the sulfate ion is positioned in a nearly identical manner as that observed in a recently published full length bacillus ftsz structure  <cit> . a c-centered orthorhombic crystal form  was found to contain two sulfate ions in the nucleotide binding pocket . additionally, prominent difference density was observed between the two sulfate ions which we clearly observed at a 6σ contour level. initially, a water molecule was placed at this site however this water was surrounded by a large amount of positive difference electron density following refinement. the unidentified atom appeared to be coordinated by two water molecules and two oxygen atoms of the sulfates in a distorted square planar arrangement. we considered the possibility that this was a magnesium ion. however, although four coordinate magnesium is a possibility it typically forms six coordinate interactions <cit> . we then used the program wasp <cit>  to examine the solvent structure for potential metal ions. the water positioned at this site of positive difference density was flagged as a possible sodium ion. therefore, a sodium ion was subsequently positioned in the difference density and refined. the refined metal-oxygen non-bonded distances and coordination geometry were consistent with those expected for a sodium ion <cit> . in this structure, the sulfate ions adopt similar positions as the α and γ phosphates of gtp-γ-s found for ftsz:gsp. similarly, non-bonded contacts are formed between the t <dig>  t <dig>  and t <dig> loops of ftsz and the sulfate ions.

these results clearly show that proteins expressed from a synthetic gene composer engineered gene can be successfully used in protein crystallization experiments. more importantly, the results also show that protein construct engineering using structural and phylogenetic information can be critical for successful crystallization of a protein target since only the truncated form of ftsz yielded protein crystals.

protein expression in e. coli under high-throughput conditions
in order to begin to understand how often engineering of the nucleic acid sequence will improve protein expression, we randomly chose eleven different proteins from three different bacterial species on the national institute of allergy and infectious disease priority pathogens list, and compared protein expression from full length wild type genes and full length gene composer engineered genes. the proteins were expressed from identical expression vectors, were amended with identical purification tags, and the final protein product pairs had identical amino acid sequences. all of the expressed proteins contained 6× his tags to facilitate quantitation of soluble protein expression. in these examples the proteins were expressed using autoinduction media  <cit> .

the results in figure  <dig> show that the level of soluble protein expression is nearly identical for the randomly selected eleven pairs of constructs . as a control, the engineered and native ftsz genes that had previously demonstrated significant differences in the level of protein expression under standard expression testing  were included in the experiment. a similar result was obtained with ftsz  with the engineered gene expressing at significantly higher levels than the wild-type gene, however there was only modest differences between the level of expression from the engineered gene vs. the native genes for the randomly selected constructs. this result demonstrates that redesign of the nucleic acid sequence does not always result in improved levels of protein expression; however it also demonstrates that gene engineering does not lead to decreased levels of protein production.

protein expression in cfs
the improved expression of ftsz and p38α from synthetic genes in e. coli may result from the biased codon usage of the native genes leading to abortive heterologous protein expression when rare trna pools become depleted in vivo. it is difficult to test this possibility in vivo because of the many factors that could potentially modulate levels of aminoacylated trna pools; however it is possible to control trna pools in vitro. to this end, we expressed several native and engineered gene sequences  in a wheat germ extract-based cell free system . the cell free system reagents include an excess of molecular translation machinery, resulting in a protein expression strategy that is not limited by depletion of trna pools. we cloned the same engineered and native ftsz, ns5b and p38α genes into a cfs expression vector  ensuring that the full length proteins had identical amino acid sequences. the proteins were expressed under identical conditions and all proteins present in the final expression extract  were resolved by sds page. the resulting commassie blue stained gel is shown in figure 6a. the results show that because the recombinant expressed proteins ftsz, ns5b and p38α only account for a small percentage of the total proteins present in the cfs extracts, an accurate comparison of expression levels of the proteins of interest cannot be made from the sds-page analysis of the total cfs extracts. only the ns5b protein bands of ~  <dig> kda in lanes  <dig> and  <dig> of figure 6b could be reliably discerned above the background proteins, and it appears that the native gene expressed ns5b protein in lane  <dig> is made in slightly larger amounts than its counterpart in lane  <dig> produced by the synthetic ns5b gene.

in order to more accurately compare the protein expression levels, the soluble 6x-his tagged recombinant proteins were purified from the cfs extracts by nickel chelate bead capture and resolved sds page with commassie blue staining as shown in figure 6b. the ns5b proteins were not captured by nickel chelate and were shown to be located entirely in the insoluble fraction of the expression extract . quantification of the full length purified ftsz proteins shows an approximate 2-fold increase in protein expressed from the engineered gene relative to the native gene, while expression of full length p38α from both sources is equal. thus, the difference in protein expression levels from synthetic engineered p38α and ftsz genes relative their native counterparts is modest in the cfs experiment, and do not recapitulate the outcomes observed when these genes were expressed in e. coli cells . taken together, these results suggest that the rare codons present in the native gene sequences of human p38α and b. subtilis ftsz can significantly hamper protein expression of these proteins in e. coli, but this can be overcome either by codon engineering for e. coli or by providing an excess of molecular translation machinery in the wheat germ cfs system. moreover, the synthetic codon engineered versions of these genes do not appear to offer any significant advantage for protein production in the cfs wheat germ extract.

in order to explore the possibility that codon engineering of synthetic genes for high level e. coli expression could affect protein production in a wheat germ extract, we compared the cfs expression of synonymous pairs of genes from arabidopsis thaliana whose codon usage is comparable to that of wheat, wherein the native a. thaliana gene is compared to that of a synthetic codon engineered gene designed with codon usage of wheat genes. in all cases, the level of cfs expression from the wheat codon engineered gene was the same or slightly higher than expression from the native arabidopsis gene . this data is consistent with the suggestion that translation machinery is not limiting for protein production in the cfs wheat germ extract.

CONCLUSIONS
obtaining sufficient quantities of soluble protein for structural studies often requires expressing proteins in heterologous expression systems. unfortunately, the native nucleic sequence of any gene is likely to be biased from the evolution of that gene for expression in the native host, and in some cases, the gene may have selective pressures to be naturally expressed at very low levels. this bias may affect codon usage, codon context, mrna secondary structures, regulatory elements, etc. which will likely impact the level of expression in a heterologous system. in order to overcome this fundamental problem, we have developed gene composer software to engineer any nucleic acid sequence for any given expression system . in this report, we have systematically compared protein expression from native genes to protein expression from genes specifically engineered for high level expression in e. coli.

the majority of genes tested did not result in improved levels of protein expression. there are several possible explanations for this result. first, the yield of soluble protein may be dominated by the balance of protein turnover. if a protein is extremely unstable, increases in the rate of translation or fidelity of translation will have only small effects on the steady concentration of that protein in the cell. future pulse-chase experiments designed to access rates of protein translation are necessary to address this possibility. another possibility is that the results reflect our lack of understanding of the many factors that are important for protein expression and the likelihood that the "rules" are different for individual genes and proteins. for example, the engineered synthetic genes were harmonized for codon usage, absence of sequence repeats, absence of repeating codons within a sequence, reduction of local mrna secondary structures within the transcript, and removal of cryptic shine dalgarno sequences; however, other factors may also be important for expression. it is not possible to test these unknown factors at this point; but synthetic gene design offers the ability to incorporate and test new gene design features as they become known.

because we are still in the early days of discovering all of the rules that govern gene optimization, it is important to determine if gene composer designed genes reduce the level of protein expression compared to native genes. engineered genes did not result in a decrease in the level of soluble protein from the  <dig> different genes tested, and in two cases, gene engineering resulted in a significant increase in soluble expression . the underlying cause for the dramatic increased expression of ftsz from the engineered synthetic gene is not immediately clear and likely results from a combination of factors. for example, comparison of expression of ftsz in e. coli vs. cell free expression may suggest that codon usage resulted in a decrease in expression from the native gene since both engineered and native ftsz genes expressed at relatively high levels in this heterologous system. the native ftsz gene contained a total of  <dig> rare codons  which were eliminated in the engineered gene , however ns5b contained a significantly larger number of rare codons  but elimination of rare codons from ns5b had no effect on the level of expression. the total number of rare codons may not be important if the location of rare codons relative to individual folding protein domains or mrna secondary structure elements could also affect protein expression. there are clearly a large number of different factors that could be the cause of the significant increase in ftsz expression.

codons rarely found in e. coli highly expressed genes are listed on the left. the number of occurrences of each rare codon in the wild type ftsz, ns5b and p38α full length genes are listed. the percentage of occurrence  is listed in parentheses.

the ability to express significant quantities of ftsz enabled the crystallization of this target and demonstrates the utility of gene composer for protein design and construct engineering for structural studies. specifically, we used gene composer to define structure-guided protein constructs for crystallization studies and showed that we were unable to obtain protein crystals of full length ftsz, but did obtain multiple crystal hits from the truncated, engineered ftsz construct .

in conclusion, these results demonstrate the utility gene composer for the design of protein constructs and synthetic genes to express those proteins. the use of protein engineering to improve crystallization can have a significant impact on the gene to crystal structure process since very complex protein construct engineering principles  can be rapidly implemented without multiple molecular biology steps that can require significant amount of time and effort. because engineering of the nucleic acid sequence did not decrease the level of protein expression and in some cases dramatically improved expression, synthetic gene design can also significantly improve the gene to crystal structure process. the utility of gene composer for engineering nucleic acid sequences will improve as more design principles are identified, especially as the cost of gene synthesis continues to decrease and robust protocols for rapidly synthesizing genes become more available.

