BACKGROUND
the separation of bacteria into discrete taxa is still a matter of controversy in biological systematics. notably a universal definition of bacterial species, as it exists for eukaryotes, is an issue of ongoing debate. the ability of bacteria to acquire genes horizontally, as well as the ability to lose vast numbers of genes when adapting to a specific niche, raises the question if such a definition even exists  <cit> .

one concept from the early years of genomics is the differential genome comparison where genomes are compared as "bags of genes"  <cit>  to identify differences in the gene content of related isolates. it was hypothesized that the genes found in only one species or isolate might play an important role in the development of a specific phenotype  <cit> . however, one problem in the beginning of the genomic era was a clear prevalence of sequencing projects that focussed on bacterial pathogens. this limited the possibility to determine genetic features that are present in all representatives of one taxon, given that only a small fraction of the bacterial diversity is represented by pathogenic strains. but new time- and cost efficient sequencing technologies made it possible to sequence high numbers of non-pathogenic isolates, covering the entire spectrum of the genetic diversity of a taxon. in  <dig> tettelin et al. tried to describe a species by building its so called pan-genome <cit> . they defined the pan-genome of multiple bacterial genomes as a union of three distinct sets of genes: genes found in all investigated genomes , genes found in just one isolate  and genes found in more than one but not all members of the investigated group . subsequent pan-genome studies revealed that high numbers of core-genes exist for all investigated taxa, whether species, genus or family  <cit> . thus, using the pan-genome terminology, shared phenotypical traits should be reflected by genes included in the core-genome of a group of bacteria  <cit> . furthermore, picking up the idea of differential genome comparison, phenotypical traits that are specific to a group of bacteria, phylogenetically coherent or not, should be reflected by its unique core genome, i.e., core genes that are unique to this group in comparison to other, closely related organisms . it seems legitimate to assume that these unique core genes exist for certain groups of bacteria. but the question remains whether these genetic traits follow a phylogeny, i.e., are found in phylogenetically coherent groups of organisms, or whether they are distributed over isolates of various taxonomic clades without a close common ancestor. horizontal gene transfer  as well as the loss of genes may lead to the same pheontype in a phylogenetically diverse group of isolates. in this article, we will term groups of isolates that share a genetic trait or phenotype but have no closest common ancestor genophyletic groups in comparison to monophyletic groups, where all isolates are derived from a closest common ancester . for pathogenic bacteria the distributed genome hypothesis states that hgt is a major driving force in evolution of these phenotypes, indicating that unique core genes of pathogens may frequently be found for genophyletic groups  <cit> . however, a recently published phylogenomics study also states the existence of unique core genes for all investigated monophyletic groups of bacteria  <cit> .

xin the presented study we compared  <dig> vibrionaceae genomes to address the question whether unique core genes exists inside this bacterial family and whether they appear more often in monophyletic than in genophyletic groups. given that unique core genes exist, the cellular processes these genes are involved in, can provide knowledge about niche adaptation and development of specific phenotypes. in case of unique core genomes of monophyletic groups, these genes may also provide a way to rapidly classify bacteria into different species as proposed by dutilh et al. <cit>  which is of particular interest not only for taxonomists but for the development of clinical and diagnostic tests. additonally, they are promissing targets for the development of vaccines and antibiotics specific for a discrete group of bacterial organisms.

for our analysis we chose the family vibrionaceae of gamma-proteobacteria because it is a diverse group that currently encloses  <dig> species from seven genera, including vibrioaliivibrio and photobacterium, and they are typically abundant in aquatic environments   <cit> . historically, representatives of the vibrionaceae family have attracted considerable attention because of their abilities to cause serious diseases in humans , for example after consumption of undercooked seafood or intake of contaminated water. despite the infamous reputation of vibrionaceae, the majority of these bacteria are normally harmless to healthy humans animals and play important roles in their natural habitats, for example in the regeneration of nutrients.

RESULTS
genome dataset
table  <dig> summarizes the genome dataset used in the presented study . it comprises  <dig> genome sequences from the bacterial family vibrionaceae, and includes representatives from  <dig> species that are distributed into the vibrio, aliivibrio and photobacterium genera . in addition to  <dig> vibrionaceae genomes, that were publicly available when this study was initiated, the genome sequences of aliivibrio wodanis str. 06-09- <dig> and vibrio anguillarum str. nb <dig>  obtained from our own sequencing projects, were also included. thirteen of the genome sequences are completely assembled: nine, three and one of which belong to the vibrio, aliivibrio and photobacterium genera, respectively. the dataset includes pathogenic as well as non-pathogenic organisms from  <dig> clinical and  <dig> environmental isolates. the origin of the remaining four genomes could not be verified. genome sequences of  <dig> different vibrionaceae species are included, of which nine are represented by more than one strain. of these are six species represented by either just pathogenic or non-pathogenic organisms, whereas the three species v. cholerae, vibrio alginolyticus and vibrio harveyi contain both types.

composition of the dataset used in this study. a complete list of all  <dig> genomes can be found in additional file  <dig> 

1the origin of two isolates, whether environmental or clinical, could not be determined.

in summary, we compiled a large dataset which includes genome sequences from  <dig> representatives of the bacterial family vibrionaceae. pathogenic and non-pathogenic organisms are included as well as environmental and clinical isolates, covering a wide spectrum of the genetic diversity of this family.

identification of unique core genomes
the sequences of  <dig> isolates from our dataset were subjected to the glimmer gene prediction software  <cit>  to provide gene predictions of equal and high quality. the genome sequence of aliivibrio salmonicida was manually curated in our group  <cit>  and used as a template for annotation later in this study. in total the predictions identified  <dig>  protein coding sequences in all  <dig> isolates.

clustering of homologous genes was performed using orthomcl  <cit>  on the translated protein sequences of all predicted genes. as our dataset comprises relatively closely related organisms we chose a conservative parameter value of 50% sequence identity for the clustering. additionally, to minimize changes in the clustering that are based on software parameters, we performed multiple orthomcl runs with varying parameter values and excluded those clusters that were not stable among all conditions . for the identification of unique core genomes we excluded those homology clusters that either contained all  <dig> or just duplicates from one isolate. in total, we identified  <dig>  clusters of unique core genes in our dataset that are stable over all orthomcl runs performed. they containing a total number of  <dig>  protein sequence, i.e., 74% of all protein sequences in the dataset. the different unique core genomes were then determined by identification of those homolog clusters that contain protein sequences of the exact same isolates. this resulted in  <dig>  different combinations of  <dig> to  <dig> isolates that shared at least one unique gene. hence that the number of homology clusters included in each unique core genome also denotes the minimal number of genes per isolate included in it.

we sub-divided all unique core genomes that contain more than  <dig> homology clusters into  <dig> distinct groups: monophyletic groups of isolates, genophyletic groups of isolates and coherent phylogenetic groups with one isolate missing . the third group of incomplete monophyletic groups was introduced to accommodate the fact that the majority of the genome sequences included in this study are not fully assembled and thus might lack genes although they are present in the complete genome sequence. figure  <dig> summarizes the distribution of unique core genomes in our dataset based on the number of homology clusters and isolates included. it shows that the vast majority  of the unique core genomes found contains at most  <dig> homology clusters. another expected observation is that the amount of homology clusters, and thus the number of genes per isolate, decreases with increasing number of isolates included. of the  <dig> unique core genomes that contain  <dig> homology clusters and more, 39%  contain only two isolates. of these,  <dig>  are found in genophyletic groups of isolates, showing that unique core genomes of few isolates are found in equal numbers in monophyletic and genophyletic groups. furthermore, among the  <dig> unique core genomes that are formed by groups of at least  <dig> isolates and that contain more than  <dig> homology clusters,  <dig>  are found in genophyletic groups of isolates. thus, an increasing number of isolates per unique core genome decreases the fraction of unique core genomes of genophyletic groups. another major finding is that unique core genomes of genophyletic groups rarely exceed  <dig> homology clusters whereas almost 50% of all unique core genomes of monophyletic groups include > <dig> homology cluster.

phylogenetic relationships among the investigated genomes
we wanted to evaluate the clusters of homologous genes, as identified by orthomcl, in a phylogenetic context, and therefore constructed a robust phylogeny based on the nucleotide sequences of six core genes . the genes were selected based on criteria as recommended by zeigler   <cit> . the sequences of all six genes were concatenated and aligned using mafft v.  <dig>   <cit>  to produce a final dataset of  <dig> sequences of  <dig> nt in length. phylogenetic analyses were carried out using the epos framework v.  <dig>   <cit> . maximum-likelihood  phylogeny of the sequences was constructed using raxml v.  <dig> . <dig>  <cit>  and testamatakis <dig> bayesian inference of phylogeny was done using mrbayes v.  <dig> . <dig>  <cit> .

after reconstruction of the vibrionaceae tree  the size of the unique core genomes of three genera  and nine species was mapped onto the phylogeny. the size of an unique core genome represents the number of homology clusters that are unique to a specific group of isolates. each genus includes fifty-five , five  and four  genomes. for species, the corresponding numbers were two , three , five  and twenty-six . for all investigated phylogenetic lineages we found sets of core genes not found in any isolate outside the clade. for the three genera vibrio, photobacterium and aliivibrio the synapomorphic unique core genomes consist of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> genes, respectively. the corresponding numbers for the nine species are  <dig> unique core genes for v. cholerae,  <dig> for v. mimicus,  <dig> for v. harveyi,  <dig> for v. parahaemolyticus,  <dig> for v. alginolyticus,  <dig> for v. vulnificus,  <dig> for v. splendidus,  <dig> for p. profundum and  <dig> uniquecore genes for a. fischeri. additionally, we calculated the size of the unique core genome of both v. splendidus isolates and strain v. sp. med <dig>  which included  <dig> unique core genes.

in summary, our results show that unique core genomes exist for all investigated taxa of the bacterial family vibrionaceae. although this was already recently suggested for any bacterial taxa we could show that unique core genes can be identified even when comparing high numbers of closely related isolates of a single bacterial family  <cit> .

tracking of unique core genes on the vibrionaceae phylogeny reveals local maxima at taxon borders
to investigate in further detail how unique core genomes are distributed on the phylogeny, we calculated the changes in size of a unique core genomes, when starting at one leaf in the phylogenetic tree and successively adding the closest neighbors to our calculation. the numbers of unique core genes were then subsequently mapped onto the vibrionaceae phylogeny. figure  <dig> shows two examples where counting of unique core genes started at v. cholerae  or v. parahaemolyticus  strains of most recent origins. interestingly, the number of unique core genes was close to zero, for the species at which the counting started unless all isolates were included in the dataset. once all genomes were included a local maximum was typically calculated. for example, when starting from the v. cholerae isolate of most recent origin, we observe the first local maximum  when all v. cholerae genomes are included in the calculations . furthermore, the next local maximum of  <dig> unique core genes is found when all the closest neighbors  were added. the next major local maxima are found after inclusion of all representatives of  the vibrio genus and  the photobacterium genus. similarly, we calculated local maxima at taxon borders when starting at the v. parahaemolyticus clade . these figures show that, following the phylogeny, unique core genes are found almost exclusively in monophyletic groups of isolates.

unique core genomes of groups of genophyletic isolates
the existence of unique core genomes of isolates that do not share a closest common ancestor can be explained either  by loss of genetic features from the majority of representatives of a bigger phylogenetic group or  by hgt. although hgt can generally be considered more parsimonious than many separate gene deletion events, we wanted to estimate its frequency in unique core genomes of genophyletic groups. we investigated the annotated functions of the unique core genes of one, preferably fully assembled, template isolate per unique core genome and searched for genes with plasmid or phage related functions. additionally, genes related to pathogenicity were also assumed to indicate hgt as recent studies have shown that hgt plays a major role in the evolution of pathogenic bacteria  <cit> . we also investigated the distribution of the unique core genes on the chromosomes of the chosen isolate. we assume that gene loss results in gene artefacts with little or no spatial correlation rather than in clusters of genes found in the same genomic loci. by contrast, horizontally acquired genes are more likely to be found in one genomic loci that has been transferred into the host cell.

in our analysis we identified  <dig> different unique core genomes that are formed by genophyletic groups containing at least  <dig> homology clusters. the number of isolates in these groups vary from  <dig> to  <dig> with 48% including > <dig> isolates. additional file  <dig> summarizes the functional annotations and numbers of genomic loci the unique core genes of the chosen template isolates are found in. of all  <dig> unique core genomes  <dig>  are found in less than  <dig> genomic loci on the template. additionally, unique core genes of genophyletic groups of few isolates tend to be widely distributed in the template sequence. on the other hand, unique core genes of genophyletic groups of > <dig> isolates are almost exclusively found in single loci on one of the chromosomes. functional analysis revealed that almost 50%  of the genophyletic unique core genomes contain hypothetical proteins or proteins of various ambiguous or unrelated functions. we were able to annotate functions to  <dig> of the unique core genomes that are found in few genomic loci: seven are mostly associated with plasmid or phage related functions and one encloses all but two genes of the toxin co-regulated pilus gene cluster of v. cholerae <cit> . another four unique core genomes of genophyletic groups mostly contain proteins that are associated with secretion systems iii, iv or vi and three additional unique core genomes enclose mostly homologs of the flagellar apparatus. annotation of the remaining unique core genomes revealed genetic loci related to bacterial flagellar or fimbria, purine metabolism and various other functions .

in summary, we found indications that hgt is the origin of most unique core genomes of genophyletic groups, notably when the number of included isolates reaches four. additionally, our results support previous findings about the impact of hgt on the evolution of pathogenic bacteria, by showing that among the biggest genophyletic groups are those unique core genomes that comprise mostly genes associated with pathogenicity.

unique core genes and niche adaptation
in an attempt to link unique core genes of monophyletic groups to behavioral and metabolic traits we further investigated the unique core genome of v. cholerae. this species was chosen as a case study because, given that it is the biggest group in our dataset and given the number of closely related isolates it was differentially compared to, we assume that the unique core genes of v. cholerae are most likely to stay unique for this species, even if more vibrionaceae genomes are added.

the unique core genome of v. cholerae was calculated to comprise  <dig> genes. unfortunately the biological role of  <dig> genes remains unknown or show only poor hits to known functional classes. however, the annotations of the remaining three genes provide more insight into the role of unique core genes for the development of particular phenotypes. one unique core gene is annotated as the aerotaxis protein aer <dig> and is part of the class of methyl-accepting chemotaxis proteins. these proteins sense one or several biochemical stimuli and enable motile bacteria to rapidly change their tactic behavior to either move towards the stimulus or away from it  <cit> . aer <dig> was recently reported to cause aerotaxic behavior in v. cholerae <cit> . aerotaxis, or energy taxis, is the movement of bacteria towards or away from oxygen, a crucial electron acceptor in the energy metabolism of many organisms. this and related energy-tactic behaviors have only been reported for a small number of bacterial species and are discussed as having a major impact on the adaptation of a species to its ecological niche  <cit> . the ability to navigate towards higher oxygen concentrations may represent a major advantage for v. cholerae that populates almost all aquatic environments, including brackish waters.

the remaining two unique core genes, vibh and vibd are part of the biosynthesis pathway of the catechol siderophore vibriobactin, which has previously been identified as unique to v. cholerae <cit> . the acquisition of iron is crucial for all aquatic organisms and the ability of utilizing iron through multiple systems was discussed to be important during growth of environmental v. cholerae isolates. the biosynthesis of specific iron-chelators in addition to other unspecific siderophores may represent an advantage for the adaptation to a specific niche  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows the biosynthesis pathway of vibriobactin in comparison to the biosynthesis of the closely related enterobactin as proposed by wyckoff et al. <cit> . enterobactin is also a catechol siderophore and is found in several gram-negative bacteria including escherichia coli <cit> . interestingly, the biosynthesis pathways of the vibriobactin and enterobactin precursor, named dhba, are identical, and it is the final steps that decide the fate of dhba to either vibriobactin or enterobactin. the final steps of synthesis of vibriobactin are dependent on the products of vibh and vibd <cit> . in other words, the biosynthesis of vibriobactin and enterobactin is dependent on the same set of genes, except for vibh and vibd that are required for productions of vibriobactin only and are part of the unique core genome of v. cholerae.

together, the genetic traits represented by the unique core genes, that are of known function, may allow optimal acquisition of essential nutritions and elements in the ecological niche of this species, especially in brackish or sewage-contaminated aquatic environments.

CONCLUSIONS
it is widely accepted that adaptation to a specific niche affects genome structure and gene content. the genomic changes may occur through rearrangement of genes and regulatory elements, changes in transcriptional regulation or by hgt and loss of genes. it was recently shown that gene loss and hgt play an important role in the genomes of highly specialized bacteria when adapting to the metabolism of a new host  <cit> . our results support these findings and additionally indicate that hgt is the main reason for genetic features that are shared among isolates that do not share a closest common ancestor. nevertheless, our findings show that unique genetic traits are more likely to be shared among monophyletic than among genophyletic groups of isolates. thus, even if bacterial diversity can mostly be described as ä continous spectrum of genotypic variation"  <cit>  we hypothesize that functional sub-systems exist that discretize this spectrum to an extent, where taxonomical demarcations are possible. this was also recently suggested for other bacterial taxa  <cit> . therefore, one cornerstone in a genome-based species definition will be the identification of common and unique functional elements present in monophyletic groups of organisms, with respect to their close relatives. furthermore, our results revealed that the genes identified to be part of the unique core genome of v. cholerae are likely to play an important role in adaptation of this species to its specific ecological niche. future studies may also investigate the importance of unique core genes of higher taxa, e.g. genera or other monophyletic groups, to examine their role in bacterial taxonomy and evolution. one crucial step in these studies will be the choice of appropriate parameters for homology clustering and determination of uniqueness of genomic traits. this was also discussed for pan-genome analysis’ where the chosen percent identity cut-off can greatly influence the outcome of a study  <cit> .

