BACKGROUND
divergence in sexual signals is important to the generation of biodiversity because it may lead directly to assortative mating and reproductive isolation between taxa  <cit> . indeed, because sexual signals affect mate recognition and thus pre-mating isolation, their divergence may lead to reproductive isolation more rapidly than the accumulation of post-zygotic barriers  <cit>  however, the relative importance of different evolutionary forces in causing variation and divergence of sexual signals remains unclear  <cit> .

non-sexual traits that are of direct ecological importance, such as those affecting foraging and thermoregulation, are likely to diverge via ecological selection and therefore should track underlying environmental variation  <cit> . for example, variation in bill length is correlated with environmental differences between the andean lowlands and highlands in the speckled hummingbird , most likely due to different selection regimes imposed by variable flower morphologies  <cit> . similarly, sexual signals may be constrained by ecology and environmental variation if, for example, diet affects the expression of the trait  <cit> , or if ecological factors constrain the transmission of signals  <cit> . in these situations, ecological selection helps shape the sexual signal, and geographic variation in the signal should also track environmental variation.

alternatively, sexual signals may diverge via stochastic processes independent of environmental variation  <cit> . in these models, random drift in the responses of receivers to variation in sexual signals can cause rapid and stochastic change in the signal, leading to phenotypic variation across populations that is not correlated with ecological factors. for example, prum  <cit>  found that the explosive radiation of sexual signals in neotropical manakins  is consistent with a stochastic divergence followed by fisherian sexual selection with little direct or indirect influence of ecology. there are thus multiple phenotypic axes along which taxa may diverge during speciation, with varying opportunities for environmental influence. the relative importance of ecological selection compared to fisherian sexual selection, especially during early divergence of sexual signals, is the subject of recent debate  <cit> .

we examined these issues in the red-backed fairy-wren , a small insectivorous passerine bird endemic to australia. currently there are two recognized subspecies that differ primarily in male plumage color and tail length  <cit> : the crimson-backed, shorter-tailed m. m. cruentatus subspecies occurs in northern australia, and the orange-backed, longer-tailed m. m. melanocephalus subspecies occurs in eastern australia . these subspecies are thought to also differ somewhat in morphometric traits, for example, m. m. cruentatus has been described as weighing less than m. m. melanocephalus <cit> . both subspecies are found in qualitatively similar open tropical savannah habitats across their entire range. there is a relatively large morphological contact zone between these subspecies in northern queensland that is defined subjectively by the presence of males with intermediate values for tail length and plumage color  <cit> . previous work has shown that male plumage color is a carotenoid-based  <cit>  intersexual signal used by females during mate choice  <cit> , and male tail length appears to be an intrasexual signal used primarily during male competitive interactions  <cit> . the two subspecies are moderately genetically differentiated across the carpentarian barrier, a well-known biogeographic barrier  <cit> , suggesting divergence during the pleistocene  <cit> , likely followed by secondary contact.

because the red-backed fairy-wren is at an early stage of speciation and exhibits variation in both sexual and non-sexual traits, it is an ideal species in which to explore the effects of the environment on divergence in sexual signals. in this study, we aimed to do this by analyzing variation in a suite of sexual and non-sexual traits across the species range and determining which traits are related to underlying environmental variation. traits subject to ecological selection  should correlate with variation in the physical environment. in contrast, traits subject to stochastic divergence in concert with sexual selection should not be correlated with environmental variation, but should instead exhibit geographic variation that is better explained by geographic distance, with greater distance signifying more time to accumulate stochastic variation   <cit> . by comparing the effects of environmental variables and geographic distance on sexual signals and morphometric traits, we aimed to distinguish between two alternative hypotheses:  if sexual signals have evolved via ecological selection, variation in these traits should be correlated with environmental variables, as is predicted for non-sexual morphometric traits;  in contrast, if sexual signals have evolved via sexual selection coupled with genetic drift, then this variation should be better explained by geographic distance, independent of environment. in addition, to further explore the geographic patterns of trait divergence between subspecies, we examined the influence of the carpentarian barrier and the plumage contact zone that exists further east  on trait dissimilarity . traits that have diverged between the two genetic lineages should show a strong signal of differentiation across the carpentarian barrier, as it is the hypothesized location of secondary contact and the genetic boundary between the subspecies  <cit> .

RESULTS
morphometric variation
for all traits, we ran a model with environmental variables, geographic distance, and potential barriers as predictor variables ; a model with only environmental variables as predictor variables; and a model with only geographic distance as a predictor variable. these were compared to models with random environmental variables to assess the significance of the results. for all morphometric traits, the full model explained much more variation in the data  than did the associated random model, . in all cases, the distance-only model was similar to the random model, with a low percent variation explained . for all but two morphometric traits, neither geographic distance nor either potential barrier was retained as an important predictor in the full model, and the environment-only and full models were thus identical. the full model for wing length did include geographic distance and the carpentarian barrier as important predictors, but they contributed relatively little to the fit of the model, improving the overall fit by only  <dig> %. similarly, the full model for bill width included the eastern contact zone as an important predictor, but it improved the overall fit by only  <dig> %.

for each trait, four separate models were run. reported for each model are the percent of variation in the data explained, and the predictor variables that were retained in the model. full models include isolating barriers if they were retained as important predictors. in parentheses are the most important predictor variables , listed in order of relative importance. the remaining predictor variables are listed in numerical order. variable numbers are taken from table  <dig> 

for each morphometric trait, different combinations of environmental variables were retained as important predictors, resulting in markedly different patterns of spatial variation . although many morphometric traits were influenced by a combination of environmental variables considered important based on the height of their response curves , there were two models where a single environmental variable exhibited a response curve dramatically higher than any other. in the models of weight and tarsus length, this single environmental variable appeared to drive the overall pattern in each case: there was a strong negative relationship between weight and bio1: mean temperature , and a strong positive relationship between tarsus length and percent tree cover . finally, environmental variation explained significantly less variation in bill morphometric traits  than in other body morphometric traits .

plumage hue variation
all models for plumage hue performed substantially better than the random model . the distance-only model explained a substantial proportion of the variation in plumage hue , and this variation explained was much greater than the variation explained by distance for any of the morphometric traits . the environment-only model also explained a substantial amount of variation , but this pattern appeared to be driven by a spatial correlation between geographic distance and environmental dissimilarity. a linear regression of the most important predictor in the environment-only model  on geographic distance supports this idea . overall, the best fitting model for plumage hue also included the eastern contact zone as a predictor variable, and it improved the fit of the full model from  <dig> % to  <dig> %. in addition to the improvement of the fit by adding the eastern contact zone, the independent effect of geographic distance was the most important predictor variable in the full model . in contrast, the carpentarian barrier – the boundary between genetic lineages – was not selected as an important predictor of plumage hue in any model.

male tail length variation
all models for male tail length performed better than the random model . the distance-only model explained more variation in male tail length  than in any other morphometric trait, although not as much as in plumage hue . the environment-only model explained  <dig> % of the variation. the full model explained a similar amount of variation , and although distance contributed to the fit of the model, it was not a very important predictor, and only increased the percent variation explained by only  <dig> % . neither the carpentarian barrier nor the eastern contact zone was retained as an important predictor in the full model.

discussion
morphometric variation
as predicted, most morphometric traits were strongly correlated with environmental variables, suggesting a role for ecological selection in shaping their variation. the independent effect of geographic distance on variation in morphometric traits was only detected for wing length, and in this case the effect was minimal. furthermore, the boundary between genetic lineages  was only selected as an important variable explaining variation in wing length, and again the effect was minimal. these results suggest that morphometric traits are not clearly divergent between the subspecies, but rather that geographic variation in these traits likely arises via local selective pressures from the physical environment, regardless of genetic background. this interpretation is further supported by close examination of the predicted spatial patterns of phenotypic variation. these traits are predicted to vary on a fine geographic scale in accordance with environmental dissimilarity across the landscape, and the resulting spatial patterns are quite different from what would be expected if one subspecies exhibited clear morphometric differentiation from the other. for example, variation in wing length follows a latitudinal gradient such that birds at similar latitudes appear to have similar wing lengths regardless of whether they are east or west of the genetic boundary between subspecies .

gdm results describe how dissimilarity in phenotypic traits is associated with environmental dissimilarity but they do not provide information about the directionality of these relationships. however, examining the linear relationships between certain morphometric traits and important environmental variables revealed two interesting patterns. first, there was a strong negative relationship between weight and mean temperature. this result suggests that red-backed fairy-wrens may conform to bergmann’s rule, which posits that organisms will evolve to be smaller in hotter climates to enhance thermoregulation via a more favorable surface area to volume ratio  <cit> . second, there was a strong positive relationship between tarsus length and percent tree cover, and longer tarsi may be an adaptation enabling the red-backed fairy-wren to better maneuver and forage in trees sensu  <cit> . we stress that these relationships, although intriguing, are subject to multiple interpretations, and it is difficult to infer evolutionary mechanisms from correlations at such a broad scale. for example, in the case of tarsus length, greater tree cover may influence other aspects of the microhabitat  not included in this study that may affect the evolution of tarsus length more directly.

interestingly, the association between environment and bill morphology was much weaker than that for other  morphometric traits, suggesting a relative lack of fit between bill morphology and environment. this pattern may be explained by the foraging ecology of the red-backed fairy-wren, as this species is a generalist insectivore capable of gleaning prey from leaves, foraging on the ground, and extracting prey from spider webs among other strategies . ecological selection on bill morphology may be relatively weak for a generalist of this sort, particularly if a single bill morphology is sufficient to exploit a diversity of prey. this interpretation is consistent with a recent analysis indicating a lack of ecological speciation among insectivorous warblers compared to granivorous finches  <cit> .

plumage hue variation
in stark contrast to the patterns observed in morphometric traits, we found several lines of evidence supporting a diminished role of environment and a greater role of isolation by distance in explaining variation in plumage hue. first, the distance-only model for plumage hue explained much more variation in the data than did the distance-only models for morphometric traits. second, when examining the full model for plumage hue, the independent effect of distance was evident, as it was by far the most important predictor of variation in plumage hue . this pattern was maintained when the western-most sampling site was removed from the model , indicating that the effect of geographic distance was not an artifact of a disproportionately distant sampling site. finally, the predicted pattern of spatial variation in plumage hue  was different from that of any morphometric trait: it did not vary in accordance with any of the environmental variables across the species range, but rather exhibited a clear change from one end of the species range to the other, with the greatest turnover occurring across the eastern contact zone. taken together, these results indicate that isolation by distance is the most likely explanation for variation in plumage hue. such a pattern is predicted by the hypothesis of divergent sexual selection via a fisherian mechanism, coupled with genetic drift in signals and responses to those signals during the period when the two subspecies were geographically isolated  <cit> . furthermore, isolation by distance is a particularly plausible mechanism of divergence in the red-backed fairy-wren, as they have extremely limited natal dispersal  <cit> .

the finding that environmental variables have relatively little effect on geographic variation in plumage hue has several implications for the evolution and function of this sexual signal. first, it suggests that the observed divergence in the carotenoid-based plumage color that characterizes the subspecies is likely not a result of differential availability of carotenoids in the environment. if this were the case, we would expect to observe a pattern where red and orange birds occur in environmentally distinct habitats where there might be a different amount or composition of insect prey . although we have no data on insect prey diversity or abundances, and do not know which specific environmental variables influence carotenoid abundance, similar environmental data sources and modeling techniques have accurately characterized the distribution of at least two australian insect species  <cit> . moreover, although availability of carotenoids in the environment can affect plumage color in some species of birds  <cit> , in many species, variation in carotenoid-based plumage color is not thought to be due to differential carotenoid intake  <cit> , and a recent review concluded that carotenoid-based signals are no more likely to be environmentally influenced than melanin-based signals  <cit> . similarly, availability of carotenoids does not appear to be responsible for variation in sexual signals in at least some other taxa  <cit> . geographic variation in a carotenoid-based plumage signal might be affected by other mechanisms such as a difference in the timing of molt or usage of food resources between subspecies. however, there is no evidence of any such differences, and importantly, such mechanisms would also be imposed by variation in the physical environment, and the resulting association between environment and plumage color would have likely been detected by our methods, as was the case for morphometric traits. thus, currently the most likely explanation is that geographic variation in the plumage signal is conferred by genetically based differences in the physiological ability to extract , absorb, modify, transport, and deposit ingested carotenoids  <cit> , though other explanations are possible. the most direct way to test this idea would be to directly modify the carotenoid content in the diet of captive birds from different geographic regions  <cit> .

second, these results also suggest that plumage color has not evolved through a sensory drive mechanism whereby a certain signal transmits more effectively in a particular physical environment sensu  <cit> . however, it is possible that the environmental variables included here may not be relevant to color transmission. analysis on a finer spatial scale with different environmental characteristics  might reveal differences in microhabitat not detected in this study.

isolation by distance rather than ecological selection seems to be influential in shaping variation in plumage hue, but the best-fitting model also included the eastern contact zone as a predictor variable, indicating that there is a high degree of dissimilarity in plumage hue across this region. this area, however, is located approximately 300 km east of the boundary between genetic lineages, the carpentarian barrier, across which we detected no significant difference in plumage hue. we suggest that the most likely explanation for this mismatch between the genetic boundary and the phenotypic contact zone is the asymmetrical introgression of red plumage from the western m. m. cruentatus subspecies into the genetic background of the eastern m. m. melanocephalus subspecies. theory supports the idea that hybridization can facilitate the introgression of an advantageous trait into another population  <cit> . in this case, introgression of red plumage may be driven by sexual selection if red-backed males have a sexually selected advantage via male competition  <cit>  or female choice  <cit> . finer-scaled spatial analyses of the possible lack of coincidence between genetic and phenotypic clines as well as field experiments will be necessary to test this idea.

male tail length variation
male tail length is presumed to be an intrasexual signal used in male competition  <cit> , and we predicted that it would exhibit a pattern of variation similar to plumage hue. instead, the pattern of variation in male tail length was more similar to those of morphometric traits, where environmental variables were retained as important predictors of variation, but geographic distance was not. in fact, the predicted pattern of spatial variation in male tail length was very similar to that of wing length . geographic distance explained more variation in male tail length than in the morphometric traits, but this effect was not as strong as in the models of plumage hue. this pattern suggests that evolution of male tail length may be constrained by ecological selection if tail length impacts survival in some way. red-backed fairy-wrens are not strong fliers and maneuver through their habitat primarily by hopping and making short flights , so the tail may play an important role in stability and balance during locomotion. this constraint may explain why there is not a clear divergent pattern of isolation by distance as is seen in plumage hue, despite a trend for m. m. cruentatus males to have shorter tails than m. m. melanocephalus males  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, comparing the influence of environment on sexual and non-sexual traits suggests that different evolutionary forces have shaped geographic variation in these traits. the red-backed fairy-wren exhibits variation in a number of morphometric traits such as weight and wing length that is well explained by environmental variation but does not show a clear pattern of divergence between the subspecies. these results suggest that ecological selection has acted on these traits to create geographic variation that is independent of subspecies identity, such that individuals exhibit morphometric traits that are adapted to the local environment. in contrast, variation in plumage hue, the most salient difference between the subspecies, is not well explained by environment, but rather shows a strong pattern of isolation by distance across the species range, with a particularly high rate of plumage hue change across the eastern contact zone. this pattern suggests that geographic variation in hue likely has evolved via a fisherian mechanism, beginning with a period of stochastic divergence  <cit> . upon secondary contact, red plumage appears to have introgressed across the genetic boundary between the subspecies, possibly driven by sexual selection. the evolutionary forces acting on male tail length appear to be more complex, as variation in this putative signal seems to be constrained to some extent by the environment, and male tail length has likely not evolved purely via stochastic or sexually selected processes. this study highlights the importance of considering sexual selection in combination with stochastic processes when examining the evolution of sexual signals, including those predicted to be under strong environmental influence. in addition, there is evidence that two putative sexual signals have evolved via different evolutionary pathways, with variable selective pressures from the physical and social environments. further experimental studies are needed to test the information content and function of male plumage color and tail length in multiple populations.

