BACKGROUND
gram-negative bacteria use diverse type ii secretion systems  to deliver a wide variety of proteins into the extracellular milieu  <cit> . transport is effected by a membrane-spanning complex of 12– <dig> structural proteins, generically termed gsp proteins . secreted substrates first cross the inner membrane by the sec or tat pathways; the gsp proteins then recognize substrates and transport them across the outer membrane. t2ss function requires several proteins that have homologs in type iv pilus biogenesis systems, including an oligomerized secretin, a helical protein filament called the pseudopilus, and a prepilin peptidase essential for pseudopilus assembly  <cit> .

secreted proteins serve many purposes, from electron transport to nutrient acquisition, and some are important pathogenicity factors for plant and animal pathogens in the enterobacteraceae  <cit> . type ii secretion has been extensively studied in pathogenic strains of escherichia coli, which collectively are known to use two distinct disease-promoting t2ss: the stce secreting system encoded by the po <dig> virulence plasmid  <cit> , and the heat-labile enterotoxin  secreting system common to many pathogenic strains  <cit> . recently the latter t2ss was shown for the first time to additionally secrete a non-lt protein, known as ssle, from the enteropathogenic strain e2348/ <dig>  thereby promoting biofilm maturation and rabbit colonization by e2348/ <dig>  <cit> . the ssle gene sits immediately upstream of the t2ss-encoding secretory genes, and transcription of ssle and the gsp genes was shown to be co-regulated in e. coli strain h <dig>  <cit> . in e2348/ <dig>  ssle exists as a lipid-anchored, surface-exposed protein in the outer membrane and is also released into the culture supernatant. strozen et al. termed the lt- and ssle-secreting system t2ssβ, to distinguish it from the chitinase-secreting t2ssα that co-occurs in several e. coli strains  <cit> . based on phylogenetic and structural analyses, dunstan et al. recently determined that the e. coli t2ssβ is part of a larger group of t2ss that contain “vibrio-type secretins”, making it a model for numerous type ii secretion systems used to deliver toxic substrates by vibrio and escherichia species  <cit> .

the ssle-secreting t2ssβ, unlike the stce-secreting po <dig> t2ss, is conserved in several non-pathogenic “safe” strains of e. coli , including wild-type b and w isolates  <cit> . to date, however, no report has described secretion of proteins by t2ssβ in any non-pathogenic strain. we were interested to determine whether non-pathogenic e. coli could also secrete the “virulence factor” ssle. secretion of ssle by a safe strain would imply that ssle itself is not capable of promoting a disease state, and would invite comparisons of ssle function between pathogens and non-pathogens. furthermore, if non-pathogenic e. coli could secrete ssle, the t2ssβ system could be studied using a non-pathogenic model organism.

we demonstrate here that the non-pathogenic e. coli strain w encodes a functional t2ssβ that secretes a cognate ssle protein. we found a strong effect of growth conditions on ssle secretion, which is relatively robust in rich medium at 37°c and undetectable when cells are cultured at 30°c or in minimal medium. previous work suggested that the c-terminus of ssle might be a permissive site for sequence insertions with regards to t2ssβ recognition  <cit> , but we found that c-terminal enzyme fusions to ssle blocked protein secretion and surface display.

as noted above, the t2ssβ was shown to promote mature biofilm formation in e. coli e2348/ <dig>  we searched for additional phenotypes in e. coli w by phenotypic microarray analysis of a mutant lacking t2ssβ-encoding genes on biolog stress plates. the phenotypic microarray indicated a potential fitness effect of the mutation in high concentrations of urea. using standard culture techniques, we found that deletion of t2ssβ-encoding genes, or the ssle gene, conferred a small survival advantage in medium containing high concentrations of urea.

our findings make t2ssβ the only virulence-associated t2ss with shared functions in pathogenic and non-pathogenic e. coli. considering our regulatory data and the clear homology between the t2ssβ-encoding operons of w and e2348/ <dig>  we propose that ssle is used by non-pathogenic as well as pathogenic strains of e. coli during host colonization.

RESULTS
e. coli w secretes ssle using t2ssβunder specific temperature and nutrient conditions
prior to publication of the finished e. coli w genome sequence  <cit> , a draft e. coli w genomic sequence generated by the u.s. department of energy joint genome institute in collaboration with the great lakes bioenergy research center  revealed the presence of the entire t2ssβ gene cluster, including a copy of the gene encoding ssle . to determine whether e. coli w secreted endogenous ssle via t2ssβ, we analyzed the proteomes of the wild-type strain  and a mutant lacking the genes encoding the conserved structural proteins of t2ssβ . we grew strains in liquid culture, then harvested cells by centrifugation and compared the proteins present in cell lysates and cell-free supernatants  by sds-page. we observed a ~180 kda protein, the expected size for ssle, that was present in the supernatants of wt cultures but not Δgsp cultures . the ~180 kda protein band was absent from supernatants and cell extracts of a Δssle strain, but reappeared when we complemented the ssle deletion with plasmid-encoded ssle . to further confirm that ssle was secreted and did not play an intracellular role in activating protein secretion, we attempted to complement the Δssle strain with a form of ssle lacking the sec signal peptide . unlike wild-type ssle, ssle-sp could not complement the secretory defect in the Δssle strain. taken together, our data demonstrate that ssle is secreted from wild-type e. coli w by t2ssβ.

intracellular ssle did not appear abundant in wild-type e. coli w, even under conditions where secretion of ssle was detectable. we observed accumulation of ssle in the cell when ssle was expressed from a multicopy plasmid, however. we postulate that in wild-type cells, the intracellular concentration of ssle is maintained at a relatively low level, and that ssle release from cells over time results in accumulation in the supernatant.

type ii secretion systems require prepilin peptidases to produce the mature, functional forms of their prepilin proteins  <cit> , and the prepilin peptidase pppa is required for secretion of lt by t2ssβ in e. coli h <dig>  <cit> . to determine whether pppa is similarly required for ssle secretion by e. coli w, we compared ssle secretion in wt to a Δpppa strain. ssle secretion was not detectable in the Δpppa background, and the mutation could be complemented by plasmid-encoded pppa . these results confirm that a fully-functional t2ssβ is required to secrete ssle, and indicate that expression of the gspc-m genes alone is not sufficient to allow ssle secretion.

we hypothesized that ssle secretion in e. coli w might play a role in host colonization, and that secretion might be regulated such that more ssle is secreted under conditions that resemble the mammalian gut. we assessed this conditionality by examining ssle secretion from cultures grown at different temperatures and nutrient conditions: 30°c vs. 37°c, and minimal mops-glycerol broth vs. rich lb . we observed secretion of ssle only in cultures grown in lb at 37°c, indicating that either reduced temperature or nutrient limitations are sufficient to block ssle secretion.

c-terminal fusions to ssle prevent secretion
in their initial characterization of ssle surface display and secretion, baldi et al. found that c-terminal fusion of a small tetracysteine-containing motif to ssle did not interfere with localization of ssle  <cit> . this result suggested that the c-terminus of ssle might not be important for the recognition of ssle by t2ssβ, and thus might be a permissive site for polypeptide fusions. we were interested in testing c-terminal permissiveness for two reasons: first, because it might provide information about the targeting of ssle for secretion , and second, because ssle fusions might be useful to anchor other proteins to the cell surface. we therefore independently fused two plant cell wall degrading enzymes, cel45a and pel10a from cellvibrio japonicus, to the c-terminus of e. coli w ssle and assessed the capacity of these fusion proteins to be secreted or displayed on the cell surface. both fusions resulted in stable, enzymatically active proteins when expressed in e. coli w. we did not generate fusions to the potentially lipidated n-terminus of ssle to avoid changes in lipidation that could affect protein localization.

we performed all secretion and display experiments side-by-side in wild-type and t2ss-deficient Δpppa strains, and present the results in table  <dig>  by following activity of the enzymatic fusions, we found that neither fusion protein was released into the medium under conditions in which we found wild-type ssle to be released. indeed, extracellular activity of ssle-cel45a was difficult to detect, though lysed cells released highly active enzyme. because the substrates for cel45a  and pel10a  are high molecular weight polysaccharides that cannot enter the e. coli cell, we were able to assess surface display of fusion proteins by measuring the enzymatic activity of intact cells as compared to cell lysates. these experiments further demonstrated that the fusion proteins were not displayed on the surface of the cell, but accumulated intracellularly.

a values shown are means of at least two biological replicates, with error in the last digit denoted parenthetically.

b extracellular activity divided by the activity from an equivalent fraction of lysed culture.

c activity measured using intact cells divided by the activity from an equivalent fraction of lysed culture.

inactivation of t2ssβ modestly increases urea tolerance
baldi et al. demonstrated that inactivation of t2ssβ in e. coli e2348/ <dig> inhibited biofilm maturation in confocal microscopic analysis of flow cell cultures, though it had no effect on early biofilm development in stationary plate assays  <cit> . to uncover other phenotypes related to t2ssβ disruption, we used e. coli w as a non-pathogenic model system in a partial biolog phenotypic microarray to compare wild-type and Δgsp strains grown with various stressors. the biolog dye-reduction traces are presented in additional file  <dig>  under most conditions the two strains were indistinguishable, but the screen indicated that elevated urea concentrations might differentially affect their growth. we examined this phenomenon in 96-well plate growth experiments under conditions in which our data showed ssle to be secreted . compared to the wild-type control, Δgsp and Δpppa strains maintained higher stationary-phase densities in the presence of  <dig>  m and  <dig>  m urea , suggesting that inactivation of the t2ssβ system modestly increased urea tolerance even when the structural gsp proteins were still expressed. we determined the role of ssle in this phenotype and verified modest urea tolerance by following the growth and viability of wild-type, Δgsp, and Δssle strains for 48 hours with or without  <dig>  m urea under the standard culture conditions we used for ssle secretion experiments . culture absorbance readings and viable cell counts indicated that, without urea, the three strains grew equivalently up to 12 hours and slowly lost viability between  <dig> and 48 hours, with indistinguishable final viable counts at 48 hours . in the presence of  <dig>  m urea all strains grew poorly, but Δgsp and Δssle strains maintained higher turbidity and viable cell counts than wild-type, with both mutants having > 60% more surviving cells than wild-type at 48 hours. we conclude that the inability to secrete ssle confers a small survival advantage in the presence of high concentrations of urea.

a –, no urea present; +,  <dig>  m urea present.

b colony-forming units per ml of culture at the indicated time after inoculation, shown as means ± sem for at least three replicate plate counts.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
strains within the species escherichia coli encode different combinations of type ii secretion systems, each of which secrete different effectors and presumably provide specific advantageous phenotypes to their host organisms. to this point, the only t2ss shown to be functional in non-pathogenic e. coli strains is the chitinase-secreting t2ssα, which is the sole t2ss encoded by e. coli k- <dig>  <cit>  and whose role in natural environments is unknown. we demonstrate here that, surprisingly, the t2ssβ that promotes virulence of the enterotoxic strain h <dig> and the enteropathogenic strain e2348/ <dig> is conserved, and secretes a virulence factor homolog, in the non-pathogenic e. coli w strain. to our knowledge, this is the first time a virulence-associated type ii secretion system has been shown to function in non-pathogenic e. coli. deletion of ssle could be complemented in trans, indicating that an ssle disruption does not prevent expression or assembly of t2ssβ in e. coli w. we observed that e. coli w preferentially secretes ssle under nutrient-rich conditions at human body temperature , which suggests that ssle may be a colonization factor in non-pathogenic strains. the regulation of ssle secretion in other strains is unclear, but expression of genes encoding the lt-secreting t2ssβ in e. coli h <dig> was also shown to be upregulated at host-associated temperatures  <cit> . we hope that future experiments will elucidate the role of ssle in host colonization by non-pathogenic e. coli.

if secretion of ssle indeed aids diverse e. coli in gut colonization, it is perhaps surprising that some gut-derived isolates of e. coli, such as k- <dig> and o157:h <dig>  lack the t2ss responsible for ssle secretion. such strains may compensate for the loss of biofilm-forming propensity using other mechanisms; strains bearing the f plasmid  may rely on f pilus-mediated aggregation  <cit> , for example. the genes encoding the ssle-secreting t2ssβ are present adjacent to the phev trna gene, which appears to be a hypervariable locus in e. coli <cit> , so they may be randomly lost at a relatively high rate. indeed, a comparison between phylogeny and t2ssα/t2ssβ presence suggests independent losses of t2ssβ in non-pathogenic strains . notably, b and w encode the complete t2ssβ, while crook’s and k- <dig> do not, in spite of the fact that crook’s diverged from k- <dig> prior to the divergence of b. this indicates that either crook’s and k- <dig> lost the t2ssβ-encoding genes independently, or that an ancestor of crook’s, b, and k- <dig> lost the genes, which were subsequently re-acquired by strain b. an examination of the t2ssβ-encoding loci in crook’s and k- <dig> strongly supports the former explanation. in k- <dig>  the t2ssβ-encoding gsp operon clearly experienced an internal deletion that removed the gspd-kβ genes, inactivating the t2ss. in crook’s, however, the homologous genomic locus appears entirely different: all gsp genes are absent, and in their place is the fec operon  and a variety of putative orfs. we infer that the most parsimonious explanation of the phylogenetic distribution of t2ssβ is that k- <dig> and crook’s both lost the t2ss at different points in their evolutionary histories. it remains an open question what pattern of gene gains and losses best explains the distribution of t2ssβ across the diversity of e. coli strains not considered in our analysis.

it is of interest to note that a non-polar deletion of the pppa gene, encoding a prepilin peptidase, prevents secretion of ssle by e. coli w. this result agrees with a similar experiment performed by strozen et al. to assess effects of pppa on lt secretion in h <dig>  <cit> . both w and h <dig> also encode a second prepilin peptidase  whose homolog is functional in facilitating chia secretion via t2ssα in k- <dig>  <cit> . whether the gspo peptidase is not expressed under conditions associated with ssle secretion in both w and h <dig>  or whether the two peptidases display different substrate specificities, remains to be determined.

strikingly, in the presence of the otherwise intact gsp operon, deletion of ssle was effective in promoting modest urea tolerance. when we first observed the urea-tolerant phenotype of the Δgsp strain, we hypothesized that the mutant’s advantage stemmed from lacking the transmembrane components of the t2ss, particularly the secretin pore in the outer membrane, which might be denatured by urea. the urea tolerance of the Δssle mutant rules out this hypothesis, however, and indicates that secretion of ssle by t2ssβ renders cells modestly more sensitive to urea. relative urea sensitivity is likely due to indirect effects on cell physiology of bearing surface-displayed ssle or of releasing of ssle into the culture medium.

we report here that enzymatic fusions to the c-terminus of ssle interfere with its targeting to the t2ss, as measured by release of fusion proteins and by display of fusion proteins on the outer leaflet of the outer membrane. previously, baldi et al. fused a tetracysteine motif to the c-terminus of e2348/ <dig> ssle and saw that the fusion protein was still displayed on the cell surface  <cit> . we do not think these results contradict ours, due to the significant structural differences between the fusion proteins in question. we propose that the six amino acids appended to the c-terminus of ssle in the study by baldi et al. did not affect secretion of ssle, but that our fusions of ssle to large tightly-folded proteins  occluded important targeting motifs recognized by the t2ss. the uncharacterized nature of t2ss recognition of substrates  <cit>  unfortunately limits our ability to speculate further as to what these motifs might be. future dissection of the ssle protein with internal deletions and protein fusions may yield new insights into the targeting motif of ssle, and determine whether ssle fusions can be used in the surface display of other proteins.

