BACKGROUND
it is believed that climate change is one of the main factors affecting global biodiversity  <cit> . during the history of life, fluctuations of the world's climate have most likely caused major extinctions  <cit>  and led to the development of new ecosystems, promoting new biotic interactions and the evolution of novel adaptive traits. the dynamics of such diversification events can be studied based on phylogenetic trees dated with fossils. here we focus on land plants. the origin and diversification of land plants has intrigued biologists for centuries. according to the fossil record, land plants diverged from green algae before  <dig> million years ago  and led to the major clades found today  <cit> . these are liverworts , mosses , hornworts  and tracheophytes. the latter include ferns , lycophytes , and seed plants, which in turn are separated into gymnosperms  and angiosperms .

there are various possible scenarios to describe the processes that influenced land plant diversification throughout geological time. one frequently proposed scenario is based on a successive replacement of ancestral lineages by more derived lineages, which in turn evolved similar habits , and diversified to fill up the niches left empty after the extinction of the 'previous' taxon. in this kind of scenario, extant taxa of liverworts, mosses, and ferns, are considered to be relicts of previous radiations  <cit> . an alternative scenario suggests a coincidence between diversification events in each of the extant land plant lineages instead of a 'continuous replacement' idea. in this case, the majority of extant diversity is either the result of recent radiation events or of a long accumulation of species diversity throughout a taxon's history  <cit> . external factors, such as the break-up of continents and climate fluctuations, are prominent factors influencing the branching of the tree of life.

in this study we ask two questions:  do we find evidence for non-constant rate of diversification in land plants?  are major shifts of diversification rates, if any, correlated with some major external factors such as global climate warming or cooling?

RESULTS
we inferred the divergence times of over 98% of all families of land plants in a single phylogenetic analysis based on multiple genes from two genomes . the topology and divergence times retrieved from the various analyses are broadly congruent with previous studies with limited sampling  <cit> . all major lineages of land plants as well as the relationships among them were supported  being mosses , lycophytes as sister to seed plants  and hornworts as sister to mosses  the clades with lowest bootstrap values . this topology is congruent with the analysis using the three most complete markers .

the tree was calibrated using multiple fossils. in one of the calibration procedures, we also constrained the age of angiosperms to a maximum of  <dig> ma following brenner  <cit>  . the estimated crown age of land plants was  <dig>  ma  and that of angiosperms was  <dig>  ma  whereas for the constrained tree we obtained a crown age for land plants of  <dig>  ma .

we produced lineage through time  plots for both time estimations, presented in figure  <dig>  these show a roughly constant rate of lineage increase , although for angiosperms, ferns and mosses some acceleration is apparent since the cretaceous, while for liverworts and gymnosperms a slowdown is observed .

a congruent pattern is obtained when we explore the data applying a high level of background extinction using a methodology developed by magallón & sanderson  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows sizes of the major clades against a 95% confidence interval of background diversification through time for land plants as a whole. in recent times, most clade sizes for mosses , ferns  and angiosperms  fall above these confidence intervals.

using a topology-based test of diversification  <cit> , a total of  <dig> significant rate shifts were identified, with a similar figure found for the constrained tree . the inclusion of  <dig> families with no dna data resulted in the identification of just one more shift in diversification, i.e. on the branch leading to balanophoraceae. we then explored the concordance of these shifts with the major cool and warm climatic modes  <cit>  and we found some striking correlations. the majority of shifts in diversification rates in angiosperms, ferns, and mosses coincide with the last warm climate mode . for liverworts, the highest number of shifts  took place in another warm climate mode . for gymnosperms, only one shift in net diversification occurred, but in this case, during a cool period. this pattern appears to also hold if we compare the timing of shifts in diversification rates with the more continuous global temperature change presented in scotese  <cit>  .

bold number columns correspond to periods of rate increases. time unit is mya . for each lineage the bottom row  corresponds to the constrained tree.

using another diversification test that take into account branch lengths , constant rates of lineage diversification were rejected for all major subclades. in gymnoperms, the best model was one with a rate shift occurring ca.  <dig> ma, corresponding to a decrease in diversification during a cool climate mode . in the other subclades, two-variable rates were favoured . in angiosperms, two consecutive slowdowns in diversification were identified for the current cool climate mode. in liverworts, a similar pattern was encountered but decreases in rates of diversification occurred firstly in a cool climate mode  and secondly during a warm climate mode . in ferns and mosses, we first observe two increases in diversification during a cool climate mode . subsequently, two decreases took place  <dig> ma  for ferns and  <dig> ma  for mosses . with the constrained tree, the pattern is similar for gymnosperms . in the case of angiosperms and liverworts, only one decrease was retrieved about  <dig>  and  <dig> ma  ago, respectively . this pattern is similar to that obtained in the unconstrained tree for mosses and ferns , although this time fern diversification increases during a warm mode  and decreases during a cool mode .

finally, diversification test incorporating multiple birth and death models as implemented in medusa  <cit>  located  <dig> diversification rate shifts being the highest overall net diversification rates for different clades within angiosperms . among land plants we also found rate shifts leading to high clade-size in mosses and ferns for individual families and clades . on other hand rates among liverworts and gymnosperms were among the lowest: their background rate were similar to the overall background rate, and their highest rates were lower than most rates found for mosses and ferns . results using the constrained tree were widely congruent  and a new rate shift for gymnosperms and higher net diversification rates across monocots were recovered.

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
by combining data for all families of land plants we are now able to clarify the picture of their evolution through geological times. lineages of extant gymnosperms radiated in the permian and experienced a decrease in diversification rate towards the end of the jurassic  or early cretaceous , during a cool climate mode. although their early history may have involved various lineage replacements associated with the evolution of new ecosystems  <cit> , we found that the slowdown in diversification of gymnosperms took place in the same period as liverworts while mosses were diversifying intensely, pointing towards a role of climate in determining such patterns.

in this study we were also able to evaluate the diversification dynamics of all families of mosses within a phylogenetic framework for the first time. our analyses converge to show that the diversification rate of this group experienced an important acceleration in the cretaceous, potentially 'replacing' the diversity of gymnosperms and liverworts. this occurred during a warm climate mode when tropical habitats were undergoing expansion. significantly, it also corresponds to the origin of the angiosperms according to brenner  <cit> , or to the origin of major groups of angiosperms  as found on our unconstrained analysis and as suggested by previous studies  <cit> . in this sense, mosses have diversified at the same period as the one reported for fern as "the shadow of angiosperms". it is important to note that the cretaceous could be divided in three main intervals with regards to vegetation and climate: i) "early" cretaceous  with few angiosperms, probably no closed canopy angiosperm forests, largely dry climates at low palaeolatitudes; ii) mid-cretaceous , where we observe the rapid diversification of angiosperms, with presence of some angiosperm-dominated forests but still no tropical everwet forests at low palaeolatitudes; and iii) "late" cretaceous , where we see an early development of angiosperm dominated forests, possibly with everwet forests in low palaeolatitudes of the old world, and perhaps also in the new world  <cit> . this is then followed by iv) the early cenozoic, when temperatures were warm and climate wet--and where there is strong evidence of widespread tropical-sub-tropical warm wet forests  <cit> . we found that all six shifts in diversification for mosses  fall within this last two intervals , pointing to the importance of both warm temperatures and wet climate for the rise of moss diversity.

according to our analyses, mosses were not the only group to have diversified in the shadow of angiosperms: ferns have also radiated in a period that coincides with the rise of angiosperms. such a pattern, had previously been reported  <cit> . here, we find further support for this hypothesis of diversification in the shadow of angiosperms, identifying a significant increase in diversification during the warmest period of the cretaceous, and decrease during the coolest period of the tertiary . more specifically, three out of the five rate shifts  fall within interval iii) above of the cretaceous, when climate was warm and wet.

finally, we found that angiosperm diversity has accumulated sharply in recent time , but diversification decreased in the coolest period of the tertiary . this is in agreement with the idea that angiosperms have outcompeted and outnumber gymnosperms and free-sporing plants  <cit> . subsequently, ferns  and mosses  <cit>  opportunistically diversified in the ecological niches provided by the angiosperms as the climate became warmer and more humid. in this sense, our study favours the "successive replacement" of ancestral lineages  <cit> .

