BACKGROUND
an ambitious goal of contemporary proteome research is the elucidation of the structure, interactions and functions of the proteins that constitute cells and organisms. during the last few years, large-scale efforts have unraveled the complex web of protein interactions in simple organisms such as h. pylori  <cit> , e. coli  <cit>  and s. cerevisiae  <cit> . most recently, attention has focused on the first protein interaction maps of complex multicellular organisms such as c. elegans  <cit>  and d. melanogaster  <cit> . although these organisms vary extensively in their complexity, corroborative evidence points to a series of simple organizing principles that characterize all complex protein interaction networks  <cit> . the most dramatic of these is their scale-free nature  <cit> , highlighting a small number of highly connected proteins which secure the integrity and connectivity among modules  <cit>  that are discernible, yet topologically overlapping, clusters of densely interconnected protein groups sharing well-defined functions  <cit> . a crucial biological corollary of this ubiquitous network organization is the observation that hubs exhibit an elevated propensity to be simultaneously conserved in evolution and are essential for survival  <cit> . this role of highly connected proteins is further indicated by a considerable degree of sequence conservation  <cit> . similarly, cohesively bound modules have been conserved as a whole, suggesting the presence of evolutionary relevant building blocks  <cit> . this hypothesis is further supported by the observation that proteins belonging to a certain module tend to be coexpressed  <cit>  and coregulated  <cit> . these particular results are utilized for the comparison of protein pathways of various organisms  <cit> , modeling of interactomes  <cit>  and prediction of protein functions  <cit> .

these insights have fundamental implications for our understanding of biological processes and potential applications; however the severe error-proneness of methods for the determination of protein interactions casts doubt on the integrity of such datasets. for example, an estimate of the accuracy of protein interactions in s. cerevisae uncovered a startling false negative rate of 90%, and a 50% false positive error rate  <cit> .

despite incoherences in the determination of protein interactions and orthologs, we observe that extensive information remains in the topology of a protein interaction network. in particular, even tremendous experimental noise does not bury the strong evolutionary signal that highly connected nodes in an interaction web of yeast proteins are preferably conserved in higher eukaryotes. accounting for interactions between pairs of yeast proteins, we find that the reliability of an interaction as indicated by a high degree of local clustering around interactions is accompanied by an elevated propensity for the corresponding proteins to be evolutionary conserved. in addition, we observe that such interactions are preferably coexpressed in both the reference and a target organism, suggesting that conservation occurs not only on the level of individual proteins but also on the level of their interactions. the observation that such link-based evolutionary signals prevail in the topology of an otherwise extremely noisy protein interaction network indicates a novel way to uncover protein interactions in any organism for which orthologs can be identified from sequence data.

RESULTS
as a basis of our considerations we utilized a protein-protein interaction network of s. cerevisae from the dip database  <cit> , providing  <dig>   <dig> proteins embedded in  <dig>   <dig> interactions. we labeled pairs of proteins as orthologous to each other as of the inparanoid database  <cit>  that relates proteins of s. cerevisiae to complete protein sets of various higher eukaryotes, allowing us to utilize  <dig>   <dig> yeast proteins with putative orthologs in h. sapiens,  <dig>  in a. thaliana,  <dig>   <dig> in c. elegans,  <dig>   <dig> in m. musculus and  <dig>  in d. melanogaster.

evolutionary retention of single proteins
utilizing these data sets we recently uncovered a correlation between a yeast proteins level of interaction and its propensity to be evolutionary conserved  <cit> . pooling all proteins into groups according to their connectivity k we determine the respective fraction of orthologs in each group. as a null-hypothesis we assume a random distribution of orthologs that is quantified by the fraction of proteins with an ortholog in a target eukaryote and the total number of proteins present in the underlying yeast protein interaction network. the degree dependent orthologous excess retention, erk, defined as the ratio of ortholog fractions in k dependent groups of proteins and fractions of randomly distributed orthologous proteins reflects the dependence of evolutionary protein conservations as function of the proteins connectivity. logarithmically binning the k-dependent values of erk the averages in each bin show a clear and systematic trend toward preferred conservation of proteins that interact on a high level . significant pearson's and spearman's rank coefficients support our qualitative observations .

evolutionary retention of interacting pairs of proteins
while we find that the conservation of single proteins is a function of connectedness we wonder if topology also contains such evolutionary signals on the level of interactions. because proteins which are placed in cohesive areas  tend to be evolutionary conserved we wonder if their interactions are conserved too. we utilize a link-based clustering coefficient that reflects the degree of clustering of an interaction's immediate network neighborhood, a topological measure that allows for correlations between local clustering and the actual reliability of observed interactions  <cit> . similar to the single protein case, we grouped all interactions according to their hypergeometric clustering coefficient cvw and determined the respective fraction of interacting pairs that are fully conserved as putative orthologs in each bin. in the absence of a correlation between evolutionary conservation and an interactions placement in the network the ratio of the cvw-dependent and random fractions of orthologous protein pairs – defined as the interaction based excess retention ercvw
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgfbqrcqwgsbgudawgaawcbagaem4qam0aasbaawqaaiabdaha2jabdeha3bqabaaaleqaaaaa@334b@  – would be unity. logarithmically binning all interactions according to their local degree of clustering cvw and determining the average excess retention ercvw
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwgfbqrcqwgsbgudawgaawcbagaem4qam0aasbaawqaaiabdaha2jabdeha3bqabaaaleqaaaaa@334b@ in each bin we identify a significant and systematic trend of proteins engaged in highly clustered interactions to be preferably evolutionary conserved . these link-based observations are not only consistent with previous node-based results but also allow to suggest that standard single-node measurements of evolutionary conservation can be extended to their neighboring links. this evolutionary corollary indicates that not only single proteins are a target of evolution but also the interactions between conserved proteins.

perturbation analysis
to demonstrate this gain of evolutionary information, we simulated the impact of extremely high false negatives rates of protein interactions by removing up to 70% of experimentally determined links between randomly selected protein pairs. additionally, to address the effects of false positives, we randomly distributed up to 70% more interactions than were previously identified in the original yeast network.

because there are no significant differences in the distributions of organism-specific excess retention in fig.  <dig>  we examine orthologs of c. elegans as a representative comparative set for these analyzes. after generating  <dig>   <dig> different realizations to each case of incomplete false data, we determine the excess retention er of proteins and their interactions that have orthologs in c. elegans according to their degree k and hypergeometric clustering coefficient cvw. determining the average excess retention in bins of increasing logarithmic size we find that the relationship between excess retention, level of interaction and local clustering is widely unaltered . addressing the statistical significance of these results we determined correlation coefficients  and performed kolmogorov-smirnov tests, recovering significant similarities between the original and perturbed distributions .

moreover, to represent missed orthologs, we randomly eliminated up to 70% from the set of yeast proteins that have an ortholog in c. elegans. in turn, we randomly labeled up to 70% more proteins as orthologs in c. elegans than were previously present in the initial set. sampling  <dig>   <dig> different realizations each, we calculated the excess retention according to the proteins degree k and local clustering around each interaction cvw. logarithmically binning the results thus obtained we averaged the excess retention of orthologous proteins in each bin, allowing us to find that the introduction of noise on the level of orthologs determination does not alter our initial observations . significantly similar correlation coefficients and kolmogorov-smirnov scores  support our conclusions.

clustering, coexpression and evolutionary conservation
the observation that highly clustered links between evolutionarily conserved proteins are reliable and stable toward severe perturbation enhances our expectation that an elevated degree of coexpression of interacting proteins will retain this relationship as well. in particular, a strong coexpression signal of the orthologs of proteins that embrace the interactions in question would strongly indicate the actual presence of the interaction in a reference and target organism. as a test case, we extend our investigations to the malaria parasite plasmodium falciparum, a single celled organism that has  <dig> putative orthologous proteins with yeast. elucidating those yeast interactions between yeast proteins conserved in p. falciparum, we find a web of  <dig>   <dig> interactions among  <dig> proteins in p. falciparum. to evaluate the quality of these inferred interactions we utilized a comprehensive set of p. falciparum specific coexpression data  <cit>  to calculate pearson's correlation coefficients rp for the inferred protein interactions. in the same way, we utilized an extensive set of yeast coexpression data  <cit>  to investigate the coexpression tendency of those interacting yeast proteins that served as the template for the inferred interactions in plasmodium. in both cases, we use the yeast specific cvw values as an approximate measure of an interaction's reliability. focusing on interactions that score above increasing thresholds of cvw, we observe a strong shift toward coexpression of the considered protein pairs . the difference between the individual coexpression patterns is further indicated by significant students t-test scores when the cvw dependent distributions are compared to a background distribution of coexpression coefficients of all protein pairs in the considered organism . the significant shifts toward elevated levels of coexpression identify a pronounced correlation between the local cohesiveness of an interaction and the tendency that the involved proteins are coexpressed. the determination of mean coexpression coefficients rp of interactions that have been logarithmically grouped according to their cvw allows us to find a statistically significant trend toward elevated levels of coexpression of conserved yeast interactions that are placed in highly clustered neighborhood . although we adopt measurements of the local cohesiveness around links cvw from yeast, we find that the corresponding interactions in plasmodium exhibit a similar trend . remarkably, the latter distribution exhibits better and statistically more significant correlation coefficients than its template in yeast .

in the same way we investigated the stability of the interactions propensity to be evolutionary conserved, we checked for the robustness of the obtained correlation between local clustering and coexpression. mimicking the presence of false positive/negative links we randomly eliminated/added up to  <dig> % of interactions in the yeast interaction network. recalculating the hypergeometric clustering coefficient for each of  <dig>  runs, we grouped all interacting pairs of yeast proteins with an ortholog in p. falciparum according to cvw in bins of logarithmically increasing size. averaging over the respective coexpression correlation coefficient rp of all yeast interactions in each bin, we observe that the initial ascending trend prevails . assuming that all interactions between proteins that have an ortholog in plasmodium were conserved we repeated this procedure by superimposing and averaging over the respective coexpression correlation values of plasmodium. similar to the yeast specific case, we observe the same qualitative trends . significant correlation coefficients and kolmogorov-smirnov scores support our observations of our findings. in the same way, we simulated the presence of false positive /negative orthologs by eliminating/adding up to 70% of orthologs in p. falciparum. averaging over  <dig>  runs each, we determined the average coexpression coefficient in each bin utilizing plasmodium and yeast specific coexpression data. in each case, we find that the original trend of high local clustering around interactions coincides with an increased propensity to be coexpressed strongly prevails , observations that are supported by significant correlation coefficients and kolmogorov-smirnov scores .

discussion & 
CONCLUSIONS
extending a previous study indicating that highly interacting proteins are predominantly conserved in evolution we generalize the concept that evolutionary signals are carried by the topology of the underlying protein interaction network. in particular, a protein's propensity to be conserved while interacting with a high number of partners – a node-based evolutionary signal – has a link based counterpart, as indicated by the propensity of interacting proteins to be evolutionary conserved with increasing local clustering around the interaction in question. although the obtained correlations are significant, the alarmingly high error rates in the determination of protein interactions cast doubt on the obtained results.

by focusing on perturbation events on node and interaction levels, we observe that extreme error rates of both protein interactions and orthologs do not ablate the evolutionary signal carried by the network structure. the introduction of noise at the node, by simulation of inconsistent determination of orthologs, does not override the preference of highly connected nodes to be evolutionary conserved; as theoretically predicted, random perturbations will rarely affect a hub in a scale-free network  <cit> . the low probability that a hub is hit by a random perturbation event also explains that interacting proteins that are placed in a highly clustered environment retain their evolutionary signal. indeed, the definition of the hypergeometric clustering coefficient assures a high score for interacting proteins that share a lot of their interaction partners.

on an interaction level, we observe that the massive insertion/deletion of links does not obliterate the local structure of networks as indicated by the stable preference of highly connected proteins and protein pairs that are embedded in a well clustered neighborhood to be evolutionary conserved. in particular, we conclude that insertion/deletion of random links on average impact sparsely connected parts of the networks much more than densely connected ones; indeed, loss of information in highly clustered neighborhoods and highly connected hubs would require massive, targeted deletion/insertion of links to obliterate their local structure. therefore, the observation that links which are placed in a highly clustered neighborhood are highly reliable  <cit>  is nested in our observation that highly clustered neighborhoods compensate severe random perturbations much better than sparsely connected ones.

while our results allow us to conclude that degree alone is a robust indicator for a proteins propensity to be evolutionary conserved, the inherent topological robustness of locally clustered links emphasizes the emergent role of cohesive areas  <cit>  as mediators of evolutionary information. in the simplest case, we confirmed that not only single proteins are a potential target of evolution but interaction among them can be potentially conserved as well. as a strong indicator that an interaction indeed has been conserved, the correlation between high local clustering and evolutionary conservation is accompanied by a stable elevated degree of coexpression of the interacting proteins in both a model and target organism. superimposing the extreme error rates simulating the incoherent determination of orthologs and interactions as well we see that trends in both the model and target organism prevail, strongly indicating that evolution also happens on the level of interactions and putative bundles of interactions.

although we utilized very noisy and inconsistent data of protein interactions and putative orthologs, we see that high connectivity and high clustering on average harbor significantly more evolutionary relevant information that sparsely connected and clustered areas. the coincidence of  high local clustering around highly reliable interactions of proteins,  their propensity to be evolutionary conserved,  their tendency to be coexpressed even in the face of tremendous experimental noise sketches a hypothetical framework to infer an evolutionary core of single protein-protein interactions by elucidating interacting proteins of a reference organism that have orthologs in the targeted organism. the quality of an interaction is assessed by calculating the corresponding hypergeometric clustering coefficient. choosing the highest scoring – thus most reliable – ortholog interaction allows the selection of a core interaction network in the targeted organism. unlike our case, where evolutionary relationships between proteins were approximated by similarity searches, the quality of predicted interactions will be enhanced by utilizing more sophisticated methods  which allow a more reliable assignment of orthology. finally, the cross-validation with high resolution coexpression data can refine specific protein-protein interaction subnetworks, allowing for checks of the actual presence of a proposed interaction. ultimately, such a framework would allow a first insight into evolutionary conserved parts in interactomes of organism for which no interaction data currently exists.

