BACKGROUND
synthetic n-methyl-d-aspartic acid  is widely known for its property to be an agonist of the l-glutamate receptor of the nmda-type. among the three families of glutamate receptor proteins identified, one is activated by nmda. the subunits of this receptor  are collectively referred to as glutamate receptors of the nmda-type. another receptor family, known as ampa-type, is activated by alpha-amino-3-hydroxy-5-methyl-4-isoxazole propionic acid  and by kainate. the third family of glutamate receptors consists of g-protein coupled receptors, the so-called matabotropic receptors   <cit>  for its widespread activity, among which one of the most important is to induce hormone release in the hypothalamus and pituitary gland  <cit> . nmda was first isolated as endogenous compound in the marine mollusk scapharca brougtonii in  <dig>  by cation exchange chromatography  <cit> , and later by hplc methods  <cit> . recently, using a novel strategy consisting in the purification of the tissue sample with o-phthaldialdehyde  associated with an enzymatic hplc method, we demonstrated that nmda is present in neuroendocrine tissues of rat  <cit> , of the protochordate ciona intestinalis  <cit>  and in other animal phyla  <cit> . in addition, it has been also demonstrated that endogenous nmda is a molecule derived from d-aspartic acid , in which an hydrogen atom of the amino group  at the alpha carbon position of d-asp is substituted by a methyl group  by a nmda synthase , according to the reaction in figure  <dig> <cit> .

amphioxus is an emerging animal model, situated in a key phylogenetic position, as a descent of a chordate ancestor. with vertebrates, amphioxus shares many body plan characteristics such as a dorsal nerve cord, notochord, endostyle, segmental muscles, pharyngeal gill slits and a post-anal tail. the genetic programs patterning the amphioxus embryo are also similar to those of vertebrate embryos, even if they are supported from a limited set of genes. in fact, cephalochordates did not undergo the extensive genome duplications that gave raise to more complex pathways and the gene redundancy typical of polyploid organisms, such as vertebrates.

noticeably, in the last few years the position of cephalochordates and tunicates has been reversed. in fact, an accurate phylogenetic analysis of a large amount of molecular data indicated that urochordates are the closest relatives to vertebrates, while cephalochordates branched earlier  <cit> . this change in the chordate phylogeny has profound implications for the understanding of the evolution of body plans, and it may imply that the chordate ancestor had a body plan organization similar to contemporary amphioxus.

taking this into consideration, cephalochordates represent a valuable model organism in understanding chordate's evolution, and in particular to distinguish between conserved  and derived  characteristics of vertebrates.

recently, we reported that the amphioxus nervous system contains considerable amounts of free d-aspartic acid  <cit> . since in rat and in ciona this amino acid constitutes the precursor for the in vivo biosynthesis of nmda  <cit> , in the present study we have designed approaches to reveal if nmda is also present in the amphioxus nervous system and to know if this excitatory amino acid is biosynthesized from d-aspartic acid.

RESULTS
purification of nmda and hplc determination
to determine specifically nmda contained in an amphioxus homogenate, the sample was highly purified from other amino acids and amino compounds, then the nmda content in the purified sample was determined by hplc. the purification of nmda from a crude homogenate was an essential step in order to avoid interference by the chromatographic peaks of other amino acids that could overlap with the peak of methylamine, ch3nh <dig> . in fact, after the sample has been purified with opa, almost 95–98% of all nmda is purified from other compounds. the use of the d-aspartate oxidase for the determination of nmda was another essential condition, because nmda as such does not react with opa-mercaptoethanol to form a fluorescent complex. therefore, nmda was first oxidized with d-aspo to form ch3nh <dig> and then treated with opa-mercaptoethanol. in this way the ch3nh <dig> reacts with opa-mercaptoethanol giving a fluorescent chromatographic peak. figure  <dig> shows a typical example of nmda determination from a pool of amphioxus nerve cords. in panel a, an analysis of total amino acids obtained from  <dig> mg of tissues is shown. panel b shows the same sample after opa purification, in this case almost all the amino acid peaks have disappeared. furthermore, when the sample is treated with d-aspo there is an increase of the peak at elution time of about  <dig> min due to the formation of ch3nh <dig> derived from the oxidation of nmda .

comparative concentration of nmda between amphioxus and other animal phyla
in this study, we have improved the previously described procedure for the purification of nmda from biological samples  <cit> , showing that purified nmda from the nervous system of the amphioxus b. lanceolatum  can be obtained with minimal loss during the procedure.

* each pool of tissue was obtained from  <dig> adult amphioxus.

# from d'aniello et al.,  <dig>  <cit> ; * from d'aniello et al.,  <dig>  <cit> ; ° present work.

the concentration of nmda in the nervous tissue of several animals ranges normally between  <dig>  and  <dig>  nmol/g of tissue, except for the cerebral ganglion of ciona intestinalis, where nmda occurs at considerably higher concentrations,  <dig>  nmol/g of tissue . interestingly also the amphioxus brain contains a very high nmda concentration .

biosynthesis of nmda
in rat  <cit>  and in ascidians  <cit>  nmda is biosynthesized from d-aspartic acid, which represents the precursor amino acid for the synthesis of this molecule, and sam  as the methyl group donor. in this study we carried out parallel experiments, finding a very high nmda biosynthetic activity when d-asp was used as substrate and when we used extracts from the same amphioxus tissues in which nmda was found endogenously . in fact, the nerve cord and particularly the brain were the tissues in which a higher amount of nmda was synthesized:  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  nmol/g of tissue, respectively. however, muscular tissues show a poor nmda synthase activity . it seems, thus, that the amount of endogenous nmda is proportionally comparable with in vitro activity of d-aspartate methyl transferase enzyme, able to transform the d-aspartic residue into nmda.

* tissues were incubated with the amino acids listed in the table and sam, according to the method described in the "methods" section. results are the mean ± s.d. obtained from  <dig> experiments.

in order to know if only d-asp constitutes the nmda precursor molecule, several different amino acids, in both d- and l-conformation, were used as potential substrate in the same reaction conditions as previously described for d-asp . the results obtained demonstrate that, except for d-asp, no other amino acid is able to act as precursor for the synthesis of nmda.

discussion
we recently found that the neural system of amphioxus contains a considerable amount of d-aspartic acid, approximately  <dig> nmol/g of tissue  <cit> . in the present work we found in the nervous system of b. lanceolatum a considerable quantity of nmda in different regions  similar to that found in the cerebral ganglion of ciona intestinalis . in addition, as occurs in rat and in urochordates, nmda is synthesized also in amphioxus from d-asp by a sam-dependent nmda synthase, which transports a methyl group from sam to d-asp, transforming it into nmda . thus, as in other animals, a biological pathway for the endogenous production of nmda seems to exist in amphioxus.

recently, we also demonstrated that nmda is present in the rat neuroendocrine system, in c. intestinalis and in other animal phyla  <cit> . synthetic nmda is well known for its stimulating action on the nmda-type l-glutamate receptors. in addition to having this effect, nmda is also known for inducing hormone release in the hypothalamus and hypophysis. in fact, already back in  <dig>  price and collaborators found that a very low amount of nmda injected into the rat increased lh levels  <cit> . after that, gay and colleagues  <cit>  found that nmd/la  elicits hypothalamic gonadotropic release in the rhesus monkey , and downing and colleagues  <cit>  observed that a minute quantity of nmd/la injected into the ewe induced the release of gonadotropin releasing hormone  from the hypothalamus, and growth hormone  and prolactin  from the pituitary gland. it has also been demonstrated that in rat synthetic nmda is able to elicit the release of lh and prl  <cit> .

in addition, an elevation of testosterone and progesterone concentration in rat has been observed as a consequence of the lh increase  <cit> . the same phenomenon has been shown to occur in c. intestinalis  <cit> . in tunicates, interestingly, d-asp is present in the cerebral ganglion while nmda is present in the neural gland. nmda is synthesized in the neural gland from d-asp as precursor and in turn it induces the release of the gnrh. then, gnrh reaches the gonads where it induces the synthesis and release of testosterone and progesterone. thus, in both mammals and in the protochordate ciona intestinalis, nmda is involved in hormone production and activity  <cit> . although our data do not allow to ascertain the functional effects of nmda in amphioxus physiology or endocrine system, its high concentration in the brain area is suggestive of it, and indicates that nmda-driven actions most probably predated chordate evolution.

CONCLUSIONS
the presence of nmda primarily in the cephalic vesicle of the amphioxus b. lanceolatum led us to argue that in cephalochordates nmda may have a role in both nervous and endocrine systems. thus, as in mammals and in tunicates, where d-asp and nmda are implicated in the development and function of the neuroendocrine system, it is reasonable to suggest that the presence of d-asp and nmda in the nervous system of the amphioxus gives support to the concept that modern vertebrates and cephalochordates share a common chordate ancestor, in which d-asp and nmda neurotransmission could play a relevant function in the neuroendocrine system. although data in other deuterostomes  are not available, the presence of nmda in the nervous system of several mollusks may indicate that nmda-derived neurotransmission could even be a more general character of bilateria.

