BACKGROUND
rna expression profiling may lead to the discovery of molecular markers for disease diagnosis, assessing prognosis, and targeting with drugs. quantitative  has been the “gold standard” for measuring gene expressions
 <cit>  due to its high sensitivity and specificity, reproducibility, and large dynamic range
. however, next-generation sequencing is rapidly becoming accepted
 <cit>  as an effective and more versatile tool for measuring gene expressions for research and clinical use
. compared to qpcr, the major advantages of next generation sequencing  include the ability to analyze a sample’s whole transcriptome in an unbiased way, to discover novel transcripts, and to detect gene fusions, which are common in cancer
 <cit> .

the optimal tissue for rna-seq is fresh frozen  tissue with high quality rna. unfortunately, frozen tumors are not widely available because they are costly to collect and maintain. however, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded  tissue samples are routinely archived in the course of patient care and can often be linked to clinical outcomes with long-term follow-up. unfortunately, ffpe tissues yield relatively low quantities of degraded rna. a small number of studies have reported using ffpe tissue for whole transcriptome mrna expression profiling
. here, we characterize the performance of rna-seq on ffpe renal tumors by comparing results to rna-seq on ff renal tumors and qpcr, which is considered the “gold standard” for measuring gene expression.

in this study, transcriptome-wide rna-seq was successfully performed on matching ffpe and ff clear cell renal cell carcinomas . the expression profiles generated from ffpe and ff tumors correlated well. the tumor rna was also assessed by qpcr using the openarray® nt cycler system, which we’ve previously validated for use with ffpe tumors
 <cit> . rna quantities measured by rna-seq and qpcr also correlated well. expression fold changes between our tumors and tumors from the cancer genome atlas 
 <cit>  correlated well when expressions from ffpe and ff were compared, suggesting that ffpe rna-seq can provide biologically meaningful information. we establish the feasibility of using rna-seq with ffpe tissue and recommend its use in future large-scale rna-seq studies.

RESULTS
expression levels determined by qpcr
taqman qpcr is an established assay for determining expression levels using either ff or ffpe tumors. the openarray platform uses microfluidics to load nanoliter scale taqman qpcr chambers. we recently validated the openarray platform for use with ffpe tumors
 <cit> . we conducted a literature review to compile a list of  <dig> candidate genes relevant to rcc formation, progression, prognosis and response to treatment . the expression of all rcc genes was quantified using the openarray platform for the two matching pairs of ffpe and ff rccs. the optimal reference genes for normalizing qpcr results  were empirically determined
 <cit> . as expected, the Δct for ffpe and ff showed good correlation . this confirms prior reports that qpcr can be used for expression profiling of ffpe tissue. it also indicates that the rna from our ffpe tumors is of sufficient quality to provide rna expressions using qpcr, which can serve as a standard for comparing with rna-seq.figure  <dig> 
correlation of qpcr for matched ff and ffpe tumors. a and b) the openarray® platform was used to perform taqman qpcr for rcc genes using matching ff and ffpe tumors. c) for qpcr, r  was calculated using Δct, which is the normalized cycle threshold for each gene. ff, fresh frozen; ffpe, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded.



library preparation and rna-seq
total rna was used to prepare libraries for rna-seq. ribosomal rna  constitutes more than 80% of the total tumor rna. therefore, to avoid wasting sequencing reactions generating repetitive reads, rrna was removed by competitive hybridization using the ribo-zero™ kit. total rna was assessed by agilent bioanalyzer before and after ribo-zero treatment to show that large peaks corresponding to 18s and 28s rrna disappeared . the rna from ffpe tumor is highly fragmented and the 18s and 28s rrna peaks were not visible either before or after ribo-zero treatment. sequencing libraries were prepared using scriptseq™ v <dig> rna-seq library preparation kit and visualized by e-gel® to confirm fragment sizes of approximately  <dig> bp .figure  <dig> 
library size measurement by e-gel®. the average size for all the libraries is approximately  <dig> bp. lane 1: tumor  <dig>  ffpe; lane 2: tumor  <dig>  ffpe; lane 3: tumor  <dig>  ff; lane 4: tumor  <dig>  ff; lane m:  <dig> bp marker. ff, fresh frozen; ffpe, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded.



average cluster density for the  <dig> libraries was approximately  <dig> k/mm <dig>  the average depth of sequencing for each library was  <dig> million reads. the distribution of fpkms for all the genes was similar between ffpe and ff . the number of genes detected by rna-seq was comparable between ff and ffpe . the distribution of detected genes was also comparable between ff and ffpe . rna-seq quality metrics showed that for each library, greater than 70% of the reads were uniquely mapped to the genome with less than 1% being rrna. the strand specificity was higher than 80%. .

comparison of ffpe rna-seq to established rna profiling strategies
rna-seq is an established platform for quantifying gene expressions using high quality rna from ff tissue. to validate expression profiles generated from highly fragment rna from ffpe tissue, expression profiles were compared from matching pairs of ff and ffpe renal tumors. the expressions were highly correlated , indicating that rna-seq performs well with ffpe tissue.figure  <dig> 
correlation of rna-seq for ff and ffpe tumors. a) ffpe vs. ff, tumor  <dig>  all rna-seq genes b) ffpe vs. ff, tumor  <dig>  all rna-seq genes c) ffpe vs. ff, tumor  <dig>  rcc genes d) ffpe vs. ff, tumor  <dig>  rcc genes e) for qpcr, r  was calculated using Δct. for rna-seq, r was calculated using the log <dig> fpkm for genes with fpkm > =  <dig> . ff, fresh frozen; ffpe, formalin-fixed paraffin-embedded; fpkm, fragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped.



the gold-standard for quantifying rna levels from ffpe is taqman qpcr, which is used for both research and routine patient care
 <cit> . our panel of  <dig> rcc genes were quantified by qpcr using both ff and ffpe tumors and compared with rna-seq results. the qpcr results are expressed on a log <dig> scale; therefore, fpkm values from rna-seq were transformed to a log <dig> scale. there was high correlation between expressions determined by qpcr and rna-seq for both ff and ffpe tumors . lower Δct values indicate higher expression while higher fpkm values indicate higher expression. figures were plotted using -Δct and fpkm. in a similar analysis, rank correlations were considered because the relationship between Δct and fpkm may not be linear . this analysis confirmed a high correlation between qpcr and rna-seq for both ff and ffpe tissue.figure  <dig> 
correlation of rna-seq and qpcr for ff and ffpe tumors. a) tumor  <dig>  ffpe b) tumor  <dig>  ff c) tumor  <dig>  ffpe d) tumor  <dig>  ff e) r  and ρ  were calculated using the log <dig> fpkm and -Δct for the rcc genes. ff, fresh frozen; ffpe, fresh-frozen paraffin-embedded; fpkm, fragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped.



ffpe rna-seq results contain biologically meaningful information
it is well known that tumor rnas measured by qpcr or ff rna-seq reflect diagnostic and prognostic information
. the tumors used in our study had similar clinical profiles. however they are expected to be molecularly distinct, particularly when the rcc genes are considered. therefore, fold changes were calculated for each gene comparing tumors from the two patients. if gene expressions from ffpe rna-seq reflect cancer biology then fold changes should be similar whether the tumor was assessed by rna-seq or an established platform such as qpcr. this was indeed the case . possibility of ffpe rna containing biologic information was further supported by hierarchical cluster analysis performed using rcc genes . the expression profiles clustered based on tumor rather than method used to preserve the tumor, i.e. ff vs ffpe.figure  <dig> 
potential for biological information. a) correlation of expression fold change  determined using qpcr and rna-seq. b) same analysis using ff tumors. c) hierarchical clustering based on rcc genes for all four samples after rna-seq d) same analysis based on qpcr results. ff, fresh frozen; ffpe, fresh-frozen paraffin-embedded.



it is well established that high quality rna from ff tissue can differentiate between high and low risk tumors. our tumors were clinically high risk tumors based on stage and grade . they posed high risk for metastatic recurrence even after surgical removal of the primary tumor. to calculate fold change using tumors considered low risk, patients with small, low grade tumors were selected from tcga. tcga data was from ff tumors. expression fold changes were calculated using high risk and low risk tumors. if rna using ffpe tumors can provide the same biologic information as ff tumors, the fold changes determined using ff or ffpe rccs should correlate well. this is indeed the case with an r of  <dig>  .figure  <dig> 
correlation of fold changes using ffpe vs ff tumors. the tumors from our institutional biobank were high risk tumors. to calculate expression fold changes between high risk and low risk tumors, low risk tumors  were identified from the cancer genome atlas . genes highly expressed by rna-seq in both our institutional tumors and tcga tumors were used to calculate fold change. the correlation between fold changes determined from ffpe and ff tumors is shown. the fold change was calculated using log <dig> fpkm. hr, high risk tumors from our institution; lr, low risk tumors from tcga; fpkm, fragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped.



discussion
the past decade has seen accelerated development of genomic and transcriptomic techniques. a wealth of biologic insights has come from data generated from thousands of tumor samples. both the cost and turn-around time have dropped dramatically, which in turn, has put this powerful technology within reach of most wet-lab scientists. rna-seq has become the method of choice for transcriptome profiling. in contrast to microarray and qpcr technologies, rna-seq can identify novel transcripts, examine all rna species, and identify alternative splices and mutations.

rcc has been studied using rna-seq
 <cit> . these studies provide transcriptomic profiles for understanding disease development and prognosis. however, all of these studies used ff tumors as the resource of rna, and ff tumors are relatively scarce. on the other hand, ffpe samples are widely available because they are routinely stored by all pathology departments. importantly, ffpe samples often come from patients who have had years of clinical follow-up. therefore, this clinical annotation can provide the phenotype needed to understand the genomic and molecular data that can now be readily generated.

there are several studies of rna-seq on ffpe tissue
. however, all these studies have important limitations. one of the studies used poly-a selection to capture mrna and exclude ribosomal rna. this results in the loss of all non-mrnas and because ffpe rna is highly degraded, poly-a capture provides only a limited sequence from the 3’ end of the mrna. therefore, no information is usually available on alternative splicing and many mutations will be missed
 <cit> . another study used lungs from two patients who died of influenza to perform ffpe rna-seq. however, the study profiled viral rna and not human rna
 <cit> . a third study from genomic health inc. used ffpe breast cancers; however, there was no comparison with rna-seq performed with ff breast cancer
 <cit> . this study did establish that the expression of a prognostic signature based on a limited number of genes can be determined using ffpe qpcr or ffpe rna-seq.

we performed whole-transcriptome rna-seq on ffpe and ff samples. we demonstrated that gene expressions measured by rna-seq using ffpe tissue correlate well with ff rna-seq. our findings are consistent with a recent report using a similar next-generation sequencing platform as ours to compare rna from paired ff and ffpe tissue from a variety of tumor types to report a correlation coefficient of  <dig> 
 <cit> . this study examined rna-seq in  <dig> paired ff and ffpe normal and cancer tissues from bladder, prostate, liver, colon and tonsil. in our study, we examined clear cell rcc. in addition to rna-seq, we also used qpcr as an established standard for expression profiling and showed good correlation with ffpe rna-seq. by assessing fold change between patient tumors and performing hierarchical cluster analysis, we showed that ffpe rna-seq contains potentially meaningful biologic information that can be used for basic discoveries as well as patient care.

a limitation of our study is that we only examined two patient tumors. however, rna-seq outputs covering the entire transcriptome provide ample data for a robust analysis. furthermore, use of multiple technology platforms and use of the publically available tcga results strengthen our conclusion. ffpe tumors, routinely stored by medical centers, are associated with a wealth of clinical data and follow-up information. however, to take advantage of these annotated tissues, rna-seq needs to be applied to large numbers of archival tissue. our study, along with other recent, independent reports, establishes the feasibility of rna-seq for these future studies.

CONCLUSIONS
we demonstrated that gene expressions measured by rna-seq using ffpe tissue correlate well with two different gold standards: ff rna-seq and qpcr.

ffpe rna-seq also provided biological information: the expression profiles from the matched ff and ffpe tissue clustered together. the fold change between high risk ff tumor and tcga low risk tumors correlated well with the fold change between high risk ffpe tumor and tcga low risk tumors.

our study suggests that ffpe rna-seq can be used for basic discoveries as well as clinical applications.

