BACKGROUND
environmental stress or suboptimal growth conditions reduce cell viability and require an immediate but specific response in order to maximize the survival of the whole organism. particularly, plants are constantly exposed to changing environmental conditions and are under threat of severe adverse conditions. on the subcellular level, heat exposure changes membrane fluidity  <cit>  and protein stability  <cit>  which consequently alter photosynthesis  <cit>  and central metabolic activities  <cit> . plants are highly sensitive to temperature stress and respond over different time scales . one of the most potent steps to regulate heat stress response has been suggested to occur at the level of transcription  <cit> . long heat exposure triggers epigenetic changes, some of which are conserved between yeast and plants indicating that these stress response mechanisms are evolutionarily conserved among organisms  <cit> . ultimately, proteins mediate stress response and their levels have to be rapidly adjusted to ensure cell adaptability and survival particularly under prolonged stress.

gene expression is subject to extensive regulation, including transcription, mrna degradation, translation and protein degradation, each of which operates on a different temporal regime . translation is a downstream process of transcription and provides the opportunity to rapidly adjust protein concentration in response to external stimuli  <cit> . although transcriptional reprogramming upon heat exposure has been addressed in plants, little is known for the role of translation. does translation complement transcription in shaping the heat stress response?

advances in massively parallel sequencing platforms and approaches to capture ribosomal position with nucleotide resolution, i.e. ribosome profiling  <cit> , precisely capture gene expression at the level of translation. combined with rna-seq to measure changes in mrna population  <cit> , the transcriptional and translational responses can be deconvoluted. ribosome profiling has been successfully applied in mammalian systems, for example to study the effect of heat  <cit> , oxidative  <cit>  and proteotoxic stress  <cit>  on translation in mammalian systems. the depth of those approaches revealed unprecedented aspects in the stress response programs which were not detected with a single sequencing method. the applicability of ribosome profiling technology in plants has been recently demonstrated by two studies assessing the global expression reprogramming in a. thaliana during dark to light transition  <cit>  and the response to hypoxia  <cit> . we used the combined approach of ribosome profiling  and rna-seq to assess the response of a. thaliana to prolonged heat stress. our study reveals a complex picture of adaptive response in plants and provides a rich resource for future hypothesis testing.

RESULTS
a subset of genes shapes the plant adaptation to thermal stress
to monitor the adaptive reaction we exposed wild-type a. thaliana plants  to a prolonged heat of 3 h at 37 °c. to provide a high-resolution view of the cellular programs that counteracts thermal stress at both translational and transcriptional level, we isolated ribosome-protected fragments  and total rna from leaves, and subjected both to deep sequencing. the sequencing of the rpfs  is informative on the translational activities of the cell  <cit>  while the total rna sequencing   <cit>  reports on transcriptional activities. these were compared to untreated plants growing at permissive ambient temperature . rpfs were generated by nuclease digestion of polysomes into monosomes with high reproducibility between biological replicates . the unambiguously mapped mrna and rpf reads were normalized by the total number of mapped reads  or reads per kilobase per million of the total mapped reads . we spiked each rna-seq experiment with external rna-standards  whose sequence did not align anywhere in the plant genome; the spike-ins were used to determine the detection limit  in each experiment. in both biological replicates the detection limit in rna-seq and ribo-seq was  <dig> rpkm. in general, the rpf density correlated well with the mrna reads density  suggesting a coordination of transcriptional and translational programs at control temperature growth. following heat stress, rpf and mrna reads were still well-correlated overall, albeit slightly reduced compared to the control growth conditions, and suggested that a significant translation activity was presented by the heat-exposed plants . the polysome fraction, which comprises actively translating ribosomes, is similar to that of the control plants and only marginally reduced in the fractions of heavy  polysomes . only a small increase of the monosome peak was detected ; an increase of the monosome peak is usually observed under acute stress  <cit> . note that we could not resolve the single ribosomal subunits ; 60s appeared as a shoulder of the 80s or monosome, and thus we could not estimate the ribosomal drop-off . also, the total rna used in the polysomal profiles varied as it was normalized by the mass of the used plant material and thus reflects the different rna content of the plants grown at various ambient temperature.fig.  <dig> the expression of a sizeable fraction of genes changes at either transcriptional or translational level. a scheme of the experimental set-up. each set  comprises  <dig> plants. b differential expression analysis using deseq with fdr of  <dig> . genes with changes in mrna expression only are designated in blue, those with rpf changes only  in red and genes with simultaneous changes in both, mrna and rpf, are highlighted in green. the number of genes up-  or down-regulated  in each group upon exposure to heat are included. go analysis  of these gene groups is summarized in additional file 4





overall, for the majority of genes that are translationally active under heat , we found a positive linear log-log correlation with changes in their mrna reads  suggesting that the adaptive response is shaped in a coordinated manner between transcription and translation.

however, a sizeable fraction of genes differed in their expression  . those gene groups may provide candidates whose expression is controlled either transcriptionally or translationally. hence, we used differential expression analysis  to compare the mrna and rpf counts of each gene expressed in control plants grown under ambient temperature to that in the plants exposed for 3 h to 37 °c . the confidence intervals for the fold-change analysis were set based on the reproducibility of the biological replicates for the control plants . deseq analysis considers as expression level the sum of all rna or rpf reads over a transcript but is insensitive to the distribution of reads along a transcript. if translation of a gene is enhanced, we expect increased rpf reads along the entire open-reading frame  length. we reasoned that if a gene is uniformly translated with no detectable heat-induced stalling over certain position within the cds, the counts of the rpf reads between the two halves of a gene should be equal. notably, rpfs were nearly symmetrically distributed between the two halves of a coding sequence  of genes expressed under heat exposure and resembled the uniform distribution between the two halves of the mrna , suggesting that higher total rpf reads truly report on enhanced expression of those genes under heat stress.

the deseq analysis revealed co-directional changes in the mrna and rpf counts for  <dig> out of  <dig>  genes . a sizeable fraction of genes showed only changes in the mrna  or in rpf . for each of the groups with altered rna expression or translatability , we performed enrichment analysis using david . the most prominent groups among those upregulated at transcriptional and/or translational level  were genes involved in the heat stress response and protein folding . interestingly, although the plants were exposed to heat for 3 h, which should elicit the adaptive response to heat stress, the mrna of key heat shock proteins was very high . in contrast, groups comprising genes related to the chromatin structure, cytoskeleton organization, cell wall synthesis, cell cycle, and anabolic process were mostly down-regulated at transcriptional and/or translational levels . together, prolonged exposure to heat stress resulted in large changes in gene expression and reprogramming of both transcriptional and translational activities of the plants that are likely to shape their survival under sub-optimal growth conditions.

genes with lower secondary structure propensity in 5′ start vicinity are translated under thermal stress
next, we addressed whether the gene set that is preferentially translated under heat stress  bears some common secondary structure features to facilitate their translation. we calculated the folding energy in the mrna sequences flanking the translation initiation start of two groups of genes, e.g. with increased  and decreased  ribosome density. typically, the folding profiles of all mrnas  exhibited reduced folding stability and fewer paired nucleotides in the 5′ utrs compared to the coding sequence . for translationally upregulated genes under heat, the folding energy upstream of the start codon ) was significantly higher  than that of the remaining genes in the genome  and that of the translationally downregulated ones . further downstream of the start codon, along the cds, the folding energy relaxes to the mean folding profile of all genes . the folding energy profile of genes translationally downregulated under heat did not differ from that of the remaining genes in the genome . this implies that the response to heat stress in plants at translational level is shaped, at least in part, by a selection of a subset of genes with lower propensity to form secondary structure upstream of the translation start. our attempt to verify the predicted folding patterns with experimentally derived rna secondary structure data  <cit>  was not successful. both studies  <cit>  were conducted under normal growth conditions in which the heat shock responsive genes show very low expression level, hence the read coverage was insufficient to obtain reliable secondary structure scores for those genes.fig.  <dig> genes translationally upregulated under heat stress have much lower propensity to form secondary structure in the vicinity of the start codon. a average folding energy of translationally upregulated  and downregulated  genes under heat stress compared to all expressed protein-coding genes. only in the marked area  the curves shows significant difference ). the thin lines in the same color denote the standard deviation for each position. position  <dig> is the first nucleotide of the start codon of each genes. b box plot of the distribution of the folding energy of the genes translationally up- or down-regulated under heat stress compared to all expressed genes. the region −100 nt upstream of the start till the start codon  is considered. c sequence motif analysis of 5′utrs  and 3′ utrs  of genes translationally upregulated under heat stress




to address the question as to whether rna-binding proteins contribute to translational regulation through binding the 5′ and 3′ utrs, we performed a motif search in the utr sequences of the genes which were translationally upregulated  upon the heat stress. in total,  <dig> genes  exhibited an increased number of rpf in their 5′utr and in  <dig> of them we detected a conserved a/g-rich motif . similarly, in  <dig> genes the rpfs in their 3′ utrs increased upon stress and in  <dig> of them we also detected the a/g-rich motif .

g2-quadruplexes in the utrs may also control gene expression under stress
we next analyzed each gene translationally upregulated under heat stress  for putative g-quadruplex structures in the cds, 5′utr or 3′ utr. this analysis was motivated by a bioinformatic study which has identified more than  <dig> quadruplexes with a g3-repeat sequence motif and ∼  <dig>  with a g2-repeat sequence motif in plant transcriptomes with yet unknown function  <cit> . the following sequences were considered in our search for g <dig> - g2n1-7g2n1-7g2n1-7g <dig>  for g <dig> - g3n1-7g3n1-7g3n1-7g <dig> and for g <dig> - g4n1-7g4n1-7g4n1-7g <dig>  we found no g <dig> quadruplexes and only a few g <dig> quadruplexes in the 5′ and 3′ utrs. however, we identified many g <dig> quadruplexes in the cds  and g <dig> in the 5′utr , cds  and 3′utr , respectively. we reasoned that if a g-quadruplex plays a role in heat response and controls expression of distinct mrnas upon stress, we would observe different translation  in the vicinity of a quadruplex structure between plants exposed to heat compared to the control plants. we compared the read coverage 200-bp upstream and 250-bp downstream of the first base of each quadruplex. while we observed no difference in the rpf coverage around quadruplexes in the cds , the rpf coverage around g <dig> quadruplexes in both 5′ and 3′ utrs was clearly higher in the heat stress group . intriguingly, in the genes upregulated under heat stress  the higher rpf coverage along the predicted g <dig> quadruplexes in the 5′utr correlated with their higher expression under heat than in the control plants . this suggests that a direct relationship might exist between the g2-quadruplexes and translatability of the downstream cds under heat stress.fig.  <dig> the presence of g <dig> quadruplexes in the utrs correlates with the expression of genes under heat stress. a, c higher cumulative values of the normalized rpf reads to the mrna reads at each position under heat stress-exposed plants  compared to the control plants  over the positions of the putative g <dig> quadruplexes in the annotated 5′ utrs  and 3′ utrs . rpf coverage  was normalized to the mrna reads at each position and each gene in the set is equally weighted. the first nucleotide of the g <dig> quadruplexes is at position  <dig>  p-values  were calculated with the wilcoxon signed rank test. b rpf fold change analysis of genes with g <dig> quadruplexes in their 5′ utrs. genes upregulated under thermal exposure  were compared to genes with g <dig> quadruplexes but unchanged or downregulated under stress . only reads in the cdss were considered in this analysis. n denotes the gene number in each group. d rpf coverage profile of gene at3g <dig> under heat stress exposure compared to its profile in the control plants. the position of the g <dig> quadruplex in the 5′utr is shadowed in gray. in the gene scheme over the profiles: black, cds; gray, 5′ or 3′ utrs; gray dashed line, introns. e comparison of the reads in the first vs. second halves of genes with g <dig> quadruplexes in their 3′ utrs




the effect of the g <dig> quadruplexes in the 3′utrs of genes upregulated under heat exposure is unclear; they did not contribute to the stability of the mrna under heat stress, i.e. the mrna reads for the two halves of a gene remained unchanged under stress .

detection of an alternative transcript and orf upon stress exposure
in our analysis of the rpf distributions between the first and a second half of a gene we noticed an outlier, at1g <dig>  with largely asymmetric distribution of the reads in the second half upon exposure to heat. a closer look in the read distributions revealed that in the control plants, at1g <dig>  which encodes a double-helix repeat protein, showed a relatively uniform mrna coverage over the main cds, while rpfs accumulated starting at nucleotide  position  <dig> . upon induction of heat stress, the expression of this short 3′-terminal fragment starting at 2195 nt increased at both transcriptional  and translational level . in the vicinity of the 2200 nt we detected an in-frame atg which may serve as a new translation start . although an alternative translation start of the same mrna transcript may plausibly explain the rpf enhancement, it cannot explain the increase of the mrna reads. qrt-pcr analysis using primers targeting the main and alternative transcript corroborated the rna-seq data and indicated specific upregulation of the alternative transcript under heat stress . moreover, only one splicing variant of at1g <dig> is annotated in the tair  <dig> data base. furthermore, additional in-frame aug codons in the cds  did not correlate with any increase of rpf reads at those corresponding positions .fig.  <dig> alternative transcript from the at1g <dig> gene is highly expressed under heat stress. a schematic of the putative orfs of the at1g <dig> gene. black, cds; gray, 5′ or 3′ utrs; gray dashed line, intron, and arrow heads above the gene model: locations of the qrt-pcr primers. b in addition to the main transcript, a transcript encoding 88-amino acids long peptide is detected in both ribosome profiling and rna-seq data sets  as highly expressed at both transcriptional  and translational level  under heat stress. the dashed vertical line denotes the start of this additional orf. note the different scale of the coverage profile in the heat vs. control condition. qrt-pcr verification of the expression of the alternative transcript under stress  using primer pairs spanning the main and alternative transcript designated in panel a . c three distinct recurring motifs are present within 1 kb-region upstream of the initiation of the alternative orf  and multiple heat shock responsive genes as revealed by meme motif analysis




within the region 1 kb upstream of this alternative orf and of the heat shock responsive genes we performed a sequence motif search to extract putative sequences that may serve as putative transcription factors binding sites. interestingly, we identified motifs which share conserved features with motifs found in the promoter regions of the known heat-stress responsive genes  which were transcriptionally induced upon heat stress in our data set. the presence of motif  <dig> bears significant resemblance to the heat shock promoter element agaannttct recognized by heat shock factors in arabidopsis  <cit>  supports the idea of this alternative transcript being heat-responsive. this alternative transcript with a start at 2195 nt encodes an  <dig> amino-acid long peptide/protein with high overrepresentation of positively charged amino acids; proteins with overrepresented charged amino acids may play a protective role under stress, e.g. scavenging reactive oxygen species. although it remains to be determined whether the expression of this alternative transcript generates a viable protein or peptide, our results underline the potential of ribo-seq in determining alternative orf or proteins resulting from alternative, independent translation initiation which differ from the start of the main transcript.

stoichiometry of protein complexes in chloroplasts under heat exposure
in the ribosome profiling experiment we did not select only for cytoplasmic ribosomes, but extracted the total fraction of the all ribosome-bound mrnas, including those of the chloroplasts. in each sequencing data set, 35–45 % of the total uniquely mapped rpfs were mapped to the chloroplast genome. as the chloroplast genome is relatively small − <dig> total genes including  <dig> protein-coding genes – the coverage in the ribosome profiling is very good. the majority of the plastid-encoded genes encode single subunits in large protein complexes. some of them are encoded in operons within one polycistronic mrna in a fashion similar to bacterial operons  <cit>  and are suggested to coordinate the expression of functionally related proteins. however, a large fraction of genes encoding subunits of protein complexes do not reside within the same operon, raising the question as to whether their translation maintains the stoichiometry needed for the protein complexes. thus, we next analyzed the stoichiometry of protein complexes using the total rpf reads per gene per unit length  as defined in  <cit> . the underlying assumption of this analysis is that each ribosome  is producing a protein and the total protein production is determined as the average ribosome density over the cds. although this measure is not perfect as it provides an upper bound for protein levels  <cit>  as it does not consider protein degradation and ribosomal drop-off during synthesis, our measures of protein production using this approach  agreed well with published data on protein abundance in chloroplasts  <cit> .fig.  <dig> impact of heat exposure on the expression of protein complexes in chloroplasts. a correlation between protein production  and protein abundance determined by mass spectrometry  <cit> . spearman coefficient ρ =  <dig> . b the protein production of atp synthetase subunits correlates with the assembled subunit stoichiometry. the genes belonging to each of the two operons are color-coded in blue and red. c coverage plots for each of the subunits of the atp synthetase complex under control growth. note that the y-axes are in uniform scale. schematic of the gene organization in the two operons is included over the plots. d fold changes of rpf and mrna of all chloroplast orfs. each dot represents a single protein or protein subunit. e heat exposure disproportionately reduces the production of atp synthetase subunits 




we next used this measure to evaluate the production of stable multiprotein complexes with known stoichiometry . remarkably, for the atp synthetase complex, which has the most complex stoichiometry, the protein production of each subunit quantitatively reflected its stoichiometry within the complex . the ribosome density of each orf was different despite comprising the same polycistronic mrna . the mrna levels of these two operons were similar as confirmed by rna-seq analysis, further validating that differences in the stoichiometry might be controlled at the level of translation. for some complexes, which are encoded mostly on different polycistronic mrnas, the ratio of protein production of some subunits differed from their stoichiometry  and suggests an additional regulation mechanism at the level of degradation.

the expression of protein-coding genes in chloroplasts changed under heat exposure and for the majority of the orfs changes in mrna levels were co-directional with changes in transcription  and translation  . strikingly, the production of the subunits within one protein complex changed disproportionately, even for those upregulated under heat stress  which could suggests that the different susceptibility to degradation of various subunits may additionally change the abundance of the subunits under stress.

discussion
here we analyze the adaptive response of a. thaliana to prolonged heat exposure  at both transcriptional and translational level using rna-seq and deep sequencing of rpfs of nuclear- and chloroplast-encoded genes. the plant habitat suggests that a typical heat exposure is long, for example for several hours in a summer midday. the expression changes of the majority of nuclear-encoded genes are modulated in a coordinated manner at the transcriptional and translational levels. while at early time points of heat exposure, i.e. between  <dig> and  <dig> min, translation is globally downregulated and stress response is counteracted mainly by transcriptional programs , our results show that prolonged exposure to stress  activates translational programs which shape the adaptive response. at prolonged exposure to heat stress the majority of the genes are transcribed and translated in a coordinated fashion, but a sizeable set of genes opposes this trend and instead shows only changes at the level of translation. among those translationally regulated transcripts we detected several shared features which are likely candidates to regulate their expression. the a/g-rich motifs in the 5′ or 3′ utrs of the translationally upregulated genes resemble sequences identified as rna-protein binding motifs  <cit> . the presence of relatively conserved a/g-rich motifs to which most likely the same rna-binding protein binds would allow coregulation of the expression of those transcripts  <cit> . another common feature among the genes translationally upregulated under heat stress is their lower propensity to form secondary structure, likely to facilitate ribosome binding and enhances translation  <cit> . furthermore, some of the transcripts preferentially translated under heat contain a putative g <dig> quadruplex in their 5′utr. the increased rpf reads over the quadruplex structures correlate with the enhanced expression in the downstream cds, suggesting a role in activating translation of the downstream orf with a yet unclear mechanism. this is in line with an earlier observation that transcripts with highly structured 5′utrs are enriched upon heat exposure  <cit> . although the type of the secondary structure in the 5′utr is not specified  <cit> , the authors suggest a mechanism to sense heat in a similar fashion to the riboswitches in bacteria  <cit> .

the duration of heat stress has different effects on transcriptional and translational programs. the sequence of response seems to follow a conserved pattern in microorganisms and mammalian systems. an initial reaction upon acute heat stress comprises global translational downregulation  <cit>  and a quick transcriptional activation of heat-shock proteins  <cit> . this first transcriptional burst is followed by an adaptive response which includes reprogramming of many cellular activities with a prominent activation of the heat-stress response, relating to protein folding and degradation, at both translational and transcriptional levels  <cit> . previous studies in a. thaliana addressing short term  heat exposure provide evidence that translation is greatly inhibited  <cit> . by contrast, our data show that under prolonged heat exposure  translation is fully active , suggesting a common pattern of stress response between a. thaliana, mammalian cells and microorganisms. despite the global translational repression under short term heat stress, some transcripts are selectively translated, which includes genes involved in transcriptional regulation, chromatin structure rearrangements, mrna degradation, salicylic acid-mediated signaling and protein phosphorylation are activated under short term heat exposure  <cit> . in contrast, extended heat stress  activates genes involved in heat-stress response and protein folding and deactivates genes related to the chromatin structure, cytoskeleton organization, cell wall synthesis, cell cycle, and anabolic processes. strikingly, the most prominent gene groups translated in both short term  <cit>  and extended heat stress  as also observed for mammalian systems  <cit>  suggesting a common features in maintaining heat stress among organisms.

translation in chloroplasts shares many features with bacteria, including shine-dalgarno-driven initiation and polycistronic mrnas. the prevalence of genes encoded in polycistronic transcripts in prokaryotes has been suggested as a mechanism to couple translation and control the stoichiometry of the single subunits in multisubunit complexes or to control the level of proteins with related functions in metabolic pathways  <cit> . although the premise might be true for some examples, it does not explain how a higher number of subunit copies can be achieved downstream in the operon . furthermore, in bacteria translation rates among genes within the same operon are only weakly correlated  <cit>  and the architecture of several metabolic pathways is robust against variations in the single proteins, suggesting that a precise translational coupling may not be crucial for their performance  <cit> . in plastids of a. thaliana, we detected a clearly decoupled translation of single genes within an operon; each single orf within one polycistronic message is initiated in an independent manner with distinct yield . similar observation has been made in plastids of maize  <cit>  and in bacteria  <cit> . rather than coupling of their translation, the differential synthesis rates within one message  <cit>  and/or degradation rates of the subunits  <cit>  determine the precision to achieve the balanced stoichiometry of subunits. under thermal stress, we observed variations in the translation rates of single subunits  which lead to alterations in the production of the single subunits that deviated from the expected stoichiometry. translation rates may change disproportionately because of temperature-dependent variations in the diffusion properties of the different translation components  <cit> . precise control of the stoichiometry of protein complexes at elevated temperatures could also be established by differential degradation of the subunits at elevated growth temperatures .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, our data unravel new aspects in the adaptive response of a. thaliana to heat stress at the level of translation. the adaptation to heat exposure is fine-tuned by a sizeable set of genes whose translation is most likely regulated by different secondary structure elements. furthermore, the ribo-seq and rna-seq data provide a vast resource of the arabidopsis transcriptome and translatome at permissive temperature  and under heat stress that can inform future experiments focused on understanding transcriptional and translational regulation of nuclear and plastid-encoded genes.

