BACKGROUND
mef-2-related transcription factors belong to a family of proteins that are present in all eukaryotic organisms  <cit> . these proteins share a very conserved dna-binding and protein-dimerization domain, the mads-box, named after the transcription factors mcm <dig> , agamous, deficiens  and srf   <cit> . two subfamilies of mads-box transcription factors have been defined according to the mads-box sequence: type i and type ii  <cit> . plants have a large number of types i and ii mads-box proteins while other organisms, such as fungi and animals, usually have one or more proteins of each subfamily  <cit> . animals, for example, have only one type i protein  and four type ii proteins . the two types of factors recognize different a/t rich binding sites. srf and related factors recognize the consensus sequence cc6gg  <cit> , while mef-2-related factors recognize the cta4tag consensus sequence  <cit> .

mads-box transcription factors accomplish various biological functions. in plants, they are critically involved in floral formation and development  <cit> . in yeasts, mcm <dig> participates in the regulation of pheromone expression, metabolism  <cit>  and dna replication  <cit> . in animals, these transcription factors are mainly involved in the regulation of cell-differentiation processes. srf deletion is lethal in mice because cells are impaired in cell adhesion and migration  <cit> , and the embryo cannot complete gastrulation  <cit> . tissue-specific deletion has shown that srf is also required for terminal differentiation of skeletal, cardiac and smooth muscle cells and for neural cell migration  <cit> . additional studies have demonstrated that srf regulates the expression of a large number of genes coding for actin-cytoskeleton-related proteins  <cit> .

mef- <dig> proteins are involved in regulating the expression of muscle-specific genes, both in drosophila <cit>  and in mammals  <cit> , in collaboration with myod-related transcription factors  <cit> . in mammals, there are four genes coding for very similar mef- <dig> factors that appear to functionally complement each other, at least partially   <cit> . however, mef2c-null mice die early in their development due to cardiovascular abnormalities  <cit> , and mef2a-null mice die perinatally from heart defects  <cit> . in addition, numerous studies have shown that mef- <dig> factors are also involved in the differentiation of several other cell types, such as neural crest cells, endothelial cells, chondrocytes, neurons and lymphocytes  <cit> .

our group has approached the functional study of mads-box transcription factors in the social amoeba dictyostelium discoideum. these unicellular organisms live in forest soils, feeding on bacteria and other microorganisms and are able to develop as multicellular organisms under starvation conditions. in such conditions, up to  <dig> individual amoebas aggregate to form a fruiting body composed of a basal disk, stalk and sorus where up to 80% of the original amoeba differentiate into resistant forms called spores  <cit> . the initial step is the aggregation of the cells towards camp-secreting centers to form a mound. cells within the aggregates initiate a differentiation process to form two main cell types: prestalk and prespore. prestalk cells migrate to the top of the mound, emerging as a tip. a culmination process is later initiated by the migration of prestalk cells from the tip towards the substrate through the mass of prespore cells, piling up and terminally differentiating to form the stalk. the mass of prespore cells remains attached to the top of the forming stalk, rising from the substrate until culmination is completed. migratory structures, called slugs, can be formed before culmination under adverse environmental conditions. in this case, the slugs migrate towards warmer and lighter places for culmination to facilitate the dissemination of the spores. by the end of culmination, prespore cells differentiate inside the sorus to form mature spores.

analysis of the d. discoideum genome has shown that it contains four genes coding for mads-box transcription factors, namely srfa, b, c and d. previous studies in our laboratory have shown that srfa is required for the proper development of the fruiting body, including the slug migration and culmination steps, and is essential for spore terminal differentiation  <cit> . the srfb gene is expressed earlier than srfa during development, and the encoded protein is involved in the initiation of the developmental process, cell migration and the initiation of culmination  <cit> . the functional study of the srfc gene is described in this article. we present evidence demonstrating that srfc is more similar to animal mef- <dig> genes and propose naming it mef2a. by analyzing the phenotype of mutant strains and gene expression levels during development, we clearly show that this protein is involved in d. discoideum development and, in particular, in the differentiation of prespore cells and one group of prestalk cells.

RESULTS
characterization of the mef2a  gene
the analysis of the d. discoideum genome identified four genes coding for proteins with regions similar to the mads-box domain. these genes were named srfa, b, c and d. the putative mads-box region of the proteins encoded by these genes was analyzed in more detail and compared to that of vertebrates , invertebrates , amoeba  and fungi  type i  and type ii  proteins. amino acid sequences were aligned using the clustalw and clustalx programs . the multiple alignments were used to calculate the phylogenetic tree shown in figure  <dig>  the results indicate that the d. discoideum genes srfa and srfb code for proteins that are more similar to type i genes, such as the animal srf gene, than to type ii genes, such as mef <dig>  d. discoideum srfa and srfb appear to form a monophyletic group that more closely resembles to animal proteins than to fungi proteins. in contrast, the proteins encoded by d. discoideum srfc and srfd are more similar to animal mef <dig> than to srf proteins. in this case, the protein encoded by srfc is more closely related to that of the amoeba e. histolytica and is also more similar to animal mef <dig> proteins than to srfd. in fact, srfd appears to have diverged significantly from the other type ii proteins analyzed. the results of this analysis centered our attention on srfc, which we propose to rename as mef2a, a name that we will use throughout the rest of the article.

the expression of mef2a during vegetative growth and development was analyzed by rt-pcr, and the results are shown in figure 2a. expression was detected in growing cells , but a large induction was observed at  <dig> hours of development, an induction that was maintained at later developmental stages. the promoter region of the gene was characterized to further determine the temporal and spatial patterns of expression. primer-extension experiments were performed using the race  technique. the data indicated the existence of one intron in the 5′ utr and two regions of transcription initiation  . the gene structure diagram, which includes the 5′ untranslated region  and the transcription initiation sites, is shown in figure 2b. the more upstream transcription initiation sites of each region are located at nucleotides − <dig> and − <dig>  respectively. the first intron is located in the 5′ utr of one of the two transcribed mrnas . the data obtained from the experiments also enabled us to define the limits of the second intron, located between the first  and second nucleotide  of the translation initiation codon.

the transcriptional activity of both promoters was analyzed by the use of reporter vectors where promoter  <dig> , promoter  <dig>  or the complete promoter region  were cloned, thereby driving lacz expression. pools of transformed cells obtained for each promoter were analyzed for β-galactosidase activity. promoter  <dig> drove lacz expression in scattered cells at the mound and finger stages of development, but its activity markedly increased in the prespore region of slug, mexican-hat and culminant structures . promoter  <dig> was active in scattered cells of aggregates and fingers, but the activity decreased almost completely at later developmental stages, except for a few cells in the basal disk of culminant structures. the activity of the complete promoter showed the sum of pr <dig> and pr <dig> and was maximal in the prespore region of developing structures.

generation of mef2a-deficient strains
the study of the biological function of mef2a was approached through the generation of mutant strains where the gene was partially deleted by homologous recombination. the deleted region included the first two exons, coding for the 5′ untranslated region of the gene, and the third exon, coding for the n-terminal region of the protein, including the mads-box domain . several mutant clones were isolated on two different backgrounds, the ax <dig> and ax <dig> d. discoideum axenic strains. figure 3a shows the rt-pcr analyses demonstrating mef2a gene deletion in one ax4-derived clone  and two ax2-derived clones . later results show no evidence of any transcription of the remaining coding dna of this gene . the mef2a- deleted strains grew more slowly than the wild type strains when feeding on bacteria , although no difference in growth was observed in the axenic culture .

the mutant strains completed development under starvation conditions at the same time as the wild-type strains, but several differences were observed during the process, as shown in figure 3c. both the mutant and wild-type strains formed streams during aggregation, but the streams of the mutant strain appeared more fragmented than those of the wild-type strains, forming more heterogeneous and smaller mounds. subsequently, the mutant strains formed fewer slugs, which were smaller and migrated shorter distances than those formed by the wild-type strains. finally, the mutant strains formed more culminant structures that were more heterogeneous in size than those of the wild-type strains. the number of spores formed by each strain was quantified, and the mutant strains produced about half the number of spores formed by the wild-type strains . however, the viability of the mature spores was similar for the mutant and wild-type strains.

the value  <dig> indicates the average number of spores produced in ax <dig> or ax <dig> cells. the average and standard deviations of three biological replicates, made in triplicate, are shown.

the developmental phenotype of the mutant was further characterized by studying the expression of cell-type specific marker genes. ax <dig> and mef2a- mutant cells were transfected with reporter vectors that drive lacz expression under the control of the ecma and ecmb prestalk gene promoters or the pspa prespore gene promoter. the lacz expression was analyzed at the finger, slug and mid-culminant stages of development . the ecma gene promoter is active in the anterior, prestalk region of finger and slug structures  and in the stalk, upper and lower cups and basal disk of wild-type structures. the activity was detected in the same regions in mef2a- mutants, but the anterior prestalk region was larger in the fingers. a quantification of the relative size of the psta prestalk region indicated that it represented  <dig> %  of the finger length in ax <dig> structures and  <dig> %  in the mef2a- mutants, difference that is statistically significant . in addition, ecma promoter activity was more extended and diffuse in the mutant slugs. ecmb promoter activity in the anterior prestalk region of mound and slug structures is more restricted than that of the ecma promoter and is mainly located in the tip organizer region, as well as in a number of cells scattered around the posterior regions, i.e., the anterior-like cells  <cit> . in culminant structures, the ecmb promoter is active in the stalk. the mutant strains showed an extended region of ecmb promoter activity in the finger structures. in the slug structures, ecmb-expressing cells were more disperse in the mutant strains, and no well-defined tip organizer region was observed. the pspa prespore promoter presented a pattern of activity opposite to that of the ecma promoter. in the fingers, the pspa promoter was active in the posterior, prespore region. the quantification of the pspa prespore region indicated that it is shorter in mef2a- mutants  than in ax <dig> structures . in the culminant structures, pspa was active in the sorus. the mef2a mutants showed reduced pspa promoter activity, especially in the slugs where no well-defined prespore region was observed . in the culminant structures, the mutant sori were thinner than the wild-type sori.

the differences observed could be due to the participation of mef2a in the process of prespore differentiation but could also be due to defective inter-cellular signaling in the mutant structures. we designed a developmental analysis of mixtures of the mutant and wild-type cells to discriminate between these two possibilities. in these experiments, we transfected wild-type and mutant cells with a reporter vector that would express lacz upon differentiation of the cells to prestalk  or prespore  cells. the transfected cells were mixed with non-transfected cells in a 1: <dig> proportion and allowed to develop. if the mef2a- mutant cells were defective in generating the intercellular signals required for cell differentiation, their mixture with wild-type cells would provide the defective signal and induce correct differentiation of the mutant cells. alternatively, if the mef2a- mutant cells were defective in the process of cell differentiation, the presence of wild-type cells would not compensate for their differentiation defect. therefore, wild-type and mutant cells expressing lacz from the prestalk-specific ecmb promoter or the prespore-specific pspa promoter were mixed with unlabeled cells and allowed to develop. the slugs and early culminant structures were analyzed for lacz expression, the results of which are shown in figure  <dig>  the expected distribution of ecmb-expressing cells can be observed in the ax4/ax4-lacz samples. the ecmb-expressing cells are located in the tip-organizer region of the slugs, as well as scattered in their posterior region. in culminant structures, ecmb is expressed in the stalk  and in the upper and lower- cup regions. the mixture of mef2a- mutant labeled and unlabeled cells showed a staining pattern similar to that shown in figure  <dig> for ecmb::lacz-expressing mutant cells. when the ecmb-expressing mef2a- cells were mixed with the wild-type cells, no lacz expression was detected in the tip organizer region in the slugs or in the tip of the culminant structures, indicating that the mef2a- cells were excluded from these regions. as expected, ax4-ecmb::lacz cells were found in these regions when mixed with mef2a- cells, indicating that mef2a might be required for prestalk cell differentiation at the tip-organizer region.

the results obtained using pspa::lacz as a cell marker are shown in the lower panel of figure  <dig>  homogeneous mixtures of ax4/ax <dig> and mef2a- mutant/mef2a- mutant cells presented the same pattern of staining shown in figure  <dig>  in the case of the mutant cells, a reduced population of lacz-expressing cells was also observed in the slugs and, to a lesser extent, the culminant structures. the mixture of pspa-labeled mef2a- mutant cells with wild-type unlabeled cells showed that very few mutant cells differentiated as prespore cells, and the cells that expressed pspa were found at the rear region of the slugs and the lower part of the sorus in the culminating structures. in contrast, intense lacz staining was observed when pspa-expressing ax <dig> cells were mixed with mef2a- mutant cells.

mixing experiments were also employed to study spore formation in chimeras. in this case, the cells were labeled  and mixed in a 1: <dig> proportion with unlabeled cells. cells mixtures were set to develop and allowed to differentiate for  <dig> hours. spores were collected, and the percentage of fluorescent spores was determined. table  <dig> shows that homogeneous mixtures of wild-type  or mef2a- mutant cells yielded the expected proportion of approximately 50% fluorescent spores. however, the mixture of labeled wild-type cells with unlabeled mef2a- mutant cells produced more than 90% fluorescent spores. in perfect agreement with this result, when labeled mef2a- cells were mixed with unlabeled wild-type cells, less than 10% of the spores showed fluorescence.

the fluorescent cell population is indicated in the first column by the superscript fl for each 1: <dig> cell mixture. the average and standard deviations of  <dig> biological replicates are shown.

we also analyzed spore formation by in vitro differentiation. in these experiments, starved cells were induced to differentiate into spores by incubation with 8-br-camp  <cit> . after  <dig> hours, the presence of differentiated spores was determined by the morphological changes observed under the microscope . incubation of ax <dig> cells induced the differentiation of more that 90% of the cells into ellipsoid, highly refringent spores. however, when the mef2a- mutant cells were treated, the majority of the cells appeared rounded and flattened and very few  refringent spores were observed . similar results were obtained for ax <dig> wild-type and mutant cells .

gene expression profile of mef2a mutant cells
we analyzed the differences in gene expression between ax <dig> and mef2a- strains after  <dig> hours of development  when the difference in cell-type marker expression is greatest . poly+rnas were isolated, converted to cdna and sequenced using an illumina massive sequencing machine. a total of  <dig> , <dig> alignable sequences were obtained for the ax <dig> rna and  <dig> , <dig> for the mef2a- rna, corresponding to approximately  <dig>  different genes. the sequences obtained were aligned over the ax <dig> genome sequence, and the number of sequences obtained for each gene was determined. the genes that presented a significant difference in the number of reads between wild-type and mef2a- mutant strains were finally determined. given that only one rna sample was analyzed for each strain, stringent filters were used to determine the genes that were differentially expressed: more than  <dig> times in the number of reads, with an adjusted p value of less than  <dig> . seventy-seven genes showed significant differences with these criteria. thirty two of these  <dig> genes showed higher expression in the wild-type strain, and  <dig> showed higher expression in the mef2a- mutant strain. as a control, the mef2a transcript was sequenced  <dig> times in the ax <dig> sample and none in the mutant sample. table  <dig> shows the more significant genes that were found coding for known proteins or for proteins with a number of conserved domains. the largest group of genes code for small proteins that are expressed in prestalk cells and that are generally expressed to higher levels in the mef2a- mutant structures. a number of these genes showed similarity to the hssa gene  <cit> . a second group of genes coded for 57– <dig> amino acid long proteins that do not show significant similarity to hssa but are also expressed in prestalk cells. three genes coding for small proteins  that were expressed in prespore cells showed lower expression in the mef2a- mutant structures. other genes that are important for prestalk development and that were expressed at higher levels in the mef2a- mutant structures include pks <dig>  which codes for a polyketide synthase and could be involved in the synthesis of prestalk differentiation factors, and mybc, which codes for a transcription factor involved in the response to prestalk differentiation factors  <cit> . a number of genes coding for proteins possibly involved in transcription regulation were identified. their expression appears to be dependent on mef2a because the expression is significantly decreased in mutant structures.

the following information is indicated in each line of columns  <dig> and 3: the reference number of the gene, the ratio of the number of reads in wild-type and mutant samples  and the actual number of reads for each sample . asterisks on the third column indicate genes that present a sequence related to mef <dig> binding sites in their putative promoter regions. the letter “c” indicates that this sequence correspond to the consensus mef <dig> binding site. the letter “a” indicates the presence of consensus binding sites for the s. cerevisiae arg <dig> mads-box transcription factor.

to confirm and extend the data obtained, we performed quantitative rt-pcr experiments on new mrnas isolated from structures collected after every two hours of development. the expression levels of  <dig> of the genes listed in table  <dig> were determined by quantitative rt-pcr, and the results are shown in figure  <dig>  the genes selected were representative of the main categories identified in table  <dig> and include two hssa-related genes  and one gene coding for a small protein that was expressed at higher levels in the wild-type strain . the other analyzed genes coded for proteins involved in prestalk differentiation , for proteins possibly involved in transcription regulation , for spore-inducing factors  and for membrane proteins possibly involved in extracellular signaling or cell adhesion . the results for these genes are in complete agreement with the mrna sequencing data and show that the majority of these genes are similarly dependent on mef2a for all developmental times analyzed. the only exception was psii, which was expressed at later developmental stages in the mef2a- mutant structures than in the wild-type structures . the expression of several of the genes studied  was almost completely dependent on mef2a for all developmental stages analyzed.

discussion
the study of the biological function of the mef2a gene was approached by generating deletion mutants in d. discoideum. several mutants were generated in the ax <dig> and ax <dig> strains, and similar phenotypes were observed for all strains, as shown in figure  <dig> and tables  <dig> and  <dig>  over-expression of mef2a caused developmental defects that were morphologically similar to those observed in the mutants. pools of mef2a over-expressing cells were similar to the mutant strains in the formation of more structures, more heterogeneous in size, and fewer slugs with reduced migration , which prevented mutant complementation studies. similar results were obtained when mef2a was expressed from integrative vectors using the constitutive act <dig> promoter or the endogenous, prespore-specific mef2a promoter. a possible explanation for these results might be that over-expressed mefa proteins bind to co-factors or activating molecules outside the chromatin environment, thus impairing their regulatory function on dna-bound mef2a molecules.

the results indicate that mef2a is involved in the determination or differentiation of prespore cells and of a group of prestalk cells in d. discoideum. mutant cells do not differentiate to spores in vitro and, in vivo, produce approximately half the number of spores than wild-type cells produce. these defects are cell-autonomous because the presence of wild-type cells is not able to induce differentiation of the mef2a- mutant cells. the proposed role would represent a conserved function for mef <dig> proteins during evolution, given that plant and animal homologous proteins also play important roles in cell differentiation, as mentioned in the introduction. mef2a mutants also show impaired growth when feeding on bacteria. this defect does not appear to be due to a reduced phagocytic capacity, as determined by incubation with fluorescent microspheres . differences in cell motility could also explain the smaller size of the colonies, but these possibilities have not been further studied. however, mef2a  has been previously identified as one of the genes whose expression is regulated depending on the growth substrate of the d. discoideum cells, bacteria or axenic media  <cit> .

as mentioned above, mef2a appears to be involved in the determination or differentiation of a population of prestalk cells located at the tip of the culminant structures and at the anterior-most region of the slugs. these cells express the ecmb gene and include the tip-organizer cells that regulate the culmination of the structures  <cit> . the evidence for this function is that mef2a- mutant cells expressing ecmb::lacz do not participate in the formation of the tip in mixed developmental processes . in addition, mef2a mutant cells differentiate poorly to ecmb-expressing prestalk cells in vitro in the presence of dif and camp  <cit>  . however, we have not detected mef2a expression in these cells. the cell-autonomous function of mef2a during differentiation may be due to a cell-type determination process taking place at the previous mound stage of development where mef2a is expressed . alternatively, the expression of mef2a in ecmb-expressing prestalk cells might be too low to be detected by gene reporter expression analyses.

other populations of prestalk cells, however, are enlarged in mutant structures, as shown in figure  <dig>  differences in cell type specification could explain the phenotypes observed. for example, the existence of a larger number of prestalk cells that adhere more strongly to each other might contribute to the breakage of the streams. in addition, a number of the genes that are misregulated in mef2a mutants, such as the tgr family of genes , are involved in cell adhesion  <cit> . however, no differences in ca-dependent cell adhesion could be determined experimentally using the method described by parkinsons et al.  <cit>  . the slug structures also showed a highly altered proportion and distribution of prestalk and prespore cells , which could explain their smaller size and limited motility.

despite the developmental defects discussed above, it seems clear that mef2a is not absolutely required for d. discoideum development given that a large number of fruiting bodies and spores are formed in the mutant strains. we would like to suggest that mef2a participates in a network of transcription factors that regulate cell differentiation and that could compensate, at least partially, for the absence of mef2a. for example, mutations of histone deacetylases  <cit>  and chromatin-binding proteins  <cit>  affect prespore differentiation or cell-type patterning. in addition, the expression of several genes coding for putative transcriptional regulators is regulated by mef2a. for example, comh codes for a gata-binding transcription factor expressed in prespore cells. g <dig> codes for a putative β-sandwich domain transcription factor, and g <dig>  g <dig> and g <dig> code for proteins containing domains possibly involved in dna binding and transcription regulation. rbla, a retinoblastoma homolog, also controls the preference of the cells for stalk or spore differentiation  <cit> . this gene is expressed in the prespore region, and, in chimera with wild-type cells, rbla mutant cells show a strong preference for stalk differentiation, as was also demonstrated here for mef2a mutants.

mef2a might play a cell-autonomous regulatory role in cell differentiation in response to extracellular signals analogous to those described in other biological systems. the activity of vertebrate mef <dig> transcription factors is tightly regulated by extracellular signals. one of the best-known regulatory pathways involves the regulated association of mef <dig> with class ii histone deacetylases in a process mediated by protein phosphorylation  <cit> . mef <dig> can also be directly phosphorylated through map kinase pathways, regulating its transcriptional activity  <cit> . in this respect, the d. discoideum map kinase erkb is required for spore differentiation  <cit> . it would be of interest to determine whether mef2a participates in this erkb-mediated spore differentiation pathway, especially given that mef2a presents three consensus erk phosphorylation sites.

the main regulatory pathway described as inducing prespore cell differentiation is initiated by extracellular camp and requires protein kinase a  activation  <cit> . the in vitro spore differentiation study shown in figure  <dig> was induced by br-camp treatment, resulting in direct pka activation. the mef2a- mutant cells were unable to differentiate under these conditions. this result indicates that mef2a regulation takes place downstream of pka. in fact, a pka consensus phosphorylation site is present close to the c-terminal end of mef- <dig>  indicating the possibility that this protein might be a substrate for pka.

massive-sequencing analyses of gene expression indicate that mef2a can play a role in cell differentiation through the regulation of gene expression. there are  <dig> genes whose expression decreases in mef2a mutants, and many of these genes are specifically expressed in prespore cells, as determined by the mrna expression analysis available at dictybase  and by the in situ hybridization analysis  <cit> . a number of prespore specific proteins, often used as prespore markers, also showed differences in expression between ax <dig> and the mef2a mutant strain but did not reach the filter requirements set up in the analysis of the sequencing data . for example, cota was expressed  <dig>  more times in ax <dig> than in the mutant, cotc was expressed  <dig>  times, cotd  <dig>  times, pspd  <dig>  times, pspb  <dig>  times and pspa  <dig>  times. in contrast, many of the genes that are over-expressed in the mef2a mutant have been identified as prestalk-specific, as shown in table  <dig>  the prestalk-specific gene ecma was also expressed at higher levels in the mutant . however, ecmb was expressed  <dig>  times more in ax <dig>  in agreement with the reduced and more disorganized distribution of ecmb-expressing cells in the mutant at  <dig> hours of development .

further studies are required to determine the mechanism involved in the transcriptional regulation of the genes whose expression is altered in mef2a mutants. several of the genes that are under-expressed in mef2a mutants appear to be almost completely dependent on this transcription factor for their expression. the regulation of the expression of these genes could be mediated by the direct binding of mef2a to their regulatory regions. the dna binding site of mef2-related factors has been conserved through evolution and corresponds to the consensus sequence cta4atg. we looked for the presence of this sequence on the  <dig> nucleotide-long fragments located upstream of the  <dig> genes down-regulated in the mutant using the opossum program  <cit> . as shown in table  <dig>   <dig> of these genes contained this consensus sequence in the region analyzed. thirteen additional genes contained related sequences that differed in the c or the g nucleotides. in addition,  <dig> genes presented the consensus binding site of a related mads-box transcription factor   <cit> . these data indicate that a number of these genes could be direct regulatory targets of mef2a. alternatively, mef2a could regulate the expression of other transcription factors controlling the expression of these genes.

the initial analysis of the structure of the mef2a gene detected the existence of alternative promoters that drive the expression of the gene at different times of development and in distinct structures. it is remarkable that the related srfa and srfb genes are also transcribed from alternative promoters, specific for different cell types and developmental stages  <cit> . other developmental regulatory genes are also transcribed from alternative promoters in d. discoideum, such as pdsa   <cit> cara   <cit>  and acaa   <cit> . the existence of alternative promoters might have been an evolutionary adaptation that regulates the expression of a gene under different conditions of growth and/or different developmental processes.

CONCLUSIONS
mef2a, which codes for a protein homologous to myocyte enhancer factor  <dig> transcription factors, is required for several of the steps of the d. discoideum biological cycle, including growth on bacteria and multicellular development. in particular, mef2a is involved in the regulation of the determination or differentiation of prespore cells and a group of prestalk cells during the developmental process of fruiting body formation.

