BACKGROUND
limb regeneration of salamanders has fascinated scientists for several decades. salamanders, newts and axolotls, are used as model animals in limb regeneration studies. regeneration of missing structures is achieved by blastema, a pool of restricted progenitors that is formed after amputation  <cit> .

electroporation of dna is the fastest and efficient method to introduce exogenous transgenes into salamander limb and spinal cord in vivo but this expression is lost during regeneration as the electroporated dna is episomal  <cit> .

infection of cells both in cell culture and in vivo by modified viruses has been a powerful means of expressing exogenous genes in various experimental systems. for example, retroviral infection has been crucial for the molecular analysis of chicken limb development  <cit> . a corresponding molecular analysis of limb regeneration in salamanders has been limited due to a paucity in gene transduction methods. vaccinia and adenovirus have been used in limb regeneration studies, but their toxicity and non-integration phenotype limits their effectiveness  <cit> . similarly, pseudotyped retroviruses have been used in cultured cells  <cit>  and a recent report showing their use in vivo but the issue of viral silencing after second round of regeneration was not investigated  <cit> . we therefore sought a virus system that efficiently and stably infects salamander cells in vitro and in vivo and does not require pseudotyping and is not prone to silencing during initial and second round of regeneration.

foamy viruses  are a special type of retroviruses that are endemic to most non-human primates, horses, cattle and cats  <cit> . they were only lately successfully introduced into the repertoire of vector systems for the correction of inherited diseases, in particular of the hematopoietic lineage, in the mammalian system  <cit> . however, they have proven to be an efficient, non-toxic and stably integrating gene delivery vector system for mammalian cells. some of their unique features, including their apparent apathogenicity, infectious particle-associated dna genome, extremely broad host range as well as their efficient transduction capability for hematopoietic stem cells , make them one of the most promising tools for various gene therapeutic approaches  <cit> .

one hallmark of fvs is their extremely broad tropism, including even very distantly related organisms as reptiles or birds  <cit> . the nature of the broadly expressed, and potentially evolutionary conserved, cellular receptor of fv glycoprotein-mediated attachment and entry remains poorly characterized. though, several lines of evidence from recent publications suggest that proteoglycans and heparin sulfate function particularly as important attachment factors for fv env-mediated host cell infection, additional uncharacterized molecules appear to be essential for fusion of viral and cellular lipid membranes during uptake of virions  <cit> . based on this feature we tested whether salamander cells would be transduced by fv vectors in vitro and in vivo. we also compared their transduction profile to that of lentiviral  vectors pseudotyped with the vesicular stomatitis virus glycoprotein g , which has gained favor in gene delivery methods  <cit> .

RESULTS
to test and compare transduction efficiencies of foamy virus  and lentivirus  vectors in salamanders, fv and lv vector particles were generated by transient transfection of 293t cells with transfer vectors  containing an identical human ubiquitin c  promoter driven egfp marker gene cassette including a wpre posttranscriptional element, and the corresponding packaging expression constructs  . we first tested the infectability of cultured cell lines derived from the newt and the axolotl limb  <cit> . target cells were exposed to vector particles at a titer of  <dig> x <dig> iu/ml  for  <dig> hours with an moi  of  <dig> and analyzed in weekly intervals by facs analysis for the percentage of egfp-positive cells . in one week, the newt and axolotl cells undergo approximately two doublings. one week after viral transduction, both the lv- and fv-transduced cells showed close to 50% gfp-expressing cells. by four weeks, the fv-transduced cell preparation showed close to 75% egfp-expressing cells and remained stably at this level over  <dig> weeks in culture. in contrast, the lv-transduced cells decreased stably to 20% egfp-expressing cells. furthermore, using higher concentration/titer of viruses or different ratios of vector particles to target cells, a similar decline in lv infectivity was observed suggesting that the decline/inefficiency of lv infection cannot be circumvented by using more infectious particles .

figure  <dig> shows fluorescence images of egfp expressing newt  and axolotl cell cultures  at  <dig> days post transduction with fv and lv vectors. the reason for the initial decline in the number of egfp-positive cells in samples transduced with lv vectors and increase in fv vector transduced samples within the first three weeks post transduction is currently unclear. a silencing of integrated lv vector genomes and not fv vector genomes in individual cells is one possible explanation. alternatively, it might be the result of the differential capability of lv and fv vectors to integrate their reverse transcribed genomes in interphase chromatin. the lv vector derived initial high number of egfp expressing cells can be a consequence of reverse transcribed hiv genomes actively imported into the nucleus of cells infected during interphase and resulting in expression from episomal vector dna genomes. the subsequent decline within the first  <dig> weeks after transduction may then be a consequence of inefficient viral integrase-mediated lv vector insertion into the host genome. in contrast, fv vectors are known to require mitosis for access to host chromatin and can reside in a latent state at the centrosome of non-dividing cells for weeks  <cit> . thus, an increase of the percentage of egfp expressing cells within the first  <dig> weeks after transduction might be the result of efficient integration of fv vector genomes only after individual mitotic divisions of individual cells. for the majority of target cells this might take up to three weeks.

we next wanted to test the ability of the viruses to infect limb tissue in vivo. concentrated virus preparations were prepared by centrifugation and subsequently injected in mature limbs of axolotls. we did not observe any egfp labeling in these limbs injected with lv or fv particles . since fv require mitosis to access their host genome, we injected lv and fv particles into  <dig> day old axolotl forelimb blastemas. injection of  <dig>  to  <dig> μl of concentrated fv particles  consistently yielded labeling of many limb cells . to test the stability of transgene expression, we allowed the limbs to fully regenerate and then re-amputated the limbs. after  <dig> weeks of second round regeneration, we continued to observe robust expression of egfp . similarly, tail and limb blastema were injected with fv particles containing ubic promoter driving dsred and allowed to regenerate . in contrast, we observed virtually no gene expression after injection of a similar volume of the highest concentration lv preparations that we could achieve  .

to determine the specific cell types that were labeled we cross sectioned the infected, regenerated limbs and performed immunostaining. we observed egfp/dsred expression that co-localized with immunostaining for muscle specific myosin , collagen , keratin , myelin basic protein  and blood vessels .

to ascertain the efficiency of fv to transfer two genes , a <dig> cells were transduced with a mixture of fv . we saw colocalization of both the fluorescent proteins in majority of cells . similarly, colocalization of egfp and dsred was also observed in nerve tracts of spinal cord when a tail blastema was injected with the two fv viruses . these results confirm that multiple fv particles can transfer genes in the same target cell.

to determine if viral transduction could be used to achieve cell type-specific expression, we inserted the caract:egfp expression cassette  into a fv vector and produced concentrated vector stocks as described in methods and materials. subsequently, vector particles were injected in blastemas at day  <dig> and regeneration was allowed to occur. we observed egfp expression only in the limb muscle fibers in the regenerated limb and not in any other cell type . therefore, foamy virus vector-mediated transgene integration results in faithful, cell-type restricted expression.

these results indicate that fv particles can infect blastema cells with stable and persistent expression during regeneration and after amputation. furthermore, tissue specific expression is achieved when combined with tissue specific promoter. fv vectors have previously been shown to transduce cells from species very distantly related to their natural hosts  <cit> . electroporation of plasmid dna has been successfully established in salamanders but it cannot be used for experiments that require long-term gene expression as electroporated dna is episomal and dilutes out during cell division. similarly, establishing germline transgenic axolotls is a tedious process requiring 12- <dig> months . the results of this study show that fv vectors are an effective gene delivery tool for non-mammalian models, such as the salamander, resulting in long-term transgene expression. interestingly, not only in vitro but also in vivo, their efficiency and the stability of transgene production was superior to the currently most favored retroviral vector system based on lentiviruses pseudotyped by the glycoprotein of the rhabdovirus vsv. availability of foamy virus gene transfer system together with recently reported psuedotyped retrovirus  <cit>  for regeneration research, such as the axolotl/salamander system, will greatly expand the ability to test gene function during regeneration.

CONCLUSIONS
we here report on the successful application of foamy virus as a vector for transgene integration and sustained expression during regeneration. upon infection of the blastema, egfp expression was observed in multiple cell types, and expression lasted throughout regeneration and persisted through a second round of regeneration. both limb and tail blastema were transduced with foamy virus expressing egfp/dsred and resulted in wide range of cells labeled after limb/tail regeneration was complete. we also demonstrated the compatibility of this system with cell-type specific expression by incorporating the xenopus cardiac actin promoter in the foamy virus vector. our observation of widespread and stable expression with the foamy virus contrasts with the difficulty to achieve persistent in vivo transgene expression with concentrated lentivirus vectors.

