BACKGROUND
while gene flow decreases the differentiation among populations, it may increase genetic diversity within them. population connectivity is therefore important to maintain overall genetic diversity across small local populations that would otherwise "erode" because of drift  <cit> . the effects of isolation by distance and reduced local population sizes tend to be most visible at the edges of species ranges, as these fringes go through periods of expansion with founder effects and contraction with bottlenecks  <cit> . empirical studies on butterflies show that peripheral populations are indeed less diverse than central populations  <cit> , and experience larger population fluctuations due to less favourable conditions  <cit> . in addition the breeding system will also affect within-population genetic diversity, with asexual species being least diverse and sexual systems being variably affected by deviations from random mating, which may affect effective population size independent of drift  <cit> .

endangered species often occur in small isolated populations where demographic and environmental stochasticity impose additional risks of local extinction. this has made some researchers question the role that genetic factors play in driving population extinction  <cit> , because genetic factors are likely to be negligible when population decline occurs rapidly. however, when effective population sizes remain moderate, inbreeding over many generations may have marked fitness effects due to increasing disease susceptibility and inbreeding depression  <cit> . this is because purging tends to remove primarily the few deleterious recessive alleles with large negative effects, and hardly affects the more numerous slightly deleterious alleles  <cit> . theory indicates  <cit>  and comparative studies across  <dig> species have shown  <cit>  that a significant proportion of endangered populations/species have reduced levels of genetic variation compared to related non-endangered species, suggesting that genetic factors often play a role in population extinctions  <cit> .

researchers have traditionally been forced to evaluate present day diversity of endangered populations against other contemporary populations of the same or closely related species. such studies are valuable, but since populations rarely have identical demographic and environmental histories, precise identification of the factors that caused extant genetic differences remains impossible. recent technical advances in the extraction and amplification of old dna have made the large resources of natural history collections  available for population genetic studies, providing direct and highly relevant reference points for studies of genetic diversity in endangered populations. particularly taxa with long histories of collection by entomologists, such as beetles, butterflies and hoverflies, have thus become very useful for long term population studies of genetic change over time.

the number of studies utilizing nhc material for evolutionary genetic studies is increasing, and many focus on past and present genetic diversity in endangered populations  <cit> . despite the promises these methods hold for conservation genetics, there are also limitations to the use of historical dna, and special precautions are required in the experimental and the analytical phase of such work. the highly degraded nature of dna extracted from historical samples, which increases with age, temperature and water content  <cit> , generally restricts pcr amplification to short fragments  thus limiting the choice of genetic markers. nuclear microsatellite markers have proven useful in this context, as they have short and highly polymorphic amplicons  <cit> . however, historical dna is not only of low quality but also occurs in very low quantity, increasing the risk of genotype errors caused by cross contamination, allelic dropout or false alleles. the importance of following standard protocols when working with historical samples can therefore not be stressed enough, and the assessment and reporting of genotype error rates is indispensable in order to validate such datasets  <cit> .

the large blue butterfly, maculinea arion, is one of many butterfly species that have declined in europe during the last century, both in terms of population numbers and population connectivity  <cit> . as a result, many extant populations are considered endangered and only exist because they are actively managed  <cit> . the physical attractiveness and fascinating biology of m. arion has made the species popular among amateur collectors, so that many european natural history museums hold large collections often with good numbers of specimens collected in particular years that together form attractive time series for single localities. when these series coincide with periods of population decline they provide an outstanding opportunity to analyse how isolation and demographic fluctuations may have affected genetic variation in the past. such time series are common for m. arion and we exploit such collection material in this study. in particular, we investigated whether/how a recent, severe reduction in population census size and a long history of isolation by distance has affected genetic diversity in the last extant danish population of m. arion, on the island of møn . as contemporary reference points we used a cluster of six m. arion populations in south and central sweden approximately 100- <dig> km away  <cit>  and as historical reference points we used nhc specimens from the møn population covering the time period 1930- <dig> 

RESULTS
contemporary reference populations
two of the nine microsatellite loci that were analysed in the contemporary populations departed from hardy-weinberg equilibrium after sequential bonferroni corrections , but without showing evidence of null alleles. null alleles were found in macu <dig>  but only in the møn population and at low frequencies . linkage disequilibrium between pairs of microsatellite loci was found between macu <dig> and macu <dig>  and locus macu <dig> was subsequently excluded from further analysis.

the two measures of genetic diversity, allelic richness and expected heterozygosity, differed among the contemporary populations , but only significantly so for allelic richness . the møn population had a medium level of genetic diversity in comparison with the swedish populations, i.e. lower than the functional metapopulations in skåne, Öland and gotland, but higher than three isolated single site populations  <cit> . the allelic composition was, however, clearly different. while the isolated swedish populations had few private alleles, the population on møn had the highest proportion of diagnostic alleles , even exceeding the numbers found in skåne, Öland and gotland. consequently pairwise fst values among the six swedish populations were lower than their equivalents with the møn population. the population on møn was genetically most similar to the geographically closest population in skåne reflecting a general isolation by distance pattern among population .

historical reference populations
only one of  <dig> dna extractions of historical samples failed . fitting a general linear model to the remaining  <dig> historical samples revealed that pcr amplification success depended on sample age, the maximum allele length at the specific locus and also the interaction between the two . the negative effect of long alleles on amplification success thus increased more than proportionally with sample age. loci with allele sizes >  <dig> bp did not amplify consistently in the historical samples , and were not used in the further analysis . among the microsatellite loci used, genotype error rates per locus were  <dig>  on average in historical samples  and  <dig>  in modern samples , an order of magnitude difference .

two loci/population combinations departed from hardy-weinberg equilibrium after sequential bonferroni corrections . in macari <dig> this was due to homozygote excess, and evidence for null alleles was found in four of the sampling years . the loci macu <dig> and macari <dig> also showed signs of null alleles, but only in sample year  <dig> . due to small sample sizes the presence of null alleles could not be tested for the samples from  <dig> and  <dig>  no linkage disequilibrium was found between any pair of microsatellite loci. two of the  <dig> microsatellite loci were monomorphic in all sampling years , whereas the remaining ten loci were polymorphic in all populations, except macari <dig> in  <dig> and macari <dig> in  <dig> 

the two measures of genetic diversity, allelic richness  and expected heterozygosity  did not differ significantly between years, nor between historical and contemporary samples . furthermore, there was no difference in the genetic diversity measures when comparing all historical samples vs. the two contemporary samples. twelve of the  <dig> alleles were unique to the historical samples, four of which used to be present at relatively high frequencies . in contrast only one allele was unique to the contemporary samples, and was found at lower frequencies .

based on the empirical and simulated m-ratios four of the sampling years showed signs of a recent bottleneck, independently of the parameter setting . the remaining five sampling years showed signs of bottlenecks in the vast majority of parameter combinations, except when the parameters ps  and Δg  were set at their maximum .

the overall fst across loci was estimated to be  <dig>  . the pairwise genetic distances  between sampling years were significantly correlated with the temporal difference between samples , i.e. samples that were fewer years apart were more similar genetically.

discussion
contemporary vs. historical levels of genetic diversity
we found medium levels of genetic diversity in the maculinea arion population on møn compared to six contemporary swedish populations. significant differences in genetic diversity among populations could only be detected in allelic richness , which is known to be more strongly affected by population size reductions than is heterozygosity  <cit> . the very distinct allelic composition of the møn population shows that ongoing gene exchange with populations in skåne is restricted, and has been for a long time. this is in line with recent findings showing that gene flow in m. arion may occur over long distances  but only if suitable "stepping-stone" sites are found within ca  <dig> km of one another  <cit> . the fact that the population on møn is more closely related to the skåne populations is likely to reflect a shared history, as the open dots on the map in figure 1b indicate.

while the southern swedish populations  are thought to have been relatively stable over time, with several local populations within dispersal distance  <cit> , the population on møn has fluctuated markedly in census size in recent decades, and has been through two documented periods of consistently low numbers . this might imply that the lower levels of contemporary genetic diversity on møn compared to these southeastern swedish populations are related to regular moderate bottlenecking. similarly large fluctuations of m. arion have been reported in four uk populations. the magnitude of these oscillation around the carrying capacity has been ascribed to scramble competition between caterpillars after their adoption into the host-ant nests  but the duration of these 'natural' population oscillations are normally shorter than the ones observed on møn  <cit> , where population census size was reduced to 50- <dig> individuals over a period of at least six years .

despite this, we found no evidence for higher genetic variation in the møn population prior to the crash around  <dig>  levels of allelic richness and heterozygosity did not differ significantly in the studied period covering  <dig> years . several scenarios may explain this: i) the population reduction was not severe enough to impact the genetic diversity measures. this scenario would be comparable to a study of two species of bumble bees  <cit>  showing that only population reductions by at least 80% resulted in detectable loss of heterozygosity, ii) the number of historical samples was too low to estimate true levels of genetic diversity, or iii) the population was already genetically impoverished before the documented low population size in  <dig>  we cannot completely exclude that sample sizes in this study may compromise our ability to accurately assess historical levels of genetic diversity, but we believe that the third scenario is the most likely. the exact historical events causing the low level of contemporary genetic diversity on møn cannot be determined, but the long-term isolation  of the population has undoubtedly had an effect. the populations in northern sweden show even lower levels of genetic diversity, but analysis of historical data similar to the present study would be needed to reconstruct the causes of these patterns of extant genetic diversity.

given are the sample sizes  of the years the høvblege population could be studied and the total number of alleles , mean allelic richness  based on  <dig> independent diploid individuals, expected heterozygosity , inbreeding coefficient  and the ratio between allele number and allele range  calculated according to garza and williamson . asterisk indicates significance level: * p <  <dig> .

based on generally accepted measures, only two sampling years  showed evidence of bottlenecks, i.e. m-ratio <  <dig>  . however, when comparing to parameter sets realistic for m. arion, all populations showed signs of having passed through a bottleneck except for combinations using extreme parameter values . this suggests that the møn population has not been in mutation-drift equilibrium for many decades, and highlights the importance of evaluating m-ratio values over a wide range of parameter values when the exact mutation model of the used microsatellite loci is unknown and the population specific ne uncertain  <cit> .

although we did not find temporal changes in genetic diversity, 28% of the sampled alleles were unique to historical samples, with half of these present at frequencies above 10% . the high number of so-called ghost alleles, i.e. alleles that are lost in modern samples, is remarkable, given the exhaustive sampling in the contemporary population. ghost alleles are normally reported as evidence of a more diverse past  <cit> , which would suggest that the low population census sizes in the early 1990s have had some genetic impact on the møn population. however, the high temporal turnover in allele frequencies  suggests that we cannot rule out that ghost alleles in this study rather reflect the general life history of maculinea arion. the low mobility of patrolling m. arion males and the extremely heavy juvenile mortality rates mean that ne/nc in m. arion is likely to be very low because moderate population bottlenecks occur in each generation. a continuous turnover of alleles possibly associated with occasional female immigrants from far away  <cit>  would explain the relationship between pairwise genetic distance and temporal difference between samples .

caveats for using historical dna samples
studies in the field of conservation genetics increasingly employ nhc samples to assess past genetic diversity levels  <cit> . studies of insects have until very recently been underrepresented in these efforts, despite their potential because of large available time series from distinct populations often dating back to the late nineteenth century. while some studies using nhc samples of >  <dig> years old report successful amplification of nuclear microsatellite loci with alleles exceeding  <dig> bp  <cit> , we found that alleles longer than  <dig> bp did not amplify consistently in historical samples. moreover, we found that amplification failure of long alleles increased more than linearly with sample age , which is in accordance with dna degradation and fragmentation being random processes, leading to an exponential decline in dna template with increasing amplicon target size  <cit> .

accordingly, only loci with short allele sizes were used in our present study , which had the advantage that our genotype error rates  remained at the very low end of the much larger range  reported from other studies using samples of low dna quantity and quality  <cit> . this illustrates the importance of assessing the suitability of the genetic markers to be used for such studies, and of reporting genotype error rates that allow independent validation .

CONCLUSIONS
our study shows that the last maculinea arion population in denmark is only somewhat genetically impoverished compared to the larger, closest populations in southern sweden  <cit> . contrary to previous opinion, the genetic data of our present study indicate that this pattern is not due to the drastic reduction in population size in the early 1990s, but more likely a consequence of a history of long-term isolation from nearby populations. this emphasises that clusters of interconnected populations are crucial to maintain genetic variation within m. arion populations, as the species' extraordinary lifecycle makes local effective population sizes low. for conservation this implies that efforts should not be restricted to the active management of sites currently occupied by m. arion, but also include restoration of additional suitable sites within the ca.  <dig> km dispersal range, as is current practice in england and denmark  <cit> .

while many studies of conservation genetics have a rather pessimistic concluding paragraph, the results of our study indicate that extant m. arion populations in northwest europe may be somewhat more robust than the dismal rates of extinction during recent decades have suggested. the enormous stochasticity of larval mortality likely imposes such consistent effects of genetic drift that local site-specific adaptations have little opportunity to evolve despite relatively low dispersal rates. this may imply that while neutral alleles are turned over at a fairly high rate, there may not be much room for maintaining genetic variation for life history traits that deviate from the species average. the key issue for m. arion conservation would thus be active site management to secure optimal conditions for both the specific food-plants and host-ants that large blue butterflies require. once that has been achieved, the lack of variation for core life history traits may in fact facilitate natural recoveries from low numbers if eventual changes in the local habitat conditions remain within the standard m. arion niche. the same characteristics would facilitate re-introduction programs as a source population is unlikely to be differently adapted than the extinct population that it is meant to replace, if they experience similar climatic conditions. both inferences appear to be consistent with field observations in native and introduced populations  <cit> .

