BACKGROUND
in  <dig>  szybalski first discovered that the mrna synonymous strand of dna contained a predominance of purine-rich clusters  <cit> ; by convention, the top strand of a linear dsdna molecule is viewed 5'→3', therefore when transcription of a gene is to the right, the top strand is considered the mrna synonymous strand and if transcription is to the left, the top strand is the template strand. chargaff's second parity rule states that for single-stranded dna %a ≅ %t and %c ≅ %g  <cit>  and implies that for regions with clusters of purines there must be local deviations from chargaff's second parity rule favoring purines  <cit> . these local deviations from chargaff's second parity rule also known as chargaff differences have been seen in a variety of organisms including vaccinia virus; bell et al. determined that chargaff differences do correlate with direction of transcription and that the number of a nucleotides is greater than the number of t nucleotides in  <dig> of  <dig> vaccinia genes  <cit> .

many programs have been designed to predict genes, but few actually rate the "quality" or significance of the prediction and leave researchers to evaluate this themselves. in poxviruses, predicting which orfs are likely to be expressed  without the use of biochemical analysis usually involves simply choosing a minimum orf length cut-off and excluding all orfs that are smaller than the cut-off. analysis may be extended to include manual inspection of each predicted orf for the presence of promoter consensus sequences. excluding orfs that are smaller in size than the cut-off, however, risks missing genes that are unusually short; during annotation of vaccinia virus strain copenhagen  at least three recently verified genes  were not included in the initial annotation of the complete genome; these genes, vacv-cop a <dig> l  <cit> , a <dig> l  <cit>  and g <dig> r  <cit>  have now been included in our poxvirus orthologous clusters  database  <cit> .

poxvirus genes are transcribed from both dna strands and so far have never been shown to overlap more than a few nucleotides. despite this knowledge, some poxvirus genomes have been liberally annotated so as to include all orfs above a certain size, irrespective of whether they overlap larger well-characterized genes. thus, the current genbank file for vacv-cop contains  <dig> major  orfs and  <dig> minor  orfs  <cit> . the majority of these minor orfs in vacv-cop overlap larger, major orfs on the opposite dna strand.

in this paper, it is shown that for the at rich poxviruses, the purine skews can be used to help predict the synonymous  strand, particularly in regions where smaller orfs overlap each other on opposite strands of the genome and neither have orthologs in other poxvirus genomes. furthermore, it is shown that the majority of minor orfs found in vacv-cop are unlikely to be functional genes and that based on purine content, two of the three genes initially excluded from the annotation of the vaccinia virus genome due to their small size, fit our definition of a major orf.

RESULTS
when the purine skew  slopes in the downward direction, this is due to a pyrimidine bias on the top strand and a commensurate purine bias on the bottom strand indicating that the major orfs are located on the bottom strand. in regions where the purine skew changes direction from a downward slope to an upward slope or vice versa, these are regions on the genome where the transcription direction of the genes in the genome changes. for example, the purine skew appears to change direction from a downward slope to an upward slope at position  <dig>  bp and then changes again from an upward slope to a downward slope at position  <dig> . figure 1c  shows that within this region , there is one gene  that is located on the top strand  and is flanked by genes that are located on the bottom strand . a second example can be seen in figure  <dig> c  where an upward slope in the purine skew occurs between positions  <dig>  and  <dig> . in this case, the upward sloping region encompasses four genes  and the two downward sloping regions flanking each side of this region encompass genes that are located on the bottom strand.

it was previously shown that minor orfs in vacv-cop tend to have higher than average serine content as well as lower than average aspartate and glutamate content  <cit> . based on these observations and our current finding that the synonymous dna strand is usually purine rich, we created a simple mathematical equation designed to provide a "quality" measure of each orf. the results of the formula , which essentially sums the trends in amino acid composition  and purine content, are shown in figure  <dig>  if peptides are translated from orfs on the non-synonymous strand, they tend to have a higher than average ser%, but lower than average asp% and glu% , and have a lower than average purine content. by subtracting the actual %purine from the genome average for vacv-cop , if the orf is major, the numerical result of the equation is negative and if the results of the equation are positive, the orf is predicted to be minor.

plotting the results of this equation, we found that of the  <dig> orfs originally predicted in vacv-cop,  <dig> orfs  were incorrectly classified as being major and  <dig> orfs  were incorrectly classified as being minor.

it was found that the majority of incorrectly classified major orfs were misclassified because they are small membrane proteins that had a lower aspartate and glutamate content than other major orfs and that the majority of incorrectly classified minor orfs were misclassified because they have a lower serine and higher purine percentage compared to other minor orfs despite the fact that all but one minor orf  overlap a major orf on the opposite strand . there were three genes that had initially been excluded from the annotation of vacv-cop due to their small size. two of these genes  have a negative "quality" measure value indicating that they are major. one of these genes  was misclassified as minor likely due to the fact that it is a small membrane protein .

a similar analysis was repeated for the genome of amsacta moorei , an extremely at-rich  entomopoxvirus  <cit> . the amev genome was chosen for two reasons:  because it is not closely related to any known poxviruses and therefore its genome contains a large number of genes with unknown function and  its genome was liberally annotated and therefore it is questionable which orfs are likely to be functional genes. thus, the "quality" measure was used to predict which amev orfs are most likely to be minor. figure  <dig> graphically depicts the results of the "quality" measure calculation for amev. due to the extreme at-richness of the amev genome, it was necessary to modify the "quality" measure to the following formula: . 49% was chosen instead of 50% for the purine portion of this equation since the average purine content of the entire amev genome is 49%. as was the case with vacv-cop, if the orf is minor, the results of the "quality" measure will be positive.

it was found that there were  <dig> orfs that had a positive "quality" value and are therefore considered minor. of these  <dig> orfs,  <dig> orfs further fit our definition of a minor orf as they overlapped another larger orf on the opposite strand and  <dig> major orfs  were incorrectly classified as minor even though they each have orthologs in other poxviruses and are therefore major . the remaining  <dig> orfs  that were classified as minor using our "quality" measure were found not to overlap any orfs on the opposite or same dna strand and were further analyzed using the amev purine skew in order to try and determine the correct coding strand in each of these  <dig> regions . it was found that for  <dig>  of these  <dig> orfs, the purine skew indicates a coding strand opposite the strand on which these orfs are located, or in other words, that these orfs are minor. for  <dig>  orf, the purine skew indicated a coding strand identical to the strand on which this orf is located and therefore this orf may actually be major. amev-itr <dig> does not have any orthologs in other poxviruses but it does show a  <dig> % amino acid identity with the amev-itr <dig> orf which was classified as being major using the "quality" calculation further supporting that amev-itr <dig> is likely major. amev-itr <dig> was predicted to contain a transmembrane domain  <cit>  which could explain why it was misclassified.

there were three orfs that had been classified as major  yet overlapped a larger gene on the opposite or same dna strand . two of these orfs  overlap a larger orf on the same strand and therefore neither the purine skew nor the "quality" measure are capable of determining which orf is major; and one orf  overlaps the much larger spheroidin gene on the opposite strand and was likely misclassified due to its lower than average serine content and higher than average aspartate content.

for the analyses shown in figures  <dig> and  <dig>  the cut-off value used in both cases was zero. the value of zero was chosen in the training case  because it represented a reasonable cut-off between genes that were known to be major and orfs that were known to be minor with minimal misclassification of genes. with our test case , since it was not known which orfs were major or minor, a cut-off of zero was initially used with the presumption that the cut-off may need to be adjusted due to the extreme at-richness of the amev genome. analyzing the "quality" measure data obtained for amev with a cut-off of zero yielded satisfactory results in that the number of overlapping and therefore likely to be minor orfs that were misclassified was relatively low and because of this we decided to maintain the zero cut-off. it is likely that a cut-off of zero worked well with amev despite its extremely at-rich genome because the "quality" measure that was used reflected the average ag% of the genome. it is also likely that other poxvirus genomes that are analyzed using our method would use a cut-off of zero, provided the "quality" measure that was used was changed to reflect the average ag content of the genome, although we have yet to test whether this cut-off is universal throughout all poxviruses.

thus far we have shown that purine skews can be used to predict the coding strand of poxvirus genomes and that major orfs in vacv-cop and in amev usually contain greater than 50% and 49% purines, respectively. in order to explain this purine richness in genes, the purine  to pyrimidine  ratio  was calculated for each codon position of each coding and non-coding orf in vacv-cop. a student's t-test was used to compare the mean r/y ratio values for the coding  and non-coding orfs at each codon position; means were considered statistically different when the p-value was less than  <dig> . at the first nucleotide position in the codon, both vacv-cop major and minor orfs are rich in purines but the major orfs  have significantly  higher levels of purines at this position . at the second nucleotide position the major orfs have a r:y ratio of approximately  <dig> and the minor orfs have a significantly lower r:y ratio  indicating that minor orfs are pyrimidine rich at the second codon position whereas major orfs contain roughly equal amounts of purines and pyrimidines at this position. at position  <dig>  no statistical difference was found, with both major and minor orfs being rich in pyrimidines. thus, for the first and second nucleotide positions of the codons, the major orfs  have significantly higher purine content than the minor orfs.

it is important to remember that the use of purine/amino acid content of the coding strand and predicted protein, respectively, are just two measures that can be used to help predict whether an orf is likely to be a functional gene and that usually they are only useful in discriminating between coding and non-coding strands. occasionally orfs that are fragments of bone fide genes are also flagged as non-functional, this is probably because of unusual amino acid content in small protein sub-domains. an example of this is the a25l orf of vacv-cop that was flagged as non-functional by this method even though it is a fragment of the ati protein. in a similar way, fragmentation of genes into smaller orfs can also lead to unusual isoelectric points in the resulting predicted proteins; the  <dig> orfs with a predicted pi of > <dig>  are all minor orfs or gene fragments. thus, multiple approaches that may also include promoter analysis must be applied to attempt to correctly annotate small orphan orfs in these genomes and there is no guarantee that the process will be 100% successful.

CONCLUSIONS
we have successfully shown that in the case of at-rich poxviruses, purine skews can be used to help predict the coding regions of the genome. this is particularly useful if predicted orfs overlap each other and it is not apparently obvious which orf is major . a second method that can be used in conjunction with purine skews is to calculate the "quality" of each predicted orf using information from amino acid composition and purine content. for a given orf, if the results of this calculation are negative the orf is predicted to be a functional gene, and if the results of the calculation are positive, the orf is predicted to be minor.

by comparing purine to pyrimidine  ratios at each codon position of major and minor vaccinia virus orfs, it was found that the purine abundance seen for major orfs stems primarily from the first codon position with both the second and third codon positions containing equal amounts of purines and pyrimidines.

the software used to create the purine skews  and the vocs database are both available for public use via the web  <cit> .

