BACKGROUND
the first complete genome sequence for the protozoan parasite t. cruzi was reported in  <dig>  along with the genomes of the related parasites trypanosoma brucei and leishmania major. together, these parasites are the cause of substantial morbidity and mortality and thus are the focus of continued research to prevent and treat the diseases that they cause.

one of the unique features of the t. cruzi genome is the abundance of large gene families, groups of homologous and functionally related genes that exist in multiple loci across the genome. greater than 25 % of the genome of t. cruzi is comprised of families of genes with at least  <dig> members  <cit> . in contrast, the gene family composition for t. brucei and l. major is approximately  <dig> and 12 % respectively  <cit> . furthermore, three of these gene families in t. cruzi, the trans-sialidases, mucins and mucin-associated surface proteins  each encode more than  <dig> unique surface membrane proteins. one of the purposes of this study is to more fully inventory the largest of these families, the trans-sialidases, and to determine the mechanism of their massive diversification in t. cruzi.

the t. cruzi trans-sialidases  are glycosylphosphatidylinositol-anchored surface proteins produced by trypomastigotes and amastigotes of t. cruzi. a minority  of the tcts genes encode enzymatically active proteins that transfer sialyl residues from host donor molecules to t. cruzi glycoproteins and glycolipids. because t. cruzi and other trypanosomatids are unable to synthesize sialic acid de novo, this transferase activity is the only mechanism for sialylation of parasite surface molecules and is crucial to parasite infectivity and survival  <cit> . the purpose of the vast majority of tcts genes which apparently lack trans-sialidase activity and the reason for the development and expansion of this and other gene families selectively in t. cruzi is not understood. one hypothesis is that multiple copies of similar genes might serve an immune evasion function for t. cruzi by presenting to the immune system a multitude of different and potentially constantly varying surface molecules. it is further postulated that these gene families have expanded in response to immune pressure, presumably by duplication, recombination and mutation of the ancestral founding family members.

while the genome provides ample evidence of large gene families in t. cruzi, it must be noted that the presence of large numbers of homologous genes and other repetitive elements also hindered genome assembly and a complete inventory of gene family members. in fact, the genome was not initially fully assembled into chromosomes but was rather published as  <dig>  contigs , some of which were mapped to ~ <dig> scaffolds. given that there are over  <dig>  unannotated contigs  the question arises as to what these contigs contain. focusing specifically on the tcts family, we have asked if there are additional, previously unannotated tcts genes in the genome.

in this work we describe the method to specifically identify all trans-sialidase-like sequences in the reference t. cruzi cl brener genome, raising the total number from the  <dig> initially annotated to  <dig>  next, we verified and adjusted the predicted bounds of the annotated tcts genes , including among these tcts nucleotide sequences that contain in-frame stop codons. motif analysis using multiple em for motif elicitation  provided a means to compare the structure of all  <dig> tcts sequences and to generate a model tcts based upon the most conserved motif patterns. lastly, we show that tcts family members have been undergoing recombination, thus generating new variants from the thousands of pieces, while retaining the overall structure of the core tcts family members.

RESULTS
identification of previously unannotated tcts sequences
prior to beginning analysis of the tcts family, we first made sure that we had identified the complete complement of tcts genes for the reference cl brener clone of t. cruzi. previous work by us  and others  <cit>  indicates that the number of sequenced tcts genes is underestimated, as evidenced by merging of large numbers of whole genome shotgun  reads into relatively few annotated genes. additionally, proteome analysis has shown that t. cruzi peptides map to sequence reads that are not assigned to annotated proteins  <cit> . furthermore, a preliminary remapping of wgs reads selected because of their homology to tcts gene sequences to the assembled genome revealed that a large number of these tcts-like reads mapped to regions with no annotated genes. thus this work sought to determine if additional, unannotated tcts genes might be identifiable, and if so, how these newly annotated genes compared to the existing set of previously annotated tcts genes.

assembly of the t. cruzi cl brener genome was difficult, in part because of the hybrid nature of this parasite clone and, more importantly, because of the very high number of closely related genes that form large gene families. in our attempts to provide a more complete and accurate assembly, we have, among other things, remapped the original sequencing reads from the whole genome shotgun  to the assembled genome . in order to separate potentially merged tcts genes  <cit>  into their individual genes, the sequences for all  <dig> annotated tcts genes from the cl brener genome, along with up to 1kb flanking sequence, were blasted   <cit>  against all  <dig> , <dig> wgs reads. all reads for which the best hit was to a tcts-like region with at least 90 % sequence identity were identified, resulting in  <dig>  tcts-like reads. subsequently, the tcts-like reads were blasted against all  <dig>  genome contigs to identify the regions of the genome that were most homologous to each read . this read-to-contig assignment revealed  <dig>  reads mapping to regions containing annotated tcts genes and  <dig>  mapping to non-tcts genes. given that the original source sequences included tcts-flanking regions, these results are not surprising. however, nearly  <dig>  reads mapped to regions of the genome that contained no annotated genes. since these regions were identified from tcts-like reads, it was postulated that they contained either unannotated tcts genes or genes that typically flank tcts genes .

using the regions of homology from the blast report,  <dig> distinct  contig regions were identified from the reads that mapped to no annotated genes. to determine which of these regions contained full or partial tcts genes, the dna sequences for the contig regions were extracted and blasted  against the  <dig> tcts genes annotated as full-length . blastx was used in order to identify contiguous tcts sequences on the contigs regardless of frame shifts. using a minimum identity cutoff of 90 %, the contiguous regions of contigs matching the tcts genes were identified, resulting in  <dig> candidate tcts genes. to help ensure that the new tcts genes were sufficiently trans-sialidase-like, the  <dig> sequences were blasted  against the entire genome to confirm that the most homologous protein for each newly identified tcts-like sequence was an annotated trans-sialidase gene. from this validation step,  <dig> were selected as newly identified tcts genes. the new tcts sequences were on average shorter than the originally annotated set of tcts genes  but also included many full or nearly full length genes . one hundred fourteen  of these newly identified tcts genes mapped to the assembled cl brener chromosome pairs  <cit>  while the remaining  <dig> genes mapped to contigs and scaffolds that could not be assembled into the  <dig> chromosomes. this contrasts with the  <dig> out of  <dig> previously annotated tcts genes that mapped to the chromosomes .fig.  <dig> comparison of size of previously and newly annotated tcts genes. the dna sequences for the tcts genes in the annotated genome and those newly identified were binned according to sequence length in the ranges displayed and the quantity in each bin plotted for each sequence type



modification of tcts coding sequences
the above described analysis more than doubled the number of identified tcts sequences in the t. cruzi genome and posed the additional question of ‘what characteristics are common to these > <dig> tcts gene sequences?’, i.e. ‘what defines a tcts protein?’. in order to address this question, we submitted the tcts genes to three analyses and potential modifications. first, to confirm that the 5′ and 3′ bounds for all tcts genes  encompassed the entire predicted coding region,  <dig> “model” full-length tcts genes  of at least 2kb in length and containing both a signal peptide and gpi anchor motif were selected and were blasted  against the designated nucleotide sequence for all tcts sequences . the predicted bounds of each tcts sequence were then set according to its homology with these model genes. this analysis resulted in the alteration in the bounds for  <dig> of the  <dig> previously annotated tcts genes and the merging of two adjacent sequences  into a single tcts gene .

second, deletions causing frame-shifts that result in stop codons are present in nearly half of the tcts genes and were designated as “pseudogenes” in the annotated cl brener genome. previously, we demonstrated that a number of tcts pseudogene-encoded proteins are detected in the t. cruzi proteome  <cit> , indicating that these are real genes that probably produce a truncated tcts product. in many cases, the dna sequence beyond these stop sites were homologous to other tcts gene sequences but presumably not translated into protein. however, if these sequences beyond the stop sites were at some point recombined with other tcts genes , a shift in reading frame could result in production of a tcts protein from this sequence. thus in order to generate a complete set of potential tcts protein sequences, the tcts sequences were examined for the presence of in-frame stop codons that might result in a truncated product, and if present, the reading frame was shifted by removing one or more bases to create a tcts-like protein ). this latter exercise also served to expand our tcts protein set to include sequences that could have been erroneously terminated due to sequencing or assembly errors and allowed us to utilize the complete potential protein sequence information for genes previously annotated as “pseudogenes” in the analysis of proteomic data, for protein motif searches, and for examination of the products of gene recombination.

third, to improve upon the annotation information for tcts sequences , all tcts sequences were re-annotated based on their domain composition, length, sequence type, and whether or not their translations result in any in-frame stop codons. among the potential features annotated in this process are a signal peptide, gpi anchor addition site, shed acute-phase antigen  repeats, frip motif , and the asp block  and vtvxnvxlrn motifs  <cit> . we provide three tcts sequence types, where a “full length” sequence must contain both a signal peptide and gpi anchor motif, a “partial” sequence contains a signal peptide motif but no gpi anchor, and a “pseudogene” contains no signal peptide motif. finally, if the amino acid translation of the sequence results in any stop codons, we notate that sequence with “in-frame stop” .

confirmation of tcts coding sequences
to evaluate if the newly identified tcts, most of which were not full-length genes, also encoded bona fide proteins, a database of all t. cruzi proteins  was created and screened with the spectra from three proteomic analyses using a 6-frame translation. this analysis identified a minimum of  <dig> trans-sialidase proteins,  <dig> of which were among those newly annotated as described above . this is a highly conservative estimate of the expressed repertoire due to the limitation of proteomic techniques and the difficulty of uniquely mapping small peptides to a set of highly similar proteins like those expressed by tcts genes, as previously discussed  <cit> . if we exclude peptides that map to protein translations of both previously annotated and newly annotated tcts genes,  <dig> newly annotated tcts genes had unique peptide evidence of expression . thus, of the  <dig> tcts protein sequences identified in the proteomic analysis, almost half  were new tcts sequences, of which 38 %  were unambiguously identified with high-confidence. additionally,  <dig> previously annotated tcts “pseudogenes” were confirmed to yield protein products.

motif identification and construction of a model tcts gene
the large size of the tcts family made sequence alignment an untenable method for examining the common sequence features of the > <dig> genes. thus we employed the meme tool  <cit>  because it allowed us to identify common sequence features of the tcts proteins and to determine the representation of these features in all members of the family. we arbitrarily set the meme analysis to identify  <dig> features among the tcts family proteins; motifs with the lowest number are the most common and most highly conserved while those closer to  <dig> are less so. of the  <dig> total tcts sequences,  <dig> contained at least  <dig> motif, and motif architectures were determined for these sequences and aligned .

a model tcts architecture was determined from the alignment by selecting the most common motif at each position . though the model does not capture all of the variation present in the alignment, it does provide a global representation of the most common features in tcts sequences. not surprisingly, the most common motifs  are in the n-terminal region containing the signal sequence . other known tcts features are asp-boxes , frip , gpi anchor , and the vtvxnvxlynr motif . the c-terminal region between the vtvxnvxlynr and gpi anchor is variable and sometimes contains sapa repeats. finally, selected motifs implicated in the catalytic mechanism of tcts were located in the motifs . examination of the  <dig> tcts sequences relative to the model reveals a very high degree of conservation in the ordering of the motifs; with few exceptions, the order of motifs is maintained even in the small and thus partial tcts sequences. at any particular position in the alignment, several different motifs may be observed across the architectures, but it is rare for a motif to be observed at multiple positions, especially for the higher-confidence  motifs. thus, the motif analysis of all tcts family members in the cl brener genome suggests a mechanism for the retention of a common tcts protein structure despite the nucleotide diversity among the gene family members.fig.  <dig> analysis of model tcts architecture. a the model tcts architecture  is depicted. each box represents an individual motif from the meme analysis. the top number is the motif number, the middle percentage is the representation of that motif across all tcts sequences , and the bottom number is the representation of that motif in tcts sequences of length >2000b. frequent motifs  are color-coded red, while less frequent motifs are blue. the highly-variable c-terminal region containing multiple motifs is represented as a black box. locations of previously characterized tcts motifs and residues are also shown. b an entropy analysis of tcts sequences is shown. the smoothed entropy values for selected tcts proteins is plotted against amino acid position. using sequence homology of the motifs in this study to the protein sequences of the entropy study, locations of the motifs are overlaid in the chart . note that lower-numbered motifs are typically found in areas of low entropy. c the crystal structure of tcts “1s0i_a” with motif regions highlighted and labeled and d) a notable region lacking in motifs 



not surprisingly, the most highly conserved patterns correlate with low entropy measurements . mapping of the motifs to the crystal structure of the 1so1_a tcts protein  <cit>  demonstrates the regions of higher conservation among tcts molecules  and reveals a large region of the catalytic domain with sparse mapping of motifs, indicating this as a more variable region among tcts proteins . the heat map of additional file 9: figure s <dig>  provides a global view of the degree of conservation of motifs along with the variability that provides diversity. the typical scenario shows either high conservation  with low entropy regions  and high-confidence motif-to-architecture assignments ) or high diversity . of particular interest are columns that show seemingly contradicting data: high frequency model motif  with relatively high entropy  or low frequency model motifs  with low entropy . an example of the former is motif  <dig>  this region occurs after the signal peptide and is represented in a high number of sequences . one interpretation of this result is the constraint in this area retains protein structure but does not maintain any specific function; so long as the protein conformation is correct the sequence is relatively free to mutate. an example of the latter case is motif  <dig>  which displays relatively low entropy but is not highly prevalent across the architectures . the mapping of the motifs to the structure shows that this motif is near the central, α–helix region connecting the n-terminal and c-terminal domains . the minimum entropy among all residues in motif  <dig> is  <dig>  and the maximum is  <dig> , suggesting tight constraint at particular positions but not on the motif region as a whole.

phylogenetic tree of related tcts sequences
the distribution throughout the t. cruzi genome of tcts sequences of varying sizes but with a conserved structure strongly suggests a mechanism of gene duplication followed by recombination and mutation in the evolution of this large and diverse gene family. to explore this possibility further, we first examined phylogenetic trees of tcts sequences for evidence of recombination. due to the substantial variation in gene length and nucleotide polymorphism among the > <dig> tcts sequences , we performed phylogenetic tree inference on small sets of more closely related tcts sequences identified by megablast with custom thresholds . although the potential mosaic nature of tcts sequences could hinder accurate phylogeny assessment, we were able to estimate a well-supported bayesian tree  by a lengthy and aggressive markov chain monte carlo exploration in parameter space. this bayesian phylogenetic tree has long terminal branches, indicating that either  evolution is accerated in all analyzed genes, since their divergence from their most recent common ancestors, or  disruptions in gene-independent evolution by processes such as recombination, which exchanges genetic information between genes and thus obscures ancestry. notably, a similar tree pattern is observed for the variant surface glycoprotein  genes in t. brucei and t. congolense  <cit> .fig.  <dig> bayesian phylogenetic tree of  <dig> closely related tcts. in order to construct a phylogenetic tree from high quality alignment, sequences from  <dig> tcts genes with high pairwise identity were selected. sequences were aligned using muscle algorithm, and the tree was constructed by mrbayes v <dig> . <dig>  posterior probability values are indicated on tree nodes. low treeness  provides support for recombination among tcts gene family members



assessment of recombination events in tcts
in order to more thoroughly evaluate the role of recombination in the evolution of the tcts family, we developed a recombination detection pipeline that relied heavily on the recombination detection program  v <dig> ,  <cit>  . evaluation of the pipeline with simulated data indicated dependable performance  with a sensitivity of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for gene-conversion-recombinant genes and gene-conversion-recombinant events, respectively, demonstrating the ability of our pipeline to accurately capture the presence of recombinant genes and recombination events. our pipeline displayed a specificity of  <dig>  and  <dig>  for gene-conversion-recombinant genes and gene-conversion-recombinant events, respectively. note that the event-specificity, which describes how frequently the pipeline precisely determines recombination breakpoints, is impacted by the difficulties of pinpointing the recombination breakpoint between sequences with less informative variations . the false positive rates are below  <dig>  for all recombination-negative datasets tested. notably, our recombination pipeline is not intended to detect reciprocal exchange of dna sequences between  <dig> tcts genes, as is shown by simulation results .fig.  <dig> workflow of recombination detection pipeline fortctsgene family. a tcts sequences are binned into similarity sets by scanning each tcts gene for closest-matching non-self sequences within the tcts gene family; b rdp is used to identify possible recombinant regions, recombination breakpoints, and the major and minor sequence donor among the tcts similarity sets; c false-positive recombination events are removed by realigning each recombination event’s triplet of mosaic sequence, major donor and minor donor



using this pipeline to analyze the  <dig> tcts genes, we document clear evidence of recombination in  <dig> trans-sialidase genes with a total of  <dig> recombination events;  <dig> and  <dig> genes have participated at least once as major donors and minor donors, respectively. of all the  <dig> recombination events,  <dig> events have a p-value less than  <dig>  with one or more of the algorithms in rdp and  <dig> events have p-values < <dig>  for all algorithms . all  <dig> recombination events also have multiple-test corrected p-values under  <dig> . thus, these recombination events are detected with very high confidence. the  <dig> mosaic genes identified have between  <dig> and  <dig> recombination events each, with an average of  <dig>  recombination events/genes . the signals of mosaic sequence patches in tcts genes can be confirmed by manual inspection at the nucleotide level and fig.  <dig> shows an example. note that the break-points of recombinant regions frequently lack a distinct boundary but instead have short regions that are not encoded by either the major donor or minor donor .fig.  <dig> a mosaic tcts gene showing evidence for recombination events and example sequence comparisons within each minor donor sequence. a bootscan and maxichi output showing alterations in bootstrap support and peak log) values, respectively, at mosaic region boundaries. b the tcclb. <dig>  mosaic gene with donor contributions indicated by colors. c partial alignment of mosaic regions with respective donors. in each sequence triplet alignment, the middle sequence is the mosaic gene, shading highlights identical nucleotides of mosaic sequences with major  and minor  donor

fig.  <dig> examples of boundary regions in mosaic tcts. from the mosaic tcclb. <dig>  gene in fig.  <dig>  boundary regions on one end of each of the  <dig> donor sequences are shown. in each sequence triplet alignment, the middle sequence is the mosaic gene, red and blue shading highlight identical nucleotides of mosaic sequences with major donor and minor donors. the brackets indicate the region most likely containing the recombination breakpoint. a donor sequence = tcclb. <dig> ; b donor sequence = tcclb. <dig> ; c donor sequence = tcclb. <dig> ; d donor sequence = tcclb. <dig> 



participation in recombination  was higher for previously annotated tcts genes relative to the newly annotated genes , although a significant proportion of this difference was due to the smaller average size of the newly annotated tcts genes. recombination events were more likely to be detected between full length and other tcts genes of  <dig> bases or more . however, 25 % of the donors contributing to mosaic full length tcts genes were of < <dig> bases, demonstrating that the incomplete tcts gene fragments in the t. cruzi genome play an active role in the diversity of the expressed, full length genes. within a select set of tcts genes grouped into eight subsets based upon multiple component analysis  <cit> , recombination was exactly four times more likely to occur between members of the same group  than between groups . it is also notable that recombination events both contributed to the production of full length tcts proteins from partial gene donors  as well as partial genes from full length genes due to shifts in reading frame as a result of recombination . thus there is an active exchange between the full-length tcts genes encoding functional proteins and partial tcts genes and pseudogenes dispersed throughout the t. cruzi genome.fig.  <dig> productive and nonproductive recombination events. a the full length, protein coding tcts tcclb. <dig>  has incorporated mosaic parts from partial tcts gene and full length tcts donors. b. introduction of sequence from the full-length tcclb. <dig>  gene into the wrong reading frame of the major donor tcclb. <dig>  results in a partial tcclb. <dig>  product. also note that two in-frame stop codons have resulted from single point mutations in the major donor supplied sequence



discussion
in the evolutionary arms race between the host immune system and pathogens, mammals have incorporated immense complexity into the immune system. the multi-gene segmental organization of immunoglobulin and t cell receptor genes, combined with recombination, can produce many millions of distinct antigen receptors capable of detecting and neutralizing a diverse array of pathogens. pathogens, including eukaryotic parasites, have also evolved mechanisms to incorporate diversity into their structures in order to avoid immune destruction. the archetypal example of antigenic variation is the variant surface glycoproteins  gene family of t. brucei, which has more than  <dig> members. although its expression is mono-allelic, the relatively frequent switch of the expressed vsg gene enables t. brucei to maintain its persistence despite the constant surveillance by host immune responses. the creation of mosaic vsgs by recombination among vsg family members  <cit>  is also crucial for parasite persistence, as host immunity to previously expressed vsgs  <cit>  accumulates over the time of infection. likewise, plasmodium sp. have evolved smaller multi-gene families encoding cell surface proteins that depend on a high frequency of recombination to produce new immune-evading variants  <cit> .

t. cruzi encodes several large, highly variant gene families, including the largest known family of variant surface protein-coding genes, the trans-sialidase family. the mostly glycosylphosphatidylinositol- -anchored tcts surface proteins have several essential functions in the parasite. the presumed founding members of this family provide t. cruzi the ability to acquire sialic acid from host donor molecules and move it to terminal glycans in a sialyl-transferase reaction. this process is apparently necessitated by the fact that t. cruzi lacks the ability to produce its own sialic acid, and in the absence of sialic acid, t. cruzi trypomastigotes are highly susceptible to host complement activation and lysis and are also poorly invasive. however, only a small proportion of the immense ts gene family, perhaps as few as 10– <dig> genes, actually encode enzymatically active ts. the remainder have been ascribed a number of other activities; among the more important, as lectins potentially involved in host cell attachment  <cit> .

despite the importance of these ts activities for the survival of t. cruzi, it is difficult to reconcile the huge commitment in terms of genome space that t. cruzi makes to the maintenance of tcts-family genes with these noted ts functions alone. the original assembly of the reference cl brener genome tallied nearly  <dig> tcts genes, approximately half of which were annotated as “pseudogenes”. in this study, the remapping of the original cl brener sequence reads and re-analysis for tcts-like sequences more than doubled the number of full and partial tcts genes identifiable in the cl brener genome to the current  <dig> unique genes. further, proteome analysis also confirmed the expression of at least a portion of these newly identified full length and truncated tcts family genes. certainly t. cruzi should not require > <dig> full and partial length tcts family genes to carry out the functions of sialic acid transfer and cell adhesion, and even if all the proposed functions of ts proteins are considered, performance of these activities perhaps requires a handful of genes – not > <dig>  this degree of gene diversity within individuals of a single species is nearly unprecedented, rivaled only by the ~ <dig> member vsg gene family in the related t. brucei  <cit> .

a limitation of the current study is the exclusive use of the reference cl-brener genome of t. cruzi. like most reference genomes, the cl brener reference was generated from relatively low coverage sanger sequencing and is prone to misassembles, particularly in regions rich in multi-gene families. as additional and more deeply sequenced and better assembled genomes of t. cruzi become available, it will be of great interest to compare the repertoire of ts genes in independently evolving lineages in this diverse species.

the critical requirement for the cell surface expression of ts activity presents a dilemma for a pathogen like t. cruzi. on the one hand, lack of ts activity significantly reduces the ability of t. cruzi to survive in mammalian hosts. on the other, expression of a single species of ts protein on the parasite surface would provide a tantalizing target for the host immune system and an effective response to such a target could prove deadly for t. cruzi. indeed ts proteins are significant targets of anti-t. cruzi immune responses  <cit>  and vaccination against ts proteins is somewhat effective, at least in preventing potentially lethal infections . thus there is strong pressure from host immune responses on ts proteins, and as with other cases of antigen diversification in pathogens, this is the likely driving force for the retention and diversification that ultimately created this immense family of genes.

the mechanism of the expansion and continued diversification of the tcts family in t. cruzi is gene duplication, mutation and recombination among family members. we present evidence for  <dig> mosaic trans-sialidase genes resulting from  <dig> separate recombination events. due to the conservative calling of recombination by gene conversion, ours is a minimal estimate; other  recombination events are likely obscured by sequence divergence resulting from accumulating mutations in both donor and recipient genes. despite the frequency and wide scope of recombinations, all the tcts family members, including enzymatically active tcts, ts-inactive, truncated molecules, and gene fragments incapable of producing a protein product, retain a similar domain structure. the retention of the common features of tcts genes and proteins across the entire family likely reflects constraints imposed by the non-enzymatic functions of tcts, such as binding to  sialyl and beta-galactopyranosyl residues  <cit> , as well as the contribution of pseudogenes/partial genes to the formation of new mosaic tcts genes. substantial homology is generally required for gene conversion-based recombination  <cit>  and this requirement would work to sustain the common structure of the tcts genes. the fact that intra-gene-family recombination events among tcts genes are four times more likely to occur between genes in the same similarity group  <cit>  than between members of different groups supports this point. importantly our analysis additionally supplies evidence that the structurally conserved but sequence variant non-coding gene fragments are derived from and are recycled back into functional  tcts genes. indeed, nearly half of the  <dig> full-length protein-coding tcts identified as mosaics have incorporated tcts pseudogenes and/or partial genes. thus, the non-coding tcts fragments undoubtedly acts as a repository of diversity for the generation of new and antigenically diverse tcts genes.

gene conversion has been shown to be a major intra-vsg-family recombination mechanism  <cit> , driving antigenic diversity in t. brucei  <cit> . thus it was reasonable to suspect that gene conversion recombination events was integral to the generation of variation in the t. cruzi ts gene family. classical recombination analysis typically relies on highly accurate sequence alignment and uses evidence of local disruption of sequence signatures or phylogenetic signals as signs of recombination. rigorous statistical analysis can then be used to confirm the significance of the identified recombination breakpoint. for gene families such as tcts containing thousands of members, such methods are not possible. alternatively, blast algorithms can be used to find local sequence matches between different family members  <cit>  or phylogenetic incompatibility distribution can be used as an index to estimate recombination activity  <cit>  and such methods have been applied to document recombination events in the t. brucei vsg gene family. however, such alternative methods, unlike the classical recombination analysis, cannot ensure both statistical support and the search-comprehensiveness of recombination events. here we propose an alternative recombination analysis pipeline that can be used on large and diverse genes families while also providing statistical validation of the results.

this recombination detection pipeline first uses blast to find local sequence matches between individual tcts genes, then, for each local sequence match, we group involved-tcts genes into a subset, between which recombination is likely to produce the mosaic patch . then for each tcts subset, we align the sequences and subject the alignment to a recombination detection program package  that implements many classical recombination detection algorithms. if a recombination event is cross-validated by multiple recombination detection algorithms, we perform an additional round of validation by realigning just the two recombination donors and the mosaic sequence and then subject the alignment to recombination analysis by rdp. this final validation step further removes false-positives caused by alignment artifacts. by starting from every possible mosaic-forming event in the gene family and validating through two rounds of rigorous recombination analysis, we combined both statistical support and search-comprehensiveness in our recombination detection pipeline for very-large gene families. though search-comprehensiveness is our goal, our pipeline would still underestimate the recombination events in a large gene family since the rigorous statistical threshold would miss many weaker recombination signals; recombination events could be overlapping, masking each other and blurring the recombination breakpoint. thus, we are likely able to see only a small part of the complex tcts recombination landscape. the current analysis is also restricted to a single t. cruzi isolate, the genome reference cl brener clone. each t. cruzi clone will generate a distinct pattern of recombination and thus its own set of ts genes, resulting in incredibly diverse populations of parasites within and between hosts. similar detailed analysis to that conducted here in other isolates is expected to confirm this species-wide diversity. additionally, these mechanisms of gene family expansion almost certainly play a similar role in other large ) and perhaps smaller gene families in t. cruzi.

although the generation and maintenance of diversity in the t. cruzi tcts with that of the vsg genes of t. brucei, there are also significant differences. most importantly, t. cruzi expresses the ts genes from multiple alleles concurrently rather than serial expression of vsg genes from single alleles as in the case of vsg genes t. brucei. tctss are broadly and abundantly expressed in both extracellular and intracellular stages of t. cruzi in mammalian hosts. although it is not possible with the technology now available to determine if all of the tcts genes are expressed concurrently , it seems likely that the majority of those with intact 5′ expression and processing sites are being produced during one or more stages of the t. cruzi life cycle. atwood et al. conservatively identified  <dig> expressed tcts  in a proteome study of all t. cruzi life-cycle stages, and  <dig> out of  <dig> top-scoring  proteins in this analysis were tcts family members  <cit> . the immune detection of epitopes encoded in different sets of tcts molecules is also strong evidence of the expression of many, if not all competent tcts genes during infection  <cit> . the immune evasion potential of a mutually exclusive pattern of expression of gene variants, as in the vsgs of african trypanosomes, is clear, as each switch to a new variant forces a restart of the immune response to the new immunodominant antigen. the benefits of the distinctive approach employed by t. cruzi of expressing many variants at once is less obvious and certainly more complex. thus t. cruzi has evolved a unique immune evasion process and likely, a unique way of regulating the size of this and other gene families and the diversity among family members.

we favor the hypothesis that the expression of large numbers of tcts variants serves an immune evasion function primarily for intracellular amastigote stages of t. cruzi and contributes to avoidance of detection by cd8+ t cells of parasite-infected cells. expression of an abundance of different ts molecules in an infected host cell could flood the class i mhc presentation pathway with a huge diversity of potential epitopes, each competing for binding to and presentation by mhc. as a result, the effective density of most parasite epitopes could remain below that necessary to trigger effector t cells, particularly for host cells with more modest levels of mhc expression  <cit> . the very high sequence similarity of tcts proteins would also provide for a network of variant epitopes capable of acting as altered peptide ligands – partial agonists or antagonists – of t cells specific for related epitopes  <cit>  and references therein). the timing of expression of the tcts proteins in intracellular t. cruzi amastigotes also impacts the presentation of ts epitopes on infected cells. we recently reported that the highly immunodominant tskb <dig> tcts epitope is not detectable on t. cruzi –infected host cells until >24 h after invasion of host cells. in contrast, a subdominant, non-variant epitope from the parasite flagellum is recognized within 3– <dig> h after infection  <cit> . interestingly, boosting the immune response to flagellar rod proteins also significantly enhanced resistance to t. cruzi  <cit> . the impact of the high frequency ts epitope-specific cd8+ t cell response generated in c57bl/6j mice is relatively minimal, since ablation of this response does not affect the ability of hosts to control of t. cruzi infection  <cit> . these data suggest that while the structure, complexity and expression of the ts family of genes does not prevent the generation of ts-specific cd8+ t cell responses, collectively these characteristics render the generated ts-specific response irrelevant with respect to the control of t. cruzi infection. in short, although unconventional, the simultaneous expression of many variant proteins appears to be a highly effective immune evasion strategy.

the creation of new mosaic genes via intra-family recombination likely contributes to the chronicity of a number of viral and bacterial infections  <cit> , and this within-host evolution of antigens may also play a role in the ability of t. cruzi to persist for decades in humans and other hosts. additionally the evolution of diversity among different lineages within the species – potentially resulting in a distinct sets of pathogen genetic types in each host – has implications beyond the individual host. palmer and coworkers have argued that the potential for superinfection – the reinfection of an already infected host – also applies evolutionary selective force for the genetic diversification of antigen variants beyond that necessary for persistence within an individual host  <cit> . this pressure would be particularly strong when the infection rates within a population are high, effectively making all members of the community accessible to infection , irrespective of current infection status. there is solid evidence for re-infection of currently and previously infected hosts by t. cruzi  <cit> , and the detection of hosts carrying mixed populations of genetically distinct parasite lineages suggests that such superinfections occur naturally . indeed superinfection with genetically distinct parasite types would facilitate genetic exchange within the species, a particularly important benefit in a species like t. cruzi that appears to rarely undergo full genome hybridization. the evidence of substantial genetic exchange between diverse t. cruzi lineages supports this possibility .

solid proof of an immune evasion role for the tcts gene family at the level of cd8+t cells awaits procedures which can drastically reduce the number of simultaneously expressed ts genes within t. cruzi. the crispr-cas <dig> gene editing system may provide that opportunity. we have recently shown the ability in t. cruzi to substantially decrease the functional activity of proteins encoded by over  <dig> genes using the crispr-cas <dig> system and just three guide rnas  <cit> . the most highly conserved motifs identified in the tcts proteins  correlate with high dna sequence homology that allows a relatively small number of grnas to target > <dig> tcts genes. thus, we believe it is well within reach to ask if mutation of large numbers of tcts genes compromises the immune evasion capabilities of t. cruzi.

CONCLUSIONS
t. cruzi has evolved a unique immune evasion process that involves the simultaneous expression of large numbers of constantly changing surface molecules. although the mechanisms for generating and maintaining the tcts gene family are conventional - duplication, mutation and recombination – the size and diversity of the tcts family is unprecedented. it is likely that other large gene families in t. cruzi utilize these same processes also driven by the need to evade host immune responses. recently developed tools based on crispr/cas <dig> should provide the means to substantially reduce the size and diversity of these gene families and determine the contribution of gene family size to parasite persistence in infected hosts.

