BACKGROUND
the diploid  strawberry species fragaria vesca has been embraced as a convenient model system for genomic research. its favorable attributes include a ~ <dig> mb reference genome, short generation time, small plant size, close kinship to commercial octoploid strawberry fragaria × ananassa, and membership in the economically important rosaceae family  <cit> . molecular, genomic, and biotechnological research in strawberry has made substantial progress with respect to in vitro transformation systems  <cit> , genetic linkage maps  <cit> , transcript analysis  <cit> , and genomic sequencing  <cit> . in particular, the f. vesca variety known as ‘hawaii 4’  has come to prominence due to its ease of agrobacterium-mediated transformation and regenerability  <cit> , the generation of an inbred derivative ‘hawaii 4x4’ , and choice of the ‘hawaii 4x4’ line as the source of the first complete strawberry genomic sequence  <cit> . as such, genetic protocol refinement for ‘hawaii 4’ is an important priority.

the original pi <dig> germplasm accession was collected in hawaii in  <dig> by r. bringhurst, and was maintained by the national clonal germplasm repository , corvallis, oregon, under the local identification number cfra  <dig>  agrobacterium-mediated transformation and regeneration was first reported by haymes and davis  <cit> . those authors described a single transformant, selected on kanamycin and carrying neomycin phosphotransferase  and β-glucuronidase  marker genes, and the segregation of these marker genes in a first  generation progeny population. pi <dig> had been utilized in this initial effort in part because of two favorable phenotypic traits: it was a so-called ‘alpine’ or semperflorens form, meaning that it had a perpetual  flowering habit as contrasted to the seasonal  flowering habit of most wild strawberry genotypes; and it was a runnering form, in contrast to non-runnering ‘alpine’ varieties such as ‘yellow wonder’ , ‘baron solemacher’ , ‘reugen’ , and ‘alexandria’ . f. vesca is typified by red fruit; however, ‘hawaii 4’, and ‘yellow wonder’ have yellow fruit.

subsequently, pi <dig> was found to be the most favorably responsive among fourteen f. vesca germplasm accessions evaluated for transformability and regenerability by oosumi et al.  <cit> , who established an optimized system that employed hygromycin resistance as the selectable marker. the study of oosumi et al.  <cit>  was aimed at establishing an in vitro system that would facilitate high throughput development of t-dna insertion lines  <cit>  in diploid strawberry. our aim  <cit>  and approach differed in that we sought to introduce rnai constructs, and that our vector system  <cit>  employed kanamycin resistance. as a prelude to future research, we also sought to know whether regeneration was occurring via a somatic embryogenesis or an organogenic pathway, a distinction that had not been specified by oosumi et al.  <cit> .

here we report significant new findings regarding the response of ‘hawaii 4’ to in vitro transformation and regeneration, including explicit evidence that regeneration under the employed conditions occurs via a somatic embryogenic pathway, and the first report that a substantial proportion of the primary transformants of this diploid line are tetraploid. we also report several variant leaf morphologies that are transgene-specific, and describe a simple means of differentiating the altered leaf morphology resulting from tetraploidy from those of the wild type and transgene-related variant forms.

RESULTS
selection and gfp screening of plant transformants
prior to initiating transformation procedures, preliminary experiments were conducted to examine the effect of explant types, combinations of plant growth regulators, antibiotic concentrations, and culture conditions. the results showed that the explants from leaves and petioles responded best on the basal medium with either 3 mg/l ba and  <dig>  mg/l iba, or 2 mg/l tdz and  <dig>  mg/l naa, on which basis ba and iba were chosen for subsequent use as the cytokinin and auxin media components. the explants responded more slowly in darkness than under light in the first two weeks of culture. nodular embryos formed at cut edges of explants after two weeks of culture . shoots regenerated after four more weeks in culture. inclusion of carbenicillin  at 500 mg/l had no observed effect on embryo or callus formation. inclusion of kanamycin  caused death of most explants by 5–6 weeks in culture. on the basis of these results, 500 mg/l cb  and 50 mg/l kanamycin for transformant selection were included with 3 mg/l ba and  <dig>  mg/l iba in the selection medium. gfp signals were seen on explants after 18 days of co-cultivation. by the third subculture on selective medium, most of the gfp-  cell masses and embryogenic structures on the explants had died. of the surviving cell masses and embryonic structures, most but not all were gfp+.

embryogenesis and plant regeneration
globular somatic embryos formed along some cut edges of the leaf explants during the first week of culture on non-selective medium, and then appeared along all cut edges  after transfer of explants to selective medium and culture under light. isolated single embryos or embryo masses were also produced on explant surfaces. after 4–6 weeks post-inoculation, most of the explants had formed somatic embryo clusters on their cut edges or surfaces . the explants with gfp+ embryo clusters were transferred to non-selective medium for further development. buds and young shoots grew well on medium with 1–3 mg/l ba and  <dig> - <dig>  mg/l iba. gfp screening and microscope observation confirmed that somatic embryos went through heart, torpedo, and dicotyledon stage and developed into whole plantlets . secondary somatic embryos were formed on some primary dicotyledon stage embryos . in order to prevent more secondary regeneration, young shoots and small plantlets were subcultured onto hormone-free medium. over  <dig> well-developed gfp+ plants were obtained, and about  <dig> plants were transferred to soil and grown to the flowering/fruiting stage. in the exceptional case, the construct flnh-c <dig> yielded gfp-positive callus that eventually died in culture even if transferred to kanamycin-free medium, and did not yield any somatic embryos or regenerants in four experiments with  <dig> inoculated leaf explants.

morphological variation among regenerated transformants
by the time plants had reached the three-true-leaf stage of plantlet development, considerable morphological variation was evident among transformants, both within and between constructs. unexpectedly, a particular broad-leaflet variant form  appeared among the transformants recovered from every construct in which regeneration was obtained. upon sexual maturity, these broad-leaflet plants displayed enlarged flowers and negligible fruit set.

variation due to polyploidy
based upon our prior familiarity with colchicine-induced autotetraploidy and its consequences in f. vesca <cit> , it was hypothesized that the broad-leaflet regenerant plants were autotetraploid. a test of this hypothesis, employing nuclear dna content measurements expressed as proportions of the known standard, indicated that the putative tetraploid plants had dna content values that were twice those of known diploid comparators. among a representative sampling of  <dig> putatively diploid and tetraploid transformant plants, dna content values ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for putative tetraploids, and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for putative diploids . a root tip chromosome count of one plant with an elevated nuclear dna content showed that it was indeed tetraploid  .
f. vesca 
‘hawaii 4’ plants

the internal standard used in dna content measurements was ilex crenata ‘fastigiata’.

in comparisons among the  <dig> plants that were first established by nuclear dna testing to be diploid or tetraploid, b/a ratios  were determined and found to vary from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for the diploids, and from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for the tetraploids . the diploid and tetraploid means of  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively, differed highly significantly . the lower b/a ratio characteristic of tetraploids resulted from the increased width of the central leaflet  relative to the overall width of the trifoliate leaf  . of  <dig> transformants representing all sixteen constructs,  <dig> plants, or about 17% of the total, were classified as tetraploid on the basis of their b/a ratios.

construct-specific leaf variants
with four constructs , variant leaf morphologies were observed that were construct-specific, clearly different from wild type , and clearly distinct from the form associated with tetraploidy. among the gfp-positive regenerants obtained with these four constructs, only a few  displayed construct-specific variant forms,; however, for three of these four constructs , multiple independent transformants that displayed the respective variant phenotypes were obtained, indicating that these features were due to the effects of introducing the construct itself rather than arising from insertional mutation. for the fourth construct, e <dig>  only a single variant transformant was obtained.

construct e08
a distinctive suite of morphological effects was generally consistent among six independent transformants obtained with construct e <dig> , one of which was tetraploid. perhaps most obvious among these aberrant features is petiolule length, , which is distinctly elongated in both diploid and tetraploid e <dig> transformants while inconspicuous in wild type ‘hawaii 4’ . the e <dig> variant plants rarely produce runners, while wild type ‘hawaii 4’ produces many runners. the variant leaf form associated with construct e <dig> was stable through vegetative propagation, and was transmitted to a proportion of progeny derived from self-pollination.

construct f10
in the case of construct f <dig>  five independent transformants – four diploids and one tetraploid – displayed a subtle, variant leaf form . the diploids had thinner leaf laminas, lighter color, and markedly shorter petiolules as compared with wild type ‘hawaii 4’. in the tetraploid, leaflets were wider than in the respective diploids and had a noticeably “ruffled” or corrugated look .

construct d09
three independent diploid transformants were obtained, and these shared multiple morphological distinctions  that were stable through vegetative propagation. as compared with ‘hawaii 4’, these lines had reduced vigor; smaller, narrower leaves; small fruits of ovoid shaped, very few runners, and greatly reduced seed set. notably, most of the seeds that were set by these lines did not display gfp-fluorescence, and the suite of mutant characters was not transmitted to progeny plants. the recovery of three independent transformants sharing the same suite of features suggests that these features may be due to the effects of the construct itself, rather than arising from insertional mutation.

construct e10
a noteworthy phenotype consisting of variably increased leaflet number was associated with construct e <dig> . this phenotype appeared to varying degrees in three mature  transformant plants thought to have arisen from a single transformation event, and the variant phenotype was also transmitted to vegetatively propagated runner plants. although all such plants had mostly trifoliate leaves, some leaves also had four, five, or even seven leaflets, and when a leaf had more than three leaflets sometimes two adjacent leaflets were partially fused .

discussion
our detailed observations of the early stages of transgenic plant regeneration under the employed conditions clearly reveal a pathway of somatic embryogenesis, encompassing heart, torpedo, and dicotyledon stages. this finding contrasts with that of oosumi et al.,  <cit> , who achieved transformation and regeneration of f. vesca ‘hawaii 4’, but who described a regeneration sequence beginning with organogenic shoot formation and followed by rooting upon transfer to hormone-free medium. in one of their figures, the latter authors indicated the presence of “embryonic callus” , but did not employ the term “somatic embryogenesis” or explicitly specify the nature of their regeneration pathway in their report.

somatic embryogenesis has been reported in the octoploid, cultivated strawberry  <cit> . importantly, husaini and abdin  <cit>  found that the regeneration pathway from leaflet explants in cultivar ‘chandler’ was steered toward either somatic embryogenesis or direct shoot formation depending upon the concentration of just one key medium component: thidiazuron . this research group then reported the optimization of tdz concentration for the promotion of somatic embryogenesis in ‘chandler’  <cit> , stating that this was the preferred regeneration pathway for their applied research purposes. other factors found to promote embryogenesis in strawberry include a period of culture in the dark  <cit> , and cold treatment  <cit> .

future efforts toward optimization of post-transformation plantlet regeneration in the widely used ‘hawaii 4’ variety of the diploid model species f. vesca will likely benefit from a targeted approach that seeks to optimize either an organogenic or a somatic embryogenic pathway, depending upon which pathway best serves the project needs. under the conditions employed in the present study, we documented regeneration via the latter pathway, thereby establishing a defined baseline for future methodological enhancement of the somatic embryogenic approach. obvious directions for such efforts would be to evaluate the dose-responsiveness of ‘hawaii 4’ explants to tdz in comparison to ba, and the effects of culture in darkness or under varying light regimes.

the frequent  occurrence of tetraploids among post-transformation regenerants was an unexpected outcome. although numerous reports of fragaria regeneration have appeared, none has yet reported ploidy changes. in our study, the occurrence of tetraploid transformants was not specific to any particular construct sequence, as tetraploids occurred among the transformants that yielded regenerants regardless of construct type. the detection of tetraploidy was an unanticipated, ad hoc observation, for which reason we did not examine the potentially causal affects of experimental factors such as vector system or cultural conditions. therefore, we cannot separate the various aspects of the transformation and regeneration procedures, considered alone or in concert, as possible causal factors in the induction of tetraploidy based upon available data. however, several intriguing questions are suggested, as discussed below.

first, is ‘hawaii 4’ particularly susceptible to the induction of tetraploidy, or is such susceptibility a generalized phenomenon in f. vesca, in diploid fragaria, or in fragaria in general? the fact that elevated ploidies following in vitro manipulations have not been reported previously in fragaria suggests the possibility that the phenomenon we documented in ‘hawaii 4’ may have at least an element of genotype- and/or taxon-specificity. alternately or additionally, the employed vector and delivery system may have been a factor in the tetraploid outcomes. we employed a specific gateway® vector  <cit> , whereas oosumi et al.,  <cit>  employed the pcambia- <dig> binary vector, while our study and theirs both employed an agrobacterium-based delivery system. oosumi et al.  <cit>  did not report the occurrence of tetraploidy among their transformants; however, a careful examination of the four transformants that were photographically documented by these authors suggests to us that the transformant depicted in their figure eight-b  <cit>  may be a tetraploid, as suggested by the distinctive leaf morphology that we have shown to be indicative of tetraploidy.

the tetraploid transformants of ‘hawaii 4’ that we examined all shared a distinctive leaf morphology, which manifested as a quantifiably altered ratio  of central leaflet to overall leaf width. increased cell size is a widely documented and general consequence of ploidy elevation, at least from the diploid to the tetraploid level. it is possible that increased cell size alone may account for the disproportionate broadening  of all three leaflets of the strawberry trifoliate leaf, the net result of which is that the broadening of the central leaflet is proportionately greater than the overall broadening of the trifoliate leaf. as yet we have not defined the tetraploidy-associated change in leaf morphology at the cellular level. we have, however, thoroughly documented the fact of tetraploidy, and have provided a simple morphological metric that allows its detection and distinction from diploid plants among regenerant transformants of ‘hawaii 4’.

the recognition that tetraploidy occurs frequently and that it has a distinctive phenotype when it does occur in ‘hawaii 4’ transformants will enhance the ability of researchers to identify mutant, non-tetraploid forms in mutagen-treated and/or transformed ‘hawaii 4’ plants. in the present study, we obtained transformants with variously altered leaf morphologies, and on the basis of our characterization of the effects of tetraploidy were able to partition ploidy-related from construct-associated alterations in leaf morphology, even when both occurred in the same plant. thus, the petiolule elongation associated with introduction of construct e <dig> was present in both diploid and tetraploid regenerants , and the tetraploid form was clearly distinguishable by its widened leaflets  and altered b/a ratio. contrastingly, the ruffled leaflet phenotype associated with construct f <dig> was considerably magnified in the tetraploid, as compared with the diploid, form .

a useful catalogue of morphological features was provided by slovin et al.  <cit> , pertaining to f. vesca inbred line 5af <dig>  a yellow-fruited and runnerless ‘alpine’ genotype closely related to ‘hawaii 4’, which itself is a runnering variety. this comprehensive phenotypic description was intended to provide a baseline to which other forms including derivative mutant forms could be compared. petiole length was among the features described; however, no mention was made of petiolule length. the petiolule elongation displayed by e <dig> transformants reveals and provides definition to an additional variable trait to be found in fragaria, thus adding to the useful trait catalogue contributed by slovin et al.  <cit> .

another interesting leaf phenotype occurred in association with construct d <dig> , and this phenotype was represented only in diploid regenerants. here, the leaves were of slightly reduced size, mostly due to narrowing of the leaflets, giving the plant an overall gangly look. finally, several regenerants carrying construct e <dig> exhibited a variable increase in leaflet number, from the usual three to four, five, or even seven, wherein adjacent leaflets were sometimes partially fused . pentafoliate leaves are a defining feature of diploid fragaria species f. pentaphylla, a form indigenous to the tibetan region. however, in f. pentaphylla, the additional leaflets are quite small or vestigial, and are attached much lower on the petiole  <cit> , while in e <dig> the additional leaflets are attached at more-or-less the same point as the normal three leaflets . the instability of the e <dig> variant form and its occurrence in only one confirmed independent transformant invokes the possibility of an insertional or other mutagenic cause. a somaclonal variant of cultivated strawberry  variety ‘redcoat’ with a similar phenotype was described by nehra et al.  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the results reported here define opportunities to optimize the existing ‘hawaii 4’ protocol by focusing on treatments that specifically promote somatic embryogenesis. the reported morphological metrics and descriptions will guide future transgenic studies using the ‘hawaii 4’ model system by alerting researchers to the potential occurrence of polyploid regenerants, and to differentiating the effects on leaf morphology due to polyploidy versus transgenic manipulations. the results reported here raise many intriguing questions about the transformation system and host genotype employed in the present study. was tetraploidy induced by some aspect of the regeneration system, or did the polyploids arise from polyploid cells pre-existing in the explant material? to what extent was the host genotype a contributing factor? for constructs associated with altered phenotypes, why did only a small proportion of regenerated, gfp + plants display the associated aberrant phenotype? yet aside from the generation of biological and methodological puzzles that invite further study, the present investigation also yielded intriguing mutant lines displaying a remarkable spectrum of leaf morphology alterations and resulting from manipulations of previously uncharacterized genes, thereby opening new avenues to the characterization of novel gene functions.

