BACKGROUND
neurotrophic factors play central role within the nervous system. they regulate cell survival, proliferation, differentiation, migration, dendrite and axonal growth, synaptic plasticity and interactions of neuronal and glial cells . the neuropoietic cytokine, ciliary neurotrophic factor , first identified in chick ciliary neurons  <cit> , belongs to the interleukin- <dig> and leukemia inhibitory factor  family of four helix bundle cytokines  <cit> . human cntf , a polypeptide of approximate 23 kda, is involved in the maintenance of ciliary and motor neurons. hcntf exerts its signaling effect by binding to a heterotrimeric complex of hcntf receptor , gp <dig> and lif receptor  . apart from neuroprotection  <cit> , hcntf is also known to influence energy balance . consequently, hcntf has potential therapeutic applications not only in neurodegenerative diseases such as amytropic lateral sclerosis  and huntington’s disease , but also in obesity and related type ii diabetes. hcntf secreting implant has completed phase ii studies as an effective therapy for dry age related macular degeneration  in the eye  <cit> .

the therapeutic potential of cntf necessitates a recombinant production system for large amounts of protein for clinical and biological applications. bacterial expression systems are known to be rapid and economical for obtaining recombinant proteins . however, attempts to express hcntf in escherichia coli  have either yielded low soluble levels  or insoluble inclusion bodies a. soluble recombinant expression of pharmaceutical proteins is of utmost importance not only for direct applications but to be able to employ advanced molecular engineering methods to alter their physicochemical properties. bacterial expression systems offer several advantages; they are relatively inexpensive to culture, can be easily modified genetically and have fast turnaround time. e. coli, a preferred bacterial host, is considered to be a ‘laboratory workhorse’ for recombinant protein expression. however, the advantages are easily offset by the challenges poised by recombinant production of eukaryotic proteins  <cit> . bacterial hosts such as e. coli are often limited in amounts of trna for the codons that are used rather less frequently. instances where codon bias of the gene is significantly different from that of the expression host e. coli, paucity of the trnas severely limits the translation process. this results in non-optimal translation of the rna including stalling, termination, possible frame-shifting and low levels of protein expression  <cit> . apart from codon usage being a determining factor in protein expression levels, structural features of mrna that interfere with the initiation of translation is also believed to adversely affect protein expression  <cit> . in contrast, a recent study found that there was very less influence of mrna structure on protein expression and that depletion of charged trnas was the main limiting factor for protein expression  <cit> . codon optimization of the target gene and/or use of trna enhanced strains have become an attractive starting point for heterologous protein expression in e. coli. codon optimization has been successfully utilized to express human pigment epithelium derived factor in e. coli  <cit>  and thirty human short chain dehydrogenase/reductive genes showed vast improvement in expression with optimized codon and use of e. coli strains containing rare codon trnas  <cit> . the other relevant issue with heterologous expression in e. coli is the formation of unordered aggregates  due to improper folding of the polypeptide chain. high rates of protein expression or unfavorable conditions for protein folding cause inclusion bodies formation. successful strategies to mitigate improper folding include decreasing the cultivation temperature  <cit> , co-expression of folding modulators  <cit>  and reducing the rate of gene expression  <cit> . an alternative strategy to improve the solubility has been to express the protein of interest fused to a solubility enhancing polypeptide ‘tag’ . the soluble ‘tag’ also serves to provide a reliable translation initiation  <cit> . although useful, the fusion ‘tag’ strategy is limited by the lack of a rational design for choice and a given ‘tag’ might be effective with only certain targets . in general, production of soluble proteins in e. coli remains largely a trial-and-error process.

in this study, we report an effective strategy towards screening and optimization for soluble expression of hcntf in e. coli. we address the twin issues of codon bias and possible improper folding by optimizing the hcntf gene sequence for use in e. coli and adopting a factorial screening strategy. small-scale screening methods have been successful in structural genomics initiatives  in providing reproducible qualitative and quantitative leads for large-scale expression. hcntf gene was codon optimized and cloned into a suite of nine vectors harboring different fusion  tags. the constructs were screened for expression in two different e. coli strains and culture medias at different temperatures.

RESULTS
the objective of our work was to achieve soluble, high yielding production of hcntf in e. coli. earlier attempts of hcntf production in e. coli resulted in low amounts of soluble protein or required purification from insoluble inclusion bodies  <cit> . mcdonald and co-workers have reported the presence of only 13% of soluble hcntf in e. coli  cell extracts  <cit> . in another report, the insoluble fraction from bacterial cell lysate was found to contain 80% of recombinant hcntf  <cit> . masiakowski et al. have also reported purifying hcntf from inclusion bodies even though the translation of recombinant hcntf was  <dig> – 40% of total protein  <cit> . purification of hcntf from inclusion bodies requires an additional refolding step and such processes are usually not desirable since they are cumbersome and in many cases might result in non-native state of the target protein. non-native state of proteins often leads to aggregation that can cause fatal immunogenic reactions from protein therapeutics  <cit> . thus, for proteins of pharmaceutical relevance, such as hcntf, it is highly desirable to have high yielding, soluble and cost effective production of protein. an effective strategy to express soluble proteins requires cost effective screening system where several factors could be tested in parallel. structural genomics initiatives have effectively utilized such approaches to produce recombinant proteins in e. coli .

in our present work, we adopted the strategy of fusing the codon optimized sequence of hcntf to nine tags  and carrying out a factorial screening for protein expression in different conditions . the overall scheme is depicted in figure  <dig>  the codon optimized hcntf sequence is shown in figure  <dig>  a proprietary algorithm  from the vendor was used to increase the codon usage bias in e. coli by improving the codon adaptation index  to  <dig> . gc content and unfavorable peaks were optimized to prolong the half-life of the mrna. stem-loop structures that have an impact on ribosomal binding and stability of mrna, were disrupted. in addition, the codon optimization process screened and successfully modified negative cis-acting sites. the construction of the popin family of vectors have been described elsewhere . each vector has a n-terminal fusion ‘tag’  followed by rhinovirus 3c protease cleavage site between the ‘tag’ and the inserted target sequence to facilitate ‘tag’ removal. the set of vectors have common cloning sites  that facilitate parallel cloning and construction of expression vectors. a cloning efficiency of 100% was achieved by picking three clones for each vector construction. the constructs were transformed into e. coli strains, bl21plyss and rosetta 2plyss  and small-scale expressions were carried out with culture medias power prime broth  at 20°c/37°c and overnight expression terrifc broth  at 25°c.figure  <dig> 
scheme depicting the overall strategy of parallel cloning, small-scale expression screening and large-scale hcntf production.

comparison of wild type  and codon optimized  hcntf sequence.

expression vectors and their fusion tags



lane
vector
fusion tag
bl21
rosetta 2

20°c ppb
37°c ppb
25°c tbonex
20°c ppb
37°c ppb
25°c tbonex

empirical scores of soluble fraction yield in small-scale expression relative to 6-his-construct. highlighted text in bold within the vector name symbolize the fusion tag.




the soluble fusion tags used in expression screening are listed in table  <dig>  the choice of soluble tags has been dictated by literature precedence on the success rate of soluble expression of a diverse set of proteins. no single soluble tag can increase the expression and solubility of all target proteins. however, some general trends on effectiveness of a limited set of tags  have been reported in some studies. sumo and nusa were found to be equally efficient in terms of total and soluble protein expression in studies on three model proteins  <cit> . the success of a particular soluble fusion tag is dependent on the target protein of interest and hence the need to screen a diverse set. both the culture medias used, ppb and tbonex, are rich and support high cell densities. tbonex, being an auto-induction media, also offers the advantage of a simplified expression protocol by eliminating the monitoring and induction steps. induction free protocol is particularly useful for high-throughput protein expression approaches. culture growth in ppb was screened at temperatures 20°c and the normal 37°c. lower culture temperature is known to facilitate proper folding and soluble protein expression  <cit> .

the soluble fractions were treated with ni-nta magnetic beads to capture recombinant 6-his--hcntf proteins. the eluted soluble, ni-nta affinity purified fractions were analyzed on a sds-page gel .figure  <dig> 
sds-page analysis of small-scale expression screen.  bl21/ppb/20°c;  bl21/ppb/37°c;  bl21/tbonex/25°c;  rosetta 2/ppb/20°c;  rosetta 2/ppb/37°c;  rosetta/tbonex/25°c. lanes m, 1– <dig> denote protein marker and ni-nta purified soluble hcntf fusion constructs from expression vectors as listed in table  <dig>  respectively. the gel was stained with coomassie blue dye.



most conditions  screened for expression showed the presence of soluble hcntf as fusions . on an average, the percentage of hcntf in the soluble fraction was close to 80% or more in majority of the conditions screened. relative amounts of soluble hcntf as fusions with soluble tags were empirically estimated  with respect to the 6-his-construct in each experimental condition . the intensity of the bands depends on protein concentration and also on the size and content of residue types of the construct. the empirical scores are not normalized against molecular size and residue content and as such the scores should not be used for direct comparisons but for easy visual summarization of relative trends. the efficacies of the fusion tags  were ranked as compared to the 6-his- tag. the trend observed was in the order of msyb/halo ; sumo/trx ; mbp/tf/nusa  and gst . significant proteolysis seems to have taken place for some of the larger fusions . this could possibly be due to improper folding of the larger fusion constructs. in a recent publication  <cit> , bird has reported similar observations with the larger fusion constructs. the most significant observation of our small scale screening experiment was that under all conditions, 6-his-hcntf constructs showed appreciable amounts of expression. it is highly desirable to obtain soluble expression of proteins without a solubility enhancing fusion partner as the downstream purification process can avoid additional steps of tag cleavage and protease removal. also, some proteins might exhibit markedly low solubility after the fusion tag has been cleaved off; limiting the utility of soluble fusion tags in such cases. the 6-his-tag is merely an affinity tag for purification and in all probability does not improve the solubility of recombinant hcntf as such, unlike the other fusion tags. in fact, in a study on  <dig> human proteins, the 6-his-tag had a negative impact on protein solubility when present at either the n- or c-terminus  <cit> . in this context, our results for soluble expression of 6-his-hcntf assume significant importance. assuming that the 6-his-tag does not influence the solubility of recombinant hcntf, or at least in a positive way, the soluble expression of hcntf in the conditions tested can be attributed to codon optimization of the hcntf sequence. our experimental design was aimed at maximizing the chances of obtaining soluble protein in the backdrop of literature precedence . however, we do note that in earlier published reports  of recombinant expression in e. coli with the wild type hcntf; conditions of expression as varied as in our experimental set up  were not explored. results from the earlier studies hint at the fact that most probably both translation  and folding  were the limiting factors in expression. it might thus be of interest to see the outcome of recombinant expression of the wild type sequence in a strain rich in trnas for rare codons, such as rosetta  <dig> or as a fusion construct with soluble tags in a strain, such as bl <dig>  even if the results of such experiments were positive, the codon optimized sequence used in the present study clearly results in a vast improvement since it allows high yielding soluble expression in bl <dig> at 37°c  without the aid of soluble fusion tags in contrast to the wild type sequence under similar conditions in previous studies . with easy and cheap availability of synthetic genes, the optimized hcntf codon sequence presents an ideal option for recombinant production in bl <dig>  without the need for a soluble fusion tag.figure  <dig> 
histograms depicting percentage soluble fraction of hcntf in small-scale expression screen.  bl21/ppb/20°c;  bl21/ppb/37°c;  bl21/tbonex/25°c;  rosetta 2/ppb/20°c;  rosetta 2/ppb/37°c;  rosetta/tbonex/25°c. the estimates are based on measurements from three technical repeats.



results from small-scale expression show varying efficacies of the fusion constructs in different conditions of growth as determined empirically . however, since the overall yield after the cleavage of the fusion tag and purification might be very different from that of the fusion construct and also the need for additional tag cleavage and removal steps; 6-his-hcntf was chosen for large scale expression with rosetta  <dig> and the auto inducing media, tbonex at 25°c as a representative example. the analysis of the overall purification scheme is shown in figure  <dig> figure  <dig> 
sds-page analysis of recombinant 6-his-hcntf purification. m: protein marker; 1: crude cell lysate; 2: soluble fraction; 3: ni-ida purified hcntf; 4: size exclusion chromatography purified hcntf. the gel was stained with coomassie blue dye.



the amount of hcntf protein obtained after final purification was 112 mg/l of culture. this is a vast improvement  in overall yield from earlier reports of  <dig> – 10 mg/l  <cit> . functional activity of recombinant hcntf was confirmed by binding to hcntfrα . the binding showed an ec <dig> value of  <dig> nm in accordance with an earlier published report  <cit> . a very recent report  <cit>  published during the course of this manuscript preparation, has highlighted an attractive alternate strategy to express high yielding soluble hcntf in e. coli. the study reports the usage of a single protein production  system that co-expresses e. coli toxin mrna interferase, mazf and hcntf. the strategy targets down-regulating the expression of endogenous bacterial proteins by selectively cleaving the aca sites in host mrnas by mazf. the hcntf gene sequence was optimized for codon usage in e. coli and removing the aca sites. so, whereas in the recently published study, a codon optimization strategy was directed at more specific use with the expression system, in our present study, a more sophisticated proprietary codon optimization algorithm optimumgene™  was used. hcntf codons in our present study were not only optimized for codon usage in e. coli but parameters such as gc content, cpg dinucleotides content, mrna secondary structure, cryptic splicing sites, premature polya sites, internal chi sites and ribosomal binding sites, negative cpg islands, rna instability motif, repeat sequences were also optimized. the spp system seems to be a promising approach, however, its robustness as a general strategy needs to be validated for a number of proteins. it appears that the spp system might be useful in obtaining high yields of recombinant proteins indirectly by suppressing endogenous protein expression. however, protein sequences that might not fold properly once translated might still need soluble tags for proper folding. from such a perspective, our approach to screen with a suite of soluble tags might have a more versatile utility. it would be interesting to integrate our approach  with the spp system  for enhanced expression of difficult eukaryotic targets.figure  <dig> 
binding of biotinylated hcntf to hcntfrα.




CONCLUSIONS
we report here high yielding soluble expression of functional hcntf in e. coli. our combined approach of codon optimization and screening for soluble expression with nine fusion tags under varying culture conditions identified several constructs producing soluble hcntf expression  and the overall yield of purified recombinant hcntf achieved was significantly higher  as compared to previous published reports. soluble expression of the 6-his-hcntf in all conditions tested points to the fact that codon optimization is sufficient for soluble expression of hcntf in e. coli. however, for maximal yields, some fusion constructs might be more useful than 6-his-hcntf. the strategy of combining codon optimization and fusion tag screening might be useful for soluble expression of pharmaceutical proteins in e. coli.

