BACKGROUND
tobacco is an important cash crop in china and has been planted in many farming areas. it has been estimated that about  <dig>  million tons of tobacco stalk were produced annually in china  <cit> . the reusing of tobacco stalk is costly due to its high lignification. most of tobacco stalk is discarded in the field directly and the nicotine in tobacco stalk can easily permeate into the soil, affecting its ecological structure and also polluting the ground water. it is reported that the average nicotine content in tobacco stalk is up to 3800 mg/kg  <cit>  and the nicotine-containing waste would be classified as “toxic and hazardous”, when the concentration of nicotine exceeds 500 mg/kg dry weight  <cit> . therefore, it is imperative to remove nicotine from tobacco stalk so as to make better utilization of tobacco stalk.

significant progresses have been made in the utilization of tobacco stalk such as making fiberboard, tobacco sheet, acticarbon or extracting chemicals . however, all of these methods were deficient due to the terrible pollution on the environment or the high cost, and it is necessary to explore new approaches to the safe and sustainable utilization of tobacco stalk. the biodegradation of lignocellulosic biomass has been demonstrated to be an environmental-friendly and economical way for the reusing of plant stalk  <cit> . it is already shown that fungi belonged to moniliales gliocephalias sp.  <cit>  and aspergillus sp.  <cit>  could degrade lignin in tobacco stalk. however, the microbes that could be used for the biodegradation of tobacco stalk were still limited due to the high lignification and the existing of nicotine. though many microorganisms have been demonstrated to be able to degradate lignin and nicotine separately  <cit> , microorganisms which could degradate the both haven’t been reported.

this study aimed to screen anti-nicotine microorganisms for the degradation of tobacco stalk, and explore their degradation characteristics. the research will provide a better way for the innocent treatment of tobacco stalk.

RESULTS
effect of fungi fermentation on nicotine degradation in tobacco stalk
the concentration of nicotine in tobacco stalk was 1900 mg/kg in this study . nicotine has been defined as one kind of the toxic and hazardous chemicals in tobacco wastes  <cit> . it can contaminate ground water when the concentration exceeds 500 mg/kg in dry weight. therefore, it is necessary to prevent the contamination of nicotine during the biodegradation of tobacco stalk.fig.  <dig> the content of nicotine in tobacco stalk when fermentation with phanerochaete chrysosporium, trametes versicolor and trametes hirsute in solid state. the culture temperature was 28 °c and the relative humidity was 80%, the nicotine content was detected every 5 days until 25 days after inoculation




nicotine concentration analysis showed that all the fungi selected could efficiently degradate nicotine . for p. chrysosporium and t.versicolor, the concentration of nicotine in tobacco stalk remained lower than 500 mg/kg after 10 days of fermentation. for t. hirsute, it is found that nicotine degradation was accelerated from day 10– <dig> after inoculation. the nicotine content was less than 550 mg/kg after 15 days fermentation. no residual nicotine was detected in fermented aqueous extracts after 25 days of incubation in all the fungi culture. to our best knowledge, this is the first study showing that nicotine can be degraded by p. chrysosporium, t. versicolor and t. hirsute and making the bio-degradation of nicotine. lac can oxidize phenolic compounds directly, while all the three enzymes can oxidize divers non-phenolic aromatic compounds with the help of mediators  <cit> , which would be helpful to the degradation of nicotine.

effect of fungi fermentation on lignocelluloses degradation in tobacco stalk
it is shown that in the nicotine degradation process, at least 10– <dig> days of fermentation is necessary to ensure the degradation of nicotine in tobacco stalk to a safe concentration. the lignocelluloses were also monitored during the process to verify the selective degradation of lignin in tobacco stalk with three white rot fungi selected.

the untreated tobacco stalk used in this study was composed of  <dig> % hemicellulose,  <dig> % cellulose,  <dig> % lignin and others. the lignocelluloses biodegradation in tobacco stalk caused by three white rot fungi  are listed in table  <dig>  the result showed that the lignocelluloses decreased gradually with increasing fermentation time. a significantly decrease of hemicellulose was observed in p. chrysosporium , and cellulose was degraded by  <dig> % after 15 days fermentation with t. hirsute. almost the same amount of lignin was degraded by three white rot fungi from 9–15 days, the maximum lignin reduction  <dig>  and  <dig> % were observed in p. chrysosporium and t. hirsute, respectively, but only  <dig> % lignin in tobacco stalk was removed by t. versicolor.table  <dig> changes in lignocelluloses content of tobacco stalk treated with white rot fungi strains during solid state fermentation 


control
a
 <dig> 
 <dig> 
 <dig> 

p.chrysosporium

t. hirsute

t. versicolor
controla: the data in bold was the control, the initial contents of cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin




in our study, hemicellulose was significantly degraded by p. chrysosporium and cellulose was significantly degraded by t. hirsute, and both of the two fungi showed relative higher lignin degradation rate. this is in accordance with previous reports that selective white-rot fungi utilized hemicellulose and/or cellulose to support their growth  <cit> . for lignin degradation of tobacco stalk, a maximum of  <dig> % lignin degradation rate was reached on day  <dig> by aspergillus sp.  <cit>  and  <dig> % on day  <dig> by moniliales gliocephalias sp.  <cit> , meanwhile the enzyme activities were not investigated. the steam explosion pretreatment of the tobacco stalk may be benefit to get a relatively higher lignin degradation rate  <cit> .

the selective degradation of lignin in tobacco stalk is important for the reusing of cellulose in tobacco stalk. the selectivity was evaluated by comparing the relative degradation rate for lignin and cellulose. the percentages of lignin degradation obtained in this study were higher than cellulose, which indicates the three fungal strains could be used in the delignification of tobacco stalk.

water-soluble and ester-soluble chemicals after fermentation with p. chrysosporium
with the development of synthetic biology, more and more valuable chemical products were found and qualified. tobacco stalk is rich in lignin and nicotine and identification of the fermented products and the intermediates may be helpful for finding valuable biobased chemicals. in this study, p. chrysosporium was shown to degrade the tobacco stalk efficiently. moreover, it could secrete various enzymes. therefore, the products in the degradation of tobacco stalk with p. chrysosporium were qualified. the total ion chromatographs corresponding to the compounds extracted with ethyl acetate and water from the supernatants of the fermentation stalk by p. chrysosporium were analyzed.

according to the degradation pathway of the nicotine and lignin  <cit> , some intermediates during the degradation of nicotine such as myosmine, cotinine, n-methyl nicotinamide, n-methylpyrrolidone, pyridine,  <dig> ′-dipyridyl, nicotinyl alcohol and niacin were detected in the culture of p. chrysosporium . meanwhile, some products from the degradation of lignin were also detected in the culture of p. chrysosporium such as 2-furancarboxaldehyde, 5-methyl, 2-furancarboxaldehyde, 5-, vanillin, benzenemethanol,  <dig>  4-dimethoxy . the detection of these chemical products further proves the nicotine-degrading ability of p. chrysosporium. besides the chemicals produced in the degradation of lignin and nicotine, some small molecular valuable chemicals and fatty acid were also detected in cultures of p. chrysosporium. acetoin and acrylic acid were measured in water extractions. ethyl propionate and propyl acetate were detected in ethyl acetate extractions. palmitic acid was found in both of them.table  <dig> the main components in the cultures of p. chrysosporium  grew on tobacco stalk during solid-state fermentation




the detection of lignin and nicotine degradation intermediates further proved the lignin and nicotine degradation ability of p. chrysosporium. it has been demonstrated by li  <cit>  and meng  <cit>  that demethylation pathway is the main nicotine degradation pathway performed by fungi. in our study, some intermediates of demethylation pathway were detected in the culture of p. chrysosporium, such as cotinine, n-methylmyosmine and pseudooxynicotine. in addition, some different intermediates such as 3-pyridinol, nicotinyl alcohol and niacin which may be the degradation intermediates were also detected which hint a new nicotine degradation pathway may be present in p. chrysosporium. moreover, the detection of small molecular chemicals and fatty acid provides a possible pathway for production of biobased chemicals by fermentation with tobacco stalk. the degradation pathway of nicotine and the concentration of the products in the degradation of tobacco stalk with p. chrysosporium need further research.

enzyme activities produced during solid state fermentation of tobacco stalk
enzyme activities are important characteristics for the degradation of biomass, moreover, the produced enzymes can also be used in various applications. in this study, the detection of enzyme activities were carried out for 25 days to identify the highest enzyme activities. ligninolytic and cellulolytic enzymes activities were monitored in the degradation process to estimate their potential application in lignocellulolytic enzymes production.

ligninolytic enzyme during solid state fermentation of tobacco stalk
lac, lip and mnp are three kinds of common lignin peroxides enzymes secreted in the degradation of lignocelluloses biomass. it was found that different ligninolytic enzymes were secreted by different fungi when fermentation with tobacco stalk. however, not all of the ligninolytic enzymes were produced by a specific fungus.

the highest activity of mnp  was observed in t. hirsute at an early stage after inoculation . this result further proved that mnp is a lignin attack enzyme produced by basidiomycetes in the initial stage of lignin degradation  <cit> . on the other hand, a relatively higher lac activity  was also observed with t. hirsute. lip was found play an important role during the degradation of tobacco stalk for p. chrysosporium and the highest lip activity  was achieved at  <dig> d after inoculation . the highest activity of lac  was achieved at  <dig> d after inoculation with t. versicolor .fig.  <dig> lignin peroxidase, laccase and manganase peroxidase activities of phanerochaete chrysosporium, trametes versicolor and trametes hirsute on tobacco stalk during solid fermentation. the culture temperature was 28 °c and the relative humidity was 80%, the enzyme activity was detected every 5 days until 25 days after inoculation




all of these ligninolytic enzymes may be potentially applied in biobleaching, biopulping and the biodegradation of aromatic environmental pollutants  <cit> . and fermentation of lignocelluloses by fungi is becoming an economical way for the production of these ligninolytic enzymes. in this study, lac activity detected in t. versicolor was at a higher level compared with wang et al. report   <cit>  emphasizing the necessity to use tobacco stalk as substrate for the production of lac.

cellulolytic enzyme produced during the solid state fermentation of tobacco stalk
endoglucanase  , exoglucanase   and filter paper enzyme  are the main cellulase produced in the degradation of cellulose. it was observed that all the fungi tested could secret a considerable amount of cellulolytic enzymes .fig.  <dig> production of cellulase by phanerochaete chrysosporium, trametes versicolor and trametes hirsute when fermentation with tobacco stalk in solid state. the culture temperature was 28 °c and the relative humidity was 80%, the enzyme activity was detected every 5 days until 25 days after inoculation




the highest cmcase  and avicelase activity  were observed in t. versicolor and the highest fpa activity was observed in t. hirsute . though the highest cellulase activities were detected in t. hirsute or t. versicolor, their enzyme activities were unstable compared with p. chrysosporium. cellulolytic enzyme activities in t. hirsute and t. versicolor were sharply decreased at  <dig> days after inoculation and were significantly lower than p. chrysosporium . overall, p. chrysosporium could produce cellulase more consecutively, suggesting that it is more suitable for the production of cellulase by fermentation with tobacco stalk.

it can also conclude that the cellulolytic enzymes production of fungi strains was influenced by substrate. fpa was demonstrated to be the dominant cellulase produced by t. versicolor when fermentation with sorghum husks  <cit>  and the highest cmcase activity was observed in t. versicolor when fermentation with wheat stalk  <cit> . however, almost the same amount of cmcase  and avicelase  was produced by t. versicolor when fermentation with tobacco stalk . t. hirsute showed a relatively higher cmcase enzyme activity when fermentation with paddy straw  <cit> . while the relatively higher fpa activity was observed in t. hirsute when using tobacco stalk as substrate .

the enzymes secreted from the strains undergo a sharp decrease in activity in the late stages of the experiments. when a fungus was inoculated to the tobacco stalk, various enzymes were secreted to degradate the tobacco stalk. even in the degradation of lignin, laccase, lip and mnp are the representative enzymes but not the whole enzymes in the degradation process. furthermore, different enzymes might play different roles in different process. therefore, to consider the production of enzymes using tobacco stalk in our subsequently research, the characteristic of the enzymes would be investigated including the stability and the inhibitor of the enzymes etc.

relationship between enzyme producing and lignocelluloses degradation
it could be concluded that specific ligninolytic enzymes were produced by different fungi during the fermentation of tobacco stalk and lead to the different degradation efficiencies of lignin. lips are able to oxide the lignin compounds directly via long-range electron transfer and was considered as key enzymes in the degradation of lignin especially for p. chrysosporium  <cit> . the highest lignin degradation ability of p. chrysosporium is in accordance with the highest lip activity detected in p. chrysosporium. the large molecular weight of lac makes it difficult to penetrate into the lignocelluloses, and lac was reported to play an important role in the initial stage of lignocellulose degradation  <cit> . that’s the reason why t. versicolor showed highest lac activity but had lower lignin degradation efficiency.

CONCLUSIONS
the nicotine in tobacco stalk could be degraded to a safe level after 15 days of fermentation with the three white rot fungi phanerochaete chrysosporium, trametes versicolor and trametes hirsute. phanerochaete chrysosporium is suitable for the degradation of lignin in tobacco with  <dig> % lignin reduction after 15 days fermentation. a considerable amount of laccase  was produced by trametes versicolor and a relatively higher cellulase was secreted by phanerochaete chrysosporium during the degradation of tobacco stalk. furthermore, the products and intermediate in the degradation of tobacco stalk with p. chrysosporium were qualified. enzyme activity detection results and the products had indicated a new approach for the reusing of tobacco stalk.

