BACKGROUND
peroxisome proliferator activated receptor-γ  is one of three members  of the ppar nuclear hormone receptor superfamily of ligand-dependent transcription factors. natural ligands for ppar-γ include fatty acids and eicosanoids  <cit> . ppar-γ expression is prominent in adipocytes and its function is best described in regulating lipid metabolism, but ppar-γ plays a more general role in cellular proliferation, differentiation, and survival, as well as acting as a negative regulator of inflammation  <cit> . more recently, it has also been implicated as a tumor suppressor gene  <cit> , and appears dysregulated in many human cancers including those of prostate, breast, colon, and lung. research is rapidly discovering carcinogenic processes in which ppar-γ is altered at the epigenetic, genetic and protein levels  <cit> .

one of the most active areas of research is examining the role of ppar-γ in lung cancer. both human and murine studies have demonstrated that up-regulation of ppar-γ can slow lung tumor development via reduced proliferation, decreased production of inflammatory cytokines, and promotion of a more differentiated phenotype . currently, lung cancer is the most common human cancer in the world and the leading cause of cancer related death  <cit> . primary lung cancer  is divided into small-cell lung cancer  and non-small cell lung cancer  with nsclc predominating. despite many advances in human oncologic surgery and chemotherapy, the 5 year survival rate for nsclc remains lower than 15 %  <cit> . due to these dismal survival rates, new approaches to cancer therapy are being investigated, including modulation of ppar-γ. in fact, several studies have shown that artificial activation of ppar-γ can inhibit growth of lung cancer cells, primarily through differentiation and apoptosis  <cit> .

the dog has proven repeatedly to be an excellent translational model for many human cancers. the dog shares many similarities with humans in respect to genetic aberrations leading to cancer, development of naturally occurring histologically similar cancers, environmental exposures, and similar responses to treatments including radiation, chemotherapy, and monoclonal antibody immunotherapy  <cit> . although rare in the dog, the species does serve as a good translational model for nsclc in that dogs naturally develop nsclc, are exposed to similar environmental inhalants, have a similar respiratory system anatomy, and similar size and distribution of primary lung tumors  <cit> . in addition, some genetic aberrations that occur in human nsclc have also been documented in the dog including k-ras mutations and altered expression of proteins associated with chemotherapy resistance  <cit> . and finally, the dog has also been used to demonstrate efficacy of new lung cancer therapies in humans, including use of inhalant chemotherapy  <cit> . there is limited research describing ppar-γ expression in the dog in health or disease. information is specifically lacking in the contribution of this gene to carcinogenesis. alterations in ppar-γ expression have, however, been implicated in canine testicular tumors and nasal carcinomas  <cit> .

there are no reports of ppar-γ expression in the canine lung or canine lung cancer. ppar-γ agonists in the thiazolidinedione class  have been studied preliminarily in the dog, including pharmacokinetics and metabolism of this drug  <cit> . more intriguing is that recent research suggests that the combination of ppar-γ agonists with platinum based chemotherapy are synergistic in treating nsclc in vitro for human nsclc and in vivo in murine models. additionally, safety of oral rosiglitazone and carboplatin was recently published in a phase i clinical trial for cancer-bearing dogs  <cit> . given this information, dogs may serve as an excellent model of naturally occurring nsclc to study the efficacy and tolerability of combination pparγ agonists and platinum-based drugs for treatment of lung cancer. the protein may also be important in metastatic cancers like osteosarcoma, but this has not been evaluated in the dog.

given that dogs develop nsclc and are a good in vivo model for studying the effects of ppar-γ agonists, it is critical to understand the expression of this protein and possible epigenetic control in the normal canine lung and canine lung cancer. the objective of this investigation was to identify ppar-γ expression at the protein and epigenetic level in nsclc and normal lung. in addition, as some protein alterations are necessary for carcinogenesis, and some are cancer specific, we also evaluated metastatic to lung osteosarcoma, to serve as an aggressive model of metastatic to lung cancer and a cancer control. the protein was studied in these groups through immunohistochemistry  and promoter methylation was studied using combined bisulfite restriction analysis , and methylation-specific pcr . the hypotheses were that ppar-γ would act as a tumor suppressor, and therefore have decreased expression with increasing malignancy, and that this would correspond with more complete 5′ ppar-γ methylation.

RESULTS
patient demographics
the median ages of dogs were as follows:  <dig>  years for the control group,  <dig>  years for the nsclc group, and  <dig>  years for the osa group. the nsclc group was statistically older than both the osa and control groups . there was no statistical difference in gender between any of the groups  .table  <dig> signalment and immunohistochemistry summary for all subjects evaluated

a
a
a
a
a
a
acinar pulmonary adenocarcinoma
a

mc male castrated; mi male intact; fs female spayed; fi female intact;  negative/none/few/low;  positive/mild/moderate/high/intense; n/a not evaluable/not present


anot included in ihc analysis, italics = this diagnosis was made by necropsy pathologist, unable to confirm specific subtype, bsee materials and methods



prior to evaluation, all cases  were reviewed by dyk to confirm the necropsy report diagnosis. all cases reported as normal lung in the necropsy report were confirmed as such by pathologist review . the same was true of all metastatic osa . the nsclc cases that could be reviewed  were further classified as pulmonary adenocarcinoma: papillary type  and solid type ; bronchioloalveolar carcinoma ; bronchial gland carcinoma ; adenosquamous carcinoma ; and large-cell carcinoma  .

cobra
there was a significant difference in methylated band maximum intensities between groups . normal lung tissue had the most complete methylation at the evaluated cg site, with primary lung cancer showing relative loss of methylation, and metastatic to lung osteosarcoma being least methylated .fig.  <dig> box plot of methylation intensity of osteosarcoma, primary lung cancer, and normal control lung. the box incorporates the middle quartiles; the line represents the median value: the whiskers indicate the minimum and maximum values. there is loss of methylation in primary lung cancer  as compared to normal control lung . there is further loss of methylation in osteosarcoma . the difference is significant 



bisulfite converted normal canine spleen and sssi treated and bisulfite converted normal canine spleen were both positive for methylation at this site, suggesting that methylation is expected to be present, even in normal tissues.

methylation specific pcr
all but one sample of primary lung cancer  and all samples of osteosarcoma were amplified by msp using primers for methylated cg. normal lung tissue samples also amplified with the methylated msp primers .fig.  <dig> cobra and msp for osteosarcoma, primary lung cancer, and normal control lung. pcr products were run on a  <dig>  % agarose gel. lad = 100 bp ladder. samples labeled o-x are osteosarcoma, p-x are primary lung cancer, and c-x are control lung. x represents the patient number. sssi is normal canine spleen dna methylated in-vitro and spl is normal canine spleen dna. sample c- <dig> did not amplify by msp



the same spleen tissue was used to investigate other genes using msp primers in an unrelated study including hoxa <dig>  dlx <dig>  dlx <dig>  hoxb <dig>  and cda and was not methylated in any case .

western blot
ppar-γ protein expression of the appropriate molecular weight of 57 kda was identified via western blot in both fresh canine lung and fresh canine placenta . human pc <dig> cells were used as a positive control.fig.  <dig> pparγ western blot. western blot analysis for the expression of pparγ in fresh tissue samples of human pc <dig> cells  , normal canine placenta  and two samples of normal canine lung samples  show protein expression of appropriate weight . the predicted canine protein is  <dig> amino acids longer than the human protein, which is reflected in the decreased migration of the band on the western blot . samples were concurrently formalin fixed and stained with h&e to confirm that they were histologically normal



immunohistochemistry
immunohistochemistry performed on canine placenta  revealed nuclear staining of trophoblast cells as expected for normal ppar-γ localization .fig.  <dig> immunohistochemistry of pparγ in canine placenta. this 400x view of the canine placenta clearly shows nuclear staining of the trophoblast cells by the antibody



the majority of bronchi and large bronchioles had strong ppar-γ positive cytoplasmic immunoreactivity in the epithelium, particularly of goblet cells, and bronchial glands, though not every sample had a large conducting airway present on the slide. in some cases, only tumor tissue was present on the slide, while in others, both tumor and normal tissue were present. thirty one percent  of control cases, 66 % of osa, and 100 % of nsclc had a large airway available for evaluation, and in every case this airway was positive .fig.  <dig> immunohistochemistry of pparγ in canine lung tissue. the respiratory epithelium of bronchi and large bronchioles exhibited immunoreactivity of pparγ, most strongly in the goblet cells  and engorged peribronchiolar interstitial macrophages that were often filled with carbon particles . some of the primary pulmonary adenocarcinomas  and metastatic osteosarcomas  expressed positive immunoreactivity. bar = 100 μm



most of the peribronchiolar interstitial macrophages that were markedly swollen with carbon particles were strongly positive. if these macrophages were absent or rare, the cases were scored as  <dig>  the cases containing moderate to high numbers of these macrophages were scored as  <dig> , which occurred in 0 % of control cases, 33 % of osa, and 42 % of nsclc. tumor tissue was immunopositive for ppar-γ in 66 % of osa cases and 33 % of nsclc cases. the tumor tissue was partially stained. the positive stains were observed multifocally within the osa but often at the periphery in the nsclc .

there was no association between methylation of the gene in primary lung cancer cases and expression of the protein in the tumor tissue , large airways , or macrophages . there was no association between methylation of the gene in metastatic to lung osteosarcoma cases and expression of the protein in the tumor tissue , large airways , or macrophages .

discussion
in general, it is believed that in carcinogenesis there is a shift in the epigenetic profile of cells in which genome wide hypomethylation develops, accompanied by regional hypermethylation, specifically in promoter regions of genes. when hypermethylation occurs in promoter regions of tumor suppressor genes, transcription machinery often is impaired, and therefore gene transcription is inhibited. as ppar-γ is believed to act as a tumor suppressor in lung cancer development, we hypothesized that ppar-γ promoter would be hypermethylated in all tumor samples, and that frequency of hypermethylation would be greater in the more biologically aggressive cancer  than in primary lung tumors. our findings are the opposite, in that methylation of ppar-γ was reduced in primary lung cancer as compared to normal lung, and even further loss of methylation occurred in aggressive metastatic to lung osteosarcoma. the interrogated region was selected based on prior data generated in our laboratory identifying methylation at this locus in canine lymphoma. the methylation previously was identified in spite of a lack of a formal cpg island in the region. it does not appear that the interrogated cg dinucleotides are active in gene expression in the evaluated tissues . these cg dinucleotides may then act as genomic cgs, as opposed to promoter cgs, and therefore have little impact on gene expression. if acting as genomic cgs, loss of methylation with increasing malignancy would be expected, as was identified here. it is also possible that the queried cgs were too far from the transcription start site to modify gene expression  <cit> . it is also possible, but less likely, that ppar-γ is serving as a tumor promoter, instead of a tumor suppressor, and that methylation decreases with increasing malignancy, although these data did not demonstrate such a relationship. it is unclear as to why c- <dig> would not amplify by msp, though this was the case with multiple attempts at the experiment. in spite of measurable dna in the sample, it is most likely that the sample was partially degraded, making it difficult to amplify with msp primers, or that the amplification is below the visible limit of detection.fig.  <dig> schematic representation pparγ gene. the location of the promoter, as well as the sites of interrogation by msp and cobra primers is represented



bisulfite treatment of dna results in conversion of cytosine to uracil, but leaves 5-methylcytosine unaltered. sssi treatment converts all cytosines to 5-methylcytosine.

in these samples, both bisulfite converted normal canine spleen and sssi treated and bisulfite converted normal canine spleen were positive for methylation. the most logical explanation for this finding is native hypermethylation at the investigated locus. the methylation status of ppar-γ in normal canine spleen has not been reported previously, and to the authors’ knowledge has not been investigated in normal human spleen. ppar-γ protein expression is reported to be high in the rat spleen however  <cit> . in unpublished data evaluating the methylation status of many other tumor suppressor genes, dna from spleen tissue of the same dog did not show hypermethylation. the repeatable nature of the finding at this locus, along with negative tumor tissues, supports its validity.

the immunohistochemistry results of this study are the first to describe ppar-γ protein localization in normal canine lung and canine lung cancer. studies of ppar-γ expression in other species are similar to the findings here. cytoplasmic ppar-γ expression was found in the epithelium of large conducting airways  <cit>  and in alveolar macrophages  <cit> . ppar-γ expression has also been described in alveolar epithelial cells in some studies, but was not identified here  <cit> . reasons for differences across species could be due to true differences in ppar-γ expression within the lung, due to differences in tissue processing and therefore antibody binding, or due to differences in sensitivity of detection.

this is the first study to describe immunohistochemical positivity for either metastatic or primary lung tumors in the dog. the incidence of ihc positive cases of nsclc in dogs  is similar to studies in human nsclc, which found that 42–45 % of cases were positive  <cit> . as in human nsclc  <cit> , the cytoplasmic distribution was also found here. it is unclear why ppar-γ is primarily cytoplasmic in both human and canine nsclc, however various other carcinomas have described primarily cytoplasmic ppar-γ staining  <cit> . one proposed mechanism by which ppar-γ is trapped in the cytoplasm is nitration, which inhibits translocation into the nucleus. this has been demonstrated in a macrophage-like cell line, although further investigation would be necessary to determine if this is the mechanism at play here  <cit> . in some human nsclc studies, it has been found that expression of ppar-γ correlated with tumor type and grade  <cit> , while in other studies no such correlation existed  <cit> . due to the small number of samples in this study, no attempt was made to correlate histologic subtype or tumor grade to ppar-γ positivity. this would be a next reasonable step for future studies where larger patient numbers could be obtained.

to the authors’ knowledge, ihc evaluation of ppar-γ in primary or metastatic osa has not been described in any species. studies of human osa cell lines have shown increased ppar-γ mrna message, suggesting that this tumor does express ppar-γ  <cit> . it is also known that ppar-γ is important for osteoblast differentiation  <cit> , and there is some suggestion that ppar-γ agonists could inhibit osa proliferation and induce apoptosis  <cit> . from the present findings, it is impossible to speculate on the role that ppar-γ may play in osa tumorigenesis, but it does provide the first investigation of ppar-γ expression in metastatic osa in the dog. in addition, it would be interesting to compare the primary tumor from osa samples to the corresponding metastatic pulmonary lesions, however this was not possible with the cases available, as the primary tumors were often removed prior to necropsy, making tissues unavailable for comparison.

there are some limitations to the materials in the present study. an attempt was made during case selection to age-match controls to the tumor groups through exclusion of cases < 5 years of age. this arbitrary age was selected to remove very young dogs from the control group, as methylation of tissues has been shown to increase with age  <cit> . this method allowed for age-matching between the osa group and the control group, however the nsclc group was significantly older. these age differences are, however, consistent with age at diagnosis in other reports, in which the average age at diagnosis of primary lung tumors is 11 years whereas the average age at osa diagnosis is 7– <dig> years  <cit> . it is very uncommon for animals in the patient database at or around 11 years of age to be submitted for elective necropsy and have histologically normal lung tissue on necropsy and no other tumor capable of metastasis. this explains why an older group of control animals was not identified. additionally, the tumor type distribution for primary lung tumors is also consistent with what has previously been reported, with adenocarcinoma and bronchoalveolar carcinoma being the most common primary lung tumors of dogs  <cit> .

there was some sample loss in comparing cases that had adequate tissue for ihc as compared to cases that had adequate tissue for cobra and msp. the reason for the loss of available tissue for epigenetic studies is a direct reflection of the type/size of samples used for this study. all tissues in this study were obtained from archived patient tissues. all samples were obtained from a veterinary diagnostic laboratory, and as such were considered a part of the patient medical record, therefore, the majority of the tissue had to be preserved to maintain the integrity of the medical record. for all ihc samples, only a single  <dig> um slice needed to be harvested from the archived block, and did not result in deterioration of the patient sample, so could be performed for most cases identified. for dna harvest, a maximum of 40um slice of tissue could be trimmed from the tissue before interfering with preservation of the patient medical record. in cases of normal control lung, often only small pieces of lung tissue were included in the paraffin embedded block, and were also often combined with up to five other tissues from the same patient. in these cases, only lung tissue was processed. if adequate dna could not be harvested after a single extraction, the blocks could not be disrupted further. for tumor cases, often the entire paraffin embedded block consisted of the pathologic sample, so there was a high percentage of cases that both ihc and dna extraction could be performed due to the large amount of preserved tissue. this is the same reason that not all tissue had a large airway available for evaluation of ppar-γ expression via immunohistochemistry. in general, with the smaller samples available for normal control lung, it is not surprising that many sections did not have large airways present for evaluation. in future studies, using tissue collected specifically for the designed study could result in a higher percentage of cases that have adequate dna available for methylation analysis as well as ensure that all types of lung tissue  would be available for evaluation by immunohistochemistry.

the most important finding of this study is the demonstration of lung tumor positivity for ppar-γ in dogs with nsclc and metastatic osa. there are currently no published successful medical treatments for either of these conditions in the dog. dogs with high tumor stage or lymph node metastasis with primary lung tumors have median survival times of < 2 months  <cit> . dogs with metastatic osa have a median survival of < 2- <dig> months, even with treatment  <cit> . ppar-γ agonists including rosiglitazone and pioglitazone have been studied in the dog, and therapeutic doses and dose-limiting toxicities are published  <cit> . in addition, a phase i clinical trial of oral rosiglitazone and carboplatin in cancer-bearing dogs showed that this combination was safe  <cit> . the findings of this study provide rationale to suggest that dogs with primary lung tumor and metastatic osteosarcoma could serve as a population which would be appropriate to treat with ppar-γ agonists, and that expression of ppar-γ can be demonstrated in these tumor types.

CONCLUSIONS
the results of this study show that ppar-γ protein is expressed in normal canine lung tissue and in canine primary and metastatic to lung cancer. this report is the first to demonstrate that the frequency of ppar-γ protein expression in canine primary lung cancer is similar to the frequency described in human nsclc. these data supports the use of ppar-γ agonists in this subset of veterinary patients, and suggest that the dog may serve as an appropriate translational model for the study of ppar-γ agonist use in lung cancer treatment. there are differences in ppar-γ methylation among normal lung, primary lung cancer, and metastatic osteosarcoma in the dog, but these differences do not relate to protein expression levels.

