BACKGROUND
protein-protein interactions participate in myriad processes of the cell such as replication, transcription, translation, signal transduction, immune response, metabolism, membrane-associated processes and development . protein-protein interactions offer an excellent way of combining its limited working parts, the proteins, to achieve large functional diversity using a limited genetic repertoire  <cit> . abnormal interactions between proteins within the cell or from pathogens cause many human diseases  <cit> . protein binding can also elicit an allosteric response. allostery is an integral and pervasive mechanism employed by nature to modulate cellular processes  <cit> . it serves as a key mechanism for obtaining fine-tuned regulation in several cellular processes – from metabolic pathways, signalling systems  <cit>  to gene regulation  <cit> . functional modulation is achieved either by enhancing  or decreasing  levels of function. the effect at target site can be varied, e.g., activation of catalysis, regulation of ligand-binding, control of complex formation <cit> .

given their importance, several high-throughput interaction assays  <cit> , such as yeast two-hybrid and tandem affinity purification, have been developed to supplement the dataset of protein-protein interactions from low-throughput methods  <cit> . however, such large-scale experimental methods suffer from high false-positive rates  <cit> . the gold standard for protein-protein interactions is usually a dataset of complexes of interacting proteins solved using x-ray crystallography  <cit> . although it is a much smaller and incomplete dataset in comparison to high-throughput protein-protein interaction datasets, it is reliable and enables mapping of interaction regions and structural changes which accompany interactions. several derived databases provide protein-protein interaction datasets in various easy to –study and –use formats. scoppi  <cit> , ipfam  <cit> , snappi-db  <cit> , 3d complex  <cit> , interevol  <cit>  and protcid  <cit>  are some of the available 3d structural databases of protein-protein complexes.

protein-protein interactions can be classified into different kinds  <cit> : homo-oligomers and hetero-oligomers; obligate and non-obligate complexes; permanent and transient complexes. non-obligate complexes form an important class since they serve as key regulators in maintaining and regulating cellular homeostasis  <cit> . they are also valuable from the viewpoint of structural biology since both the unbound and bound forms can be crystallized owing to their stability. several such structures have been solved by various groups and deposited in the protein data bank   <cit> . an invaluable non-redundant dataset of structures of both the interacting partners solved in unbound and bound form has been collated, curated and updated by weng and colleagues  <cit> . the comsin database provides a unique collection of structures of proteins solved in unbound and bound form, targeted towards disorder–order transitions  <cit> .

earlier studies of structures of protein-protein complexes using both the unbound and bound form of proteins reveal that proteins undergo changes in their structure upon binding. betts and sternberg  <cit>  were the first to compare the bound and unbound forms using a dataset of  <dig> complexes. martin et al.  <cit>  analyzed a dataset of  <dig> complexes in terms of local structural variations. the alterations in structure as a result of protein-protein interactions manifest either as a rigid-body shift of a segment or as a conformational change from one secondary structural form to another  <cit> . the extent of conformational change observed at the interface upon binding prompted several studies to understand and predict these changes  <cit> . such studies aim to improve protein-protein docking methods  <cit>  and help in the accurate docking of protein-protein interactions, which can be used to understand the mechanism of functioning of the complex or design inhibitors.

in this work, we have used a curated and non-redundant dataset of  <dig> protein-protein complexes, solved using x-ray crystallography in high resolution in both unbound and bound form, to address questions about the nature, extent and location of structural changes upon binding. we noticed that, in addition to changes in the interface, possibly allosteric changes causing structural alteration occur in about half of the complexes, indicating a much higher prevalence of this phenomenon caused due to protein binding than appreciated before.

RESULTS
proteins bound to other proteins undergo larger structural changes than unliganded proteins
structural change observed in different forms of a protein could be due to experimental artifacts  <cit> , intrinsic flexibility  <cit>  or due to a biologically important external perturbation  <cit> , such as ligand binding or post-translational modification. to differentiate structural changes potentially related to protein-protein interactions from those which are artefacts, we compared variations occurring in the dataset of protein-protein complexes with two control datasets . the first control set  consists of  <dig> structures, solved at a resolution ≤ <dig>  Å, of two fairly rigid and extensively studied proteins: bovine ribonuclease a and sperm whale myoglobin, and provides an indicator of co-ordinate uncertainties. the second control set  consists of a non-redundant set of  <dig> clusters of structures of monomers, also solved at a resolution ≤ <dig>  Å, which serve as a heterogeneous set since this dataset contains both rigid and flexible proteins, thus serving as a control set for understanding intrinsic flexibility. the main dataset of our study named ppc  is an extensively curated dataset of non-obligatory proteins with their 3-d structures solved in both unbound and bound forms . it consists of  <dig> non-obligatory complexes representing members of diverse functions . the number of proteins involved in the  <dig> complexes represent the major scop   <cit>  classes . since the dataset has been pruned to exclude cases with a large percentage of missing residues at the interface, disordered proteins are under-represented. the complexes predominantly involve two-chain interactions and some interactions involving three chains, in which two chains are considered as a single entity . the proteins constitute a mixture of single-domain and multi-domain members. although some of the structures in the ppc dataset are solved at a resolution poorer than  <dig>  Å, the highest resolution of the control-rigid and control-monomer datasets, the magnitude of structural changes captured across the datasets can be compared since 50/ <dig> complexes of the ppc dataset were solved with a resolution ≤ <dig>  Å. the conclusions of comparison of various parameters capturing structural change in the different datasets, discussed below, remained unaltered when using either the ‘50’ or ‘76’ set of complexes . the conclusions described below are for the entire dataset of  <dig> complexes.

three parameters were used to analyze structural change occurring in the different types of residues  in a protein: root mean square deviation , %pb change , pb substitution score . although rmsd captures the magnitude of structural change, it does not distinguish the type of structural change – i.e. rigid body movement  conformational change. the use of protein blocks  enables this distinction since small yet significant changes in local conformation of a protein can be captured using pbs. protein blocks consists of  <dig> standard conformational states of pentapeptides  <cit> . pbs can be used to represent precisely backbone conformation of all the protein structures known so far. this efficient design has been employed in several applications, including prediction of long fragments and short loops, and in identifying proteins with similar structures  <cit> . a pb change between the unbound and bound forms for the equivalent residue indicates a conformational change – either subtle or drastic. the % pbs altered between two structures serves as a metric for capturing the extent of structural change . a substitution matrix derived earlier  <cit>  was used to calculate the magnitude of structural dissimilarity between two structures in terms of their pb changes . a lower pbssc indicates unfavourable changes  whereas a higher pbssc indicates milder conformational changes . analysis of the three parameters revealed that all types of residues  undergo higher structural change upon binding to another protein than in the unliganded form . these values are calculated at per-protein level for the different classes of residues. rmsd  and pbc  clearly showed higher structural variation of protein-bound forms in comparison to the unbound forms whereas pbssc  showed a marginal trend. this is because the pb changes could be of two kinds: favourable  and unfavorable  and both are represented in the graph. as expected, buried residues showed the least deviation of all the classes and interacting residues the highest change. buried residues are mostly invariant, as seen from the box plot depicting the distribution of pbc , where ~50% of the values are zero for the control datasets. surprisingly, ~90% of buried residues of protein-protein complex structures show at least a single conformational change, as characterized by change in pb . however, the observed changes are mostly minor. in the rare cases when it is a large change, the residue is seen to have slight exposure to solvent.

in order to distinguish structural variations caused due to protein binding from those occurring due to crystallographic artifacts, the upper bound values corresponding to the control-rigid dataset were used as reference for the three parameters .

it is observed that the main protein-protein complex dataset comprises of complexes with varying range of interface area and size of proteins . therefore, dependence of the parameters capturing structural change for interface area and size of the protein  were analyzed. the analysis indicates that there is slight dependence of rmsd, pbc and pbssc for interface area buried by the complex whereas the parameters have negligible dependence on the lengths of proteins .

independently, we also captured structural change using all-atom rmsd which includes consideration of sidechain atoms. although there is expected variation in all-atom rmsds for interacting residues , there is no profound variation when the cα rmsds are compared with corresponding all-atom rmsd values . therefore, the present analysis is confined to cα rmsd based comparison in this study.

pre-made interfaces predominantly bind to structurally-altered interfaces
the extent of structural change at both the interfaces of various complexes has been assessed. proteins are classified into three categories based on the extent of structural change at the interfaces of various complexes: pre-made, induced-fit, and other. interfaces exhibiting cα rmsd of < <dig>  Å  are considered pre-made, while those with cα rmsd of > <dig>  Å are considered induced-fit. the interfaces showing structural changes between these two values are classified in the ‘other’ category. we identify  <dig> pre-made interfaces, fitting the lock-and-key hypothesis proposed to explain protein-ligand binding  <cit> . such a large number is surprising since the proteins would always be primed for interaction. nature’s regulatory control of the primed pre-made interfaces appears to be achieved via its partner interface. it appears that although one of the interfaces is pre-made, the other interface undergoes substantial changes  in the final stable bound form .  <dig> protein-protein complexes,  <dig> from ‘other’ category and  <dig> from enzyme-inhibitor category, show this behaviour.  <dig> of the  <dig> pre-made interfaces had almost no pb changes, implying near complete absence of conformational changes. however, the interaction seems to be modulated by the structural changes occurring in the partner interface. in 14/ <dig> of these cases, the partner’s pbc is >15%; in three cases it is >40% . only five of the  <dig> pairs seem to be pre-made in both interfaces. however, inspection of pbc for these ‘pre-made interfaces’ revealed that there are substantial conformational changes of smaller magnitude captured using pbs which use atomic positions of n, c and o atoms apart from cα as opposed to cα-based rmsd . for instance, the complex of cytochrome c peroxidise and iso-1-cytochrome c forms a pre-made interface , with cα rmsd of  <dig>  Å and  <dig>  Å for the interacting proteins. however, the conformations of side chain positions of interface residues changes drastically in 3/ <dig> interface residues. this example supports the hypothesis that almost all interacting partners undergo changes upon binding, even if one of the interfaces is pre-made, and pbs help in identifying subtle changes than classical rmsd measures. in essence, there are no ‘completely pre-made’ interfaces.

usually, interfaces with an average cα rmsd of ≥ <dig>  Å showed substantial changes at interface, exemplifying the concept of induced-fit hypothesis  <cit>  for formation of protein-protein complexes .  <dig> interfaces with average cα rmsd of ≥ <dig>  Å are found. of these predominantly altered interfaces,  <dig> are partners of pre-made interfaces,  <dig> are partners of like-wise induced-fit interfaces and the rest have values in between .

comparison of the structural change in terms of cα rmsd and normalized pb substitution score can help in distinguishing cases of rigid body movements from conformational changes. induced-fit interface regions with 0% pb change at interface can be considered to have rigid-body movements . however, since pbs are very sensitive to backbone torsion angle changes, two very similar pbs will also be considered as pb changes. therefore, normalized pb substitution score is a more pertinent metric to grade the local conformational change .

large structural changes could result for different reasons such as to avoid steric clashes and/or optimize binding. in some cases, global changes in the molecule  are observed. these complexes either move out   move in  to relieve steric clashes/optimize binding, respectively. in most cases, changes were localized at the interface, comprising of rigid-body movements  or conformational changes  or conformational changes with movement , to mainly optimize binding  or relieve steric clashes  or both . local rearrangements at the interface are identified based on the normalization-based metric . this criterion allows us to identify interfaces with proportionately larger localized changes at the interface although the magnitude is smaller  . in cases where the change is larger , rearrangement seems to be mainly targeted at avoiding steric clashes. in cases where the change is moderate , the rearrangements appear to be mostly for proper optimization of interface.

non-interacting regions away from the interface undergo substantial structural changes on binding
in general, interacting residues undergo larger structural change than non-interacting surface residues ). comparison of the three parameters quantifying structural changes studied for individual proteins showed that this trend holds true even in these cases . indeed, interacting regions need to undergo rearrangement to form an optimal fit. the general trend of comparatively larger changes at interface regions was seen for rmsd and pbssc . however, the parameter pbc provided a new insight, highlighting cases with almost no conformational change at the interface but with considerable change in the rest of the surface . this emphasizes that there exist complexes in which non-interacting regions undergo structural variation upon binding even though the interface remains largely unchanged. 6% of the complexes exhibited 10%-25% pbc and one case showed 50% pbc in the non-interacting surface region .

although interacting regions undergo large structural changes in comparison to the rest of the surface, about one-half of the cases in the ppc dataset reveal large changes away from the interface . pb changes in non-interfacial regions can be divided into two cases.  change in non-interacting regions even when there are almost no changes in interacting regions  .  change in non-interacting regions accompanying changes in interacting regions  . the two categories combine to provide a dataset of 34/ <dig> complexes exhibiting substantial structural change in non-interfacial surface regions. interfaces represented in the first case can be considered as pre-made since no pb change is observed on complexation. as expected, the partner protein for these interfaces exhibited much larger change at the interface.

*the abbreviations used are: ir - interface regions, nir_pbc – non-interacting regions with pb change, l – ligand , r – receptor , e – enzyme-inhibitor complex, a – antigen-antibody complex, o – other complexes.

the proteins are listed in decreasing order of average cα rmsd of nir_pbc values. the average cα rmsd of ir and nir_pbc is  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the normalized pb substitution score for ir and nir_pbc values is  <dig>  and - <dig> , respectively.

*the abbreviations used are: ir - interface regions, nir_pbc – non-interacting regions with pb change, l – ligand , r – receptor , e – enzyme-inhibitor complex, a – antigen-antibody complex, o – other complexes.

the proteins are listed in decreasing order of average cα rmsd of nir_pbc values. the average cα rmsd of ir and nir_pbc is  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the average difference in rmsd values for ir and nir_pbc from global rmsd are  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively. the normalized pb substitution score for ir and nir_pbc values is  <dig>  and − <dig> , respectively.

changes occurring in the non-interfacial regions are classified as near the interface region or away from the interface. all non-interfacial residues in a protein which are within a distance of ≤6 Å cα distance from any of the interacting residues were considered as ‘residues nearby interface’, since they occur in the vicinity of the interfacial residues and are important for the formation of the structural scaffold  <cit> . figure  <dig> shows that in most of the proteins, the residues nearby interface do not undergo much change ; the highest peak is at 10%, which means that most of the changes occurred away from the interface. this fact was also confirmed by visual inspection of the structure of the protein-protein complexes.

conformational changes occurring away from the interface are potentially allosteric: literature-based, structure-based and normal mode analysis
to ascertain any known or potential biological relevance for these changes, all the ‘non-interacting regions with pb change’ in the identified proteins were analyzed using following parameters:  crystallographic temperature factor . regions with low flexibility and different conformations are likely to have adopted the particular conformation. studies report that interacting sites have lower b-factors than rest of the protein surface on average even in the unbound form  <cit> .  known functional roles of residues: site records listed in pdb files and catalytic site atlas   <cit>  were consulted to identify if any of the known functionally important residues for the protein of interest are present in the non-interacting regions with pb change.  literature survey: relevant literature of the crystal structures was studied to check for any previously known information about these observed pb changes for each protein. the information gathered from the above sources is listed in table  <dig>  the b-factor distribution for the non-interacting residues with structural change varied from ‘low’  to ‘very high’  values. unfortunately, pdb site records and csa did not provide information in most cases. literature survey, although unable to account for all the structural changes observed in the non-interfacial region, indicates that many of these changes are allosteric   <cit> .

we observed that most of the proteins with changes are signalling proteins . therefore, 25/ <dig> ‘other’ complexes  from the ppc dataset show significant structural changes at distal sites, indicating prevalence of this phenomenon in signalling proteins. in contrast, only 7/ <dig> and 3/ <dig> complexes of the enzyme-inhibitor and antigen-antibody classes, respectively, show such changes.

detailed information about the residue positions and the nature of conformational change observed in the residues possibly forming the target site for all examples of case  <dig> and case  <dig> are listed in additional file 10: table s <dig> & additional file 11: table s <dig>  respectively.

although literature studies implicate allosteric communication to be the reason for the observed structural changes away from the interface in nearly half of the complexes, we did not get clues for the other cases. since flexibility of a region is known to be good indicator of functional relevance  <cit> , we used this as a metric to identify the biological relevance of the structural changes in all the cases. coarse-grained normal mode analysis   <cit>  is an effective and widely used method to identify intrinsic dynamics of biomolecules at equilibrium conditions solely based on their 3-d structures. this approach computes all possible vibrational modes in which the molecule can move. studies show that biologically important functional motions are almost always captured within one or many low-frequency modes, since they require the least energy for conformational transitions  <cit> . each mode indicates an intrinsic tendency for collective reconfiguration at particular regions. coarse grained nma has been applied to various aspects of structural biology, ranging from prediction of functionally relevant motion in proteins and assemblies, refinement of cryo-em structures, identification of notable evolutionarily conserved dynamic patterns in protein families, to guiding protein docking to proceed along trajectories deemed to be functionally relevant  <cit> . specifically, a study of four protein-protein complexes using different variations of nma to identify the regions and directionality of structural change revealed that these changes correlate with intrinsic motions of the protein in the unbound form  <cit> . a gaussian network model  –based nma of the unbound proteins in case  <dig> and case  <dig> sets that contain ‘non-interacting regions with pb change’ with low b-factors in both unbound and bound forms were carried out using ognm web server, to identify regions exhibiting intrinsic motion, which has largely been observed to correlate with biologically relevant regions  <cit> . a summary of the normal mode analysis results are presented in table  <dig>  nma indicates that structural changes away from the interface in some of the complexes are functionally relevant. a study by chennubhotla and bahar indicates that a method that combines information theoretic concepts with normal mode analysis can be used to determine the communication mechanisms encoded in the structural topology of the protein  <cit> . based on these studies, allostery, which has already been observed in 15/ <dig> complexes according to literature reports, appears to be the most likely mechanism to explain the structural changes occurring at regions away from the interface arising from protein binding.

*the abbreviations used are: ir - interface regions, nir_pbc – non-interacting regions with pb change.

this table lists the results of the analysis using nma regarding the intrinsic tendency for regions of interest to be rigid or mobile. the term ‘embedded’ indicates that the region under consideration possesses intrinsic mobility as part of a segment, whereas the term ‘whole’ indicates that the region is independent. nir_pbc which are indicated to be mobile are shown in bold formatting and those indicated to be rigid are italicized. note that the pdb codes and chains provided are for the bound form whereas the corresponding unbound form structure was used for nma.

apart from nma, the extent of evolutionary conservation of these regions was also determined, using jensen-shannon divergence measure. for regions where normal mode analysis did not provide an indication of intrinsic motion, we analyzed whether crystal packing effects could provide an explanation for conformational changes. to determine this, symmetry-related molecules were generated for the bound and unbound molecule using pymol  <cit> , and checked to find any crystal packing which could cause the change. a discussion of a few specific cases is presented below.

a) tolb – peptidoglycan associated lipoprotein  complex. the proteins tolb and pal constitute the complex used by escherichia coli and other ‘group a colicins’ to penetrate and kill cells  <cit> . tolb protein comprises of two domains – a smaller n-terminal domain and a larger c-terminal β-propeller domain which interacts with pal protein. large rigid-body motions and conformational changes were seen far away from the interface between the unbound and bound forms of the tolb protein . the biological relevance of these changes is supported by experiments which prove that pal binding results in conformational changes being transmitted to n terminal α/β domain of tolb  <cit> . further, a recent study shows that tola binds to the n-terminal region exhibiting structural change in tolb  <cit> , indicating that the structural changes occurring upon pal binding serves as an allosteric signal. additional support comes from gnm-based normal mode analysis of the unbound form. the region of our interest , was seen to have intrinsic tendency for reconfiguration in the second most significant mode pertaining to local motions . however, we identify that this region is not evolutionary conserved and most of the sites occurred in the least conserved bin of residues in the protein.

b) complement c <dig> and epstein-barr virus receptor c <dig> complex. complement component c3d binds to antigenic molecules. this binding helps in further amplification of b cell responses as a consequence of the simultaneous binding of antigen-bound c3d with complement receptor type  <dig> and binding to b cell receptor via bound antigen  <cit> . complement c3’s interaction with c <dig> receptor causes conformational changes, identified using pbs, at residues 264– <dig>  no literature information specific for this region was available. however, gnm analysis of the unbound form indicated that the region near to interface and the region in the opposite side have intrinsic motion . the region of our interest occurs opposite to the interface and is indicated to be partly flexible, implying that this motion could be biologically relevant . however, this region is moderately conserved.

c) ran gtpase and regulator of chromosome condensation  complex. ran gtpase is a key component of g-protein signaling. it serves as a molecular switch which cycles between gdp- and gtp- bound states. it requires regulators for enhancing its low intrinsic hydrolysis and nucleotide dissociation rates. guanine nucleotide exchange factors form the latter group which bind to g-proteins and induce rapid dissociation of bound gtp and hence enable fast activation to gtp bound form. the structure under consideration is a complex of ran gtpase with the guanine nucleotide exchange factor rcc <dig>  <cit> .

ran gtpase, which adopts the p-loop containing nucleoside triphosphate hydrolases fold, contains two regions of interest, one near the interface  and the other far away from the interface  . the interface also undergoes substantial changes on binding. the region of interest near the interface is seen to be intrinsically mobile in the second most important mode. the region of interest far away from the interface is seen to be a part of a mobile region in the fourth important mode. this region is very near to gdp-binding site in the unbound form. it appears that binding of ran gtpase and rcc <dig> causes structural changes at distant sites  to bring about exchange of nucleotides. this case provided a clear example of signal transduction within the molecule to bring about the desired biochemical effect. such sites can also probably be targeted by human intervention to prevent disease manifestations, such as cancer in ran signalling pathway  <cit> . the sampling of homologous sequences was not diverse enough to obtain a reliable answer about its evolutionary conservation.

structural changes away from the interface observed largely in proteins with structurally altered interfaces
since structural changes away from the interface appear to be common on protein binding , we studied the structures of the proteins in the complex to understand if there are any common characteristics of the protein exhibiting these changes  versus the binding partner .

when we analysed the type of interface  in the target protein, we observe that pre-made interfaces constitute only 7/ <dig> complexes undergoing structural changes away from the interface. induced-fit and moderately induced-fit  constitute the bulk, accounting for 15/ <dig> and 13/ <dig> complexes, respectively. allostery appears to be the most plausible explanation to connect protein binding with structural changes away from the interface, as discussed in the previous section. therefore, most of the proteins comprising of pre-made interfaces  do not appear to be the target proteins involved in allosteric communication. on the contrary, they seem to serve as the effector molecules for transmitting the allosteric signal to the partner protein. comparison of the global rmsds of case  <dig> complexes indicates that the target proteins  are significantly more flexible than their effector proteins . however, the disparity in the values could be partly caused due to the differences in lengths  since rmsd is dependent on the number of residues. for proteins of case  <dig> complexes, there is no significant variation in terms of their lengths . however, the global rmsds of the target proteins  are slightly yet significantly higher than those of the effector proteins  . therefore, it appears that binding of an effector protein causes changes at the interface of the target protein that are propagated towards the distant allosteric site, providing credence to the views implicating flexibility in allosteric modulation  <cit> .

discussion
availability of bound and unbound structures of proteins provides an opportunity to address various questions regarding structural alterations occurring due to protein-protein interactions. our study underlines that macromolecular liganded forms of proteins undergo larger structural alterations in terms of change in local conformation  as well as atomic positions  compared to unliganded proteins . these changes are much larger than those observed due to random fluctuations characteristic of intrinsic flexibility or experimental artifacts .

non-obligatory complexes occupy a niche position as key regulators of cellular homeostasis. their specific and timely association and dissociation are crucial for bringing about required biological function. spatial and temporal regulation of the interacting proteins is one of the ways of avoiding unsuitable complexation  <cit> . the other mechanism could be the use of different conformations of binding sites, which provide favourable or unfavourable binding-competence to the partner.

transformation of binding site structure into the active form can serve as a switch to ensure correct binding at the appropriate time. our analysis of structural alterations provides credence to this view. surprisingly, pre-made interfaces, which are structurally invariant upon binding, shows distribution of %pb changes similar to that observed for induced-fit interfaces. this indicates that there is some extent of conformational change in all interfaces; only the nature and magnitude varies . additionally, interface of the partner of pre-made interface is usually observed to undergo significant structural changes . in essence, there are no ‘completely pre-made’ interfaces in non-obligatory complexes. crucially, significant structural changes are observed at backbone level in most of the interfaces used in this study. it is well known that side-chains undergo large structural changes upon protein-protein complexation  <cit> . considered together, these results support the view that structural conformations by themselves can serve as a good mechanism to implement the required tight regulation. lower magnitude of structural changes is generally observed to optimize complex formation, whereas larger magnitude of structural changes is observed to remove steric clashes.

we also observe a substantial proportion of instances with significant conformational changes in non-interacting regions away from the interface . identification of these cases is facilitated by the ability of pbs to capture subtle structural variations. observation of structural changes away from interface changes has been reported previously  <cit> . they could be due to various factors:

 <dig>  flexible regions are dynamic and can take up several distinct conformations, which can have specific functional relevance  <cit> . several studies have revealed that flexibility is localized to certain regions of protein structure and such dynamic sites are usually involved in both small and large molecular interaction  <cit>  and enzymatic catalysis. in our study, the interface regions of tolb - pal complex  and complement c <dig> - epstein-barr virus receptor c <dig> complex  are shown by normal mode analysis to be intrinsically mobile.

 <dig>  studies show that thermodynamic entropy redistribution is a common outcome of protein-protein interaction, irrespective of the net change in entropy after complexation  <cit> . loss of entropy at interacting sites is many times accompanied by gain of entropy in other regions of surface. ‘entropy-entropy compensation’ may be due to significant intermolecular motion between the interacting molecules, which recovers about half of the entropy lost due to rotational and translational components  <cit> . this compensatory mechanism has been postulated to be the mechanism responsible for high-specificity binding of multiple ligands at the same region of a protein.

 <dig>  the region may be functionally relevant, for e.g. a ligand/macromolecule binding site, whose conformation is regulated by an allosteric mechanism. since binding sites are observed to be a combination of flexible and rigid sites  <cit> , the signal based on protein-protein complexation may alter the stability and facilitate conformational change at the functionally relevant distant region. the complex of ran gtpase with its cognate guanine nucleotide exchange factor probably utilizes this mechanism since complexation helps in altering the accessibility to the ligand on rho protein .

 <dig>  crystallization is known to induce substantially altered conformations  <cit> . in our study, we ensure that this bias is accounted for  and that the conformational changes observed are not due to such effects.

 <dig>  trivial factors, such as missing residues near the region of interest  the region being near termini, could contribute to such changes  <cit> . since we ruled out complexes exhibiting such changes , the changes observed have other biological origin.

in-depth analysis of several complexes using rigorous coarse-grained nma and literature survey indicates that a fair proportion of structural changes upon protein-protein complexation are allosteric . such communication is largely enriched in signalling proteins, which seems plausible considering the complex regulation of signal transduction pathways achieved using the interplay of several modular elements  <cit> . the lesser frequency of occurrence of such changes in enzyme-inhibitor and antibody-antigen complexes is expected. in the case of the former, their interaction is usually the result of an allosteric modulation and in the latter, a very high-affinity complex is formed, which needs to be cleared.

the classical view of allostery is as a mechanism of effector binding causing functionally relevant conformational changes at a distant site  <cit> . the salient features of the models involves two key attributes: the presence of two conformational states of the protein, one stabilised in the unbound state and the other favoured upon binding of the allosteric effector, and induction of structural change at the target site leading to functional modulation. however, studies in the last two decades have thrown new light on this phenomenon. the observations of allosteric modulation in the absence of conformational change  <cit>  and the introduction of allosteric perturbation in non-allosteric proteins  <cit>  have raised the viewpoint that all dynamic proteins are possibly allosteric  <cit> . these studies indicate that proteins in their unbound states exist in several conformational sub-states, characterized by different population densities  <cit> . allosteric perturbation results in change in the relative populations of these conformers  <cit> . such studies resulted in a paradigm shift in the understanding of allostery from a structure-centric to a thermodynamics-centric phenomenon  <cit> . although newer studies on allostery indicate that change in dynamics also enables allosteric communication in many cases  <cit> , in this study we have confined ourselves to the study of allostery in the classical sense, as communicated by structural changes. surprisingly, allosteric communication established only via structural changes appears to be established in almost half of the complexes upon protein binding. consideration of dynamics along with structural changes would most probably lead to uncovering of many more protein-induced allosteric changes. therefore, our study suggests that protein-protein binding in the case of signalling complexes, is often likely to result in downstream effects. the smaller of the two proteins in a complex, usually comprising of an unaltered interface upon protein-protein complexation, appears to be the effector molecule in most cases. the binding event generally causes changes at the interface and concomitant structural changes at the target site.

signalling proteins are key drug targets and the usage of allosteric modulators as drugs is gaining acceptance  <cit> . in such a scenario, the understanding that most protein-protein interactions in signalling proteins are allosteric provides impetus for the design of allosteric modulators as drugs. allosteric regulators provide certain advantages over traditional drugs, which are usually competitive inhibitors. binding of an allosteric drug at a distant site provides reduced side-effects, saturability, modulation in the presence of true agonist etc.  <cit> . we hope that knowledge of possible allosterically modified sites identified in the signalling complexes studied in our analysis  serves as a starting point for combating disease manifestations.

CONCLUSIONS
comparison of bound and unbound structures of protein-protein complexes enables us to address various questions regarding structural alterations occurring due to interaction. non-obligatory complexes occupy a niche position as key regulators of cellular homeostasis with appropriate and timely association and dissociation which are crucial for eliciting the necessary biological function. structural alterations in most of the interfaces of these non-obligatory complexes support the view that conformational features by themselves can serve as a good mechanism to implement the required tight regulation.

the interface is the most altered region in the entire protein structure upon protein-protein binding, as expected. the modifications are largely conformational in nature. in the rare case of one the partners remaining unaltered, the other partner is usually observed to undergo significant structural modification, thereby supporting the ‘induced fit hypothesis’  <cit>  more than the ‘lock and key hypothesis’  <cit> .

the observation of a substantial proportion of instances with significant structural changes in non-interacting regions away from the interface implies that the binding is likely to result in downstream effects. in-depth analysis of several complexes using rigorous coarse-grained nma and literature survey indicates that these changes have functional relevance, with most of them being allosteric. the observation of allostery-like structural changes in about half of the transient complexes suggests this phenomenon is much more prevalent in signalling complexes than appreciated before. it also appears that the reversible nature of protein-protein association and dissociation, characteristic of transient complexes, affords nature with an attractive means to bring about allostery which is generally a reversible process.

