BACKGROUND
genes involved in sexual reproduction are found to evolve rapidly in diverse taxonomic groups . the phenomenon is especially well studied in animals, where rapidly evolving genes are found to be expressed in virtually all stages of reproduction, from mating to fertilization  <cit> . large-scale evolutionary analyses show that, in general, genes expressed in animal reproductive organs show a higher divergence than genes expressed in other tissues  <cit> . examples of rapid evolution are also seen in self/non-self recognition genes in plants  <cit>  and in certain reproductive genes of a wide range of eukaryotic taxa, including algae and fungi  <cit> . the rapid evolution of reproductive genes is generally assumed to be adaptive  <cit>  and in line with this assumption, positive selection as the driving force has been confirmed for many fast-evolving reproductive genes . multiple hypotheses have been proposed to explain the rapid evolution of reproductive genes in animals and plants, including sexual selection, sexual conflict, sperm competition, self/non-self recognition and selection for reinforced prezygotic mating barriers between species .

despite the widespread observations of fast-evolving reproductive genes within the animal kingdom, the rate of evolution of genes involved in sexual reproduction of fungi has scarcely been examined. a few examples of fungal reproductive genes that evolve rapidly have been reported, including the mating-type genes, pheromone precursor and receptor genes in filamentous ascomycetes  <cit> ; for certain genes, this rapid evolution has been shown to be driven by positive selection  <cit> . previous genomic comparisons between yeast species have indicated a high turnover of genes involved in sexual reproduction  <cit> . however, there have been no large-scale evolutionary analyses of genes involved in sexual reproduction in other fungi. thus, it has been impossible to draw conclusions about a general pattern of rapid evolution of reproductive genes in this kingdom.

in this study, we identified and sequenced genes with relatively high expression during early mating between sexually compatible strains of the heterothallic  filamentous ascomycete neurospora intermedia. genomic data is at present not available for n. intermedia, and choosing it for our study made it possible to use our new data together with available genomic data from closely related neurospora species to confirm rapid evolution of sex-associated genes in this fungal genus. in heterothallic species of neurospora, individuals of two different mating types  must meet in order to enter the sexual cycle. distinct female and male reproductive structures are formed during mating, and individuals of both mating types can play both female and male roles. in the initial step of the mating process, a specialized female hypha  grows towards the male propagule  of the opposite mating type. this attraction is mediated by mating-type dependent pheromone signaling  <cit> . after cell fusion  the male nucleus is transported through the trichogyne into the developing immature fruiting body . here the male and female nuclei line up and in parallel go through several nuclear divisions, before nuclear fusion  takes place. karyogamy is shortly followed by meiosis, ascospore and fruiting body development, and the active discharge of the mature ascospores. the initial contact between sexual partners is mainly mating-type dependent and compatible individuals of different species of neurospora are able to mate  <cit> . however, interspecific matings between n. crassa and n. intermedia show reduced reproductive success as compared to matings between conspecific individuals, indicating post-mating reproductive isolation between these species. furthermore, reproductive isolation between species is reinforced in sympatry  <cit> , suggesting selection against hybridization. the genetic machinery underlying the early mating procedure , when mate recognition genes are functioning, is as yet largely unknown in neurospora.

we identified genes with relatively high expression during the early phase of sexual reproduction in heterothallic neurospora, and confirmed that the general trend of rapid evolution of sex-associated genes was upheld in this genus. furthermore, among the sex-associated genes, we identified rapidly evolving candidate genes that might be involved in reproductive incompatibilities between taxa, such as the observed reinforcement between n. crassa and n. intermedia <cit> . finally, we used molecular evolutionary analyses to assess whether positive selection was a driving force for the rapid evolution.

RESULTS
identification of sexual, vegetative and constitutive gene categories in neurospora
with the goal of distinguishing categories of genes with constitutive expression from those exhibiting high relative expression during sexual or vegetative development, we performed competitive microarray hybridizations between rna from sexual and vegetative tissue samples of two strains of neurospora intermedia, using the n. crassa microarray . sexual tissue constituted young fruiting structures formed in crosses of the two strains, and vegetative tissue was composed of young mycelia of the separately grown strains.

in total,  <dig>  genes, represented by probes on the n. crassa microarray, exhibited well-measured signal and could be analyzed. the data have been deposited both in the filamentous fungal gene expression database   <cit>  with experiment id  <dig> and in the ncbi gene expression omnibus and are accessible through geo series accession number gse <dig>  of these  <dig>  genes, bayesian analyses of gene expression levels, using ubagel  <dig>   <cit> , identified  <dig> genes that showed a significantly higher expression in the sexual tissue than in the vegetative tissue ,  <dig> genes that showed a relative increase in expression in the vegetative sample , and  <dig>  expressed genes that were not found to be differentially expressed in our samples. these three groups define our “sexual”, “vegetative”, and “constitutive” gene categories, respectively. in addition, we constructed a subcategory of the sexual category based on a stringent false discovery rate, so that this category only contained the genes with q <  <dig> . this subcategory is referred to as “sexual q <  <dig> ”, and contained  <dig> genes.

est sequencing of neurospora intermedia and the building of four-way gene alignments
we sequenced ests from clones of cdna libraries constructed from rna of n. intermedia sexual and vegetative tissue . four-way gene alignments were constructed by adding the assembled est-sequences of n. intermedia to 3-way alignments of the publicly available genome sequences for the two heterothallic neurospora species n. crassa and n. discreta, and the pseudohomothallic  n. tetrasperma. of the  <dig>  genes of n. crassa mapped to by ests of n. intermedia,  <dig> yielded 4-way orthologs including n. crassa, n. discrete, n. tetrasperma and n. intermedia. of those  <dig>  eight 4-way alignments were excluded due to lack of regions where the sequences from all four taxa were overlapping. thus, in total there were  <dig> 4-way single gene alignments without gaps. the mean alignment length for individual genes was  <dig> bp, on average including 96% of the nucleotides of the new n. intermedia est-sequence and 62% of the previously aligned sequences of the other three species.

a majority of the genes in the 4-way alignments fell into one of the three categories, defined based on the microarray experiment: of the  <dig> genes,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  fell into the sexual, vegetative and constitutive gene categories, respectively. the remaining 17%  did not have an identified category . the subcategory “sexual q <  <dig> ” contained  <dig>  genes with a 4-way alignment.

identification of rapidly evolving genes by maximum likelihood analyses
to analyze the molecular evolution of genes expressed constitutively or relatively highly during sexual or vegetative growth, we used the maximum likelihood program codeml included in the paml package version  <dig>   <cit> . the program codeml calculated dn/ds, the ratio of non-synonymous substitutions per non-synonymous site  to synonymous substitutions per synonymous site  over branches in the phylogeny and/or over codons in a gene. we used the 4-way alignment described above to estimate i) the overall dn/ds, dn and ds for the genes in different categories, by using global models of dn/ds among sites and branches, and ii) branch-specific evolutionary rates by using a two-ratio model of dn/ds, in which the branch of interest was specified as foreground and all remaining branches as background. by this approach, we identified  <dig> genes as more rapidly evolving  than the mean for the complete phylogenetic tree and/or in any of the branches. each of the genes and branch for which a dn/ds higher than mean was found, is shown in additional file 1: table s <dig> and summarized in table  <dig>  of the  <dig> rapidly evolving genes,  <dig> were found to be rapidly evolving using the global model, i.e., the global rate estimated for all four neurospora branches together was significantly higher than the mean . these genes were categorized as the “rapidly evolving neurospora genes”. we identified  <dig> rapidly evolving genes in the branch delineating n. intermedia,  <dig> in the n. crassa branch,  <dig> in the n. discreta branch, and  <dig> in the n. tetrasperma branch . the number of branch-specific rapidly evolving genes in the phylogeny is lower in the shorter branches , which is expected since the power to estimate dn/ds is lower for genes exhibiting very few nucleotide changes. most of the genes found to be rapidly evolving in each of the separate branches were also found among the rapidly evolving neurospora genes .


b genes for which data from the microarray analysis is lacking.

both total number and the distribution of these genes in the global ratio model and all separate branches is shown.

distribution of rapidly evolving genes in gene categories
of the  <dig> rapidly evolving neurospora genes,  <dig> were found in the sexual gene category . a higher proportion of genes in the sexual gene category were rapidly evolving  as compared to the constitutive gene category  . the pattern was similar in the comparison between the sexual and vegetative gene categories  . however, the difference did not pass our criterion for statistical significance . a high proportion of rapidly evolving genes were also found among the genes that were not well-measured on the microarray  , possibly explained by them being too diverged to adequately hybridize to the n. crassa oligonucleotide microarray.

the sex-associated genes evolve faster than vegetative and constitutively expressed genes
to assess whether genes in the sexual gene category evolved faster than the genes of the vegetative and constitutive gene categories,  <dig> bootstrap replicates of dn/ds values from a concatenated alignment of  <dig> randomly chosen genes from each gene category were run. the results are summarized in table  <dig> and the distribution of the estimated dn/ds, dn, and ds from the bootstrap analyses are shown as box plots in figure  <dig>  for both the global analysis and for each branch in the star phylogeny of the  <dig> species, the mean dn/ds for the sexual gene category was higher than for the constitutive gene category, which in turn exhibited a higher mean estimate of dn/ds than the vegetative gene category . a wilcoxon rank-sum test verified that the distributions of dn/ds estimates for each gene category deviated significantly from each other for both the global model and for each branch separately . the same pattern of sexual > constitutive > vegetative was revealed in examination of the estimated dn, with one exception: in the n. intermedia branch, the mean of the vegetative gene category was higher than the mean for the constitutive gene category . the median, however, was lowest for the vegetative gene category . the distribution of dn for each gene category  was significantly different from the distributions of dn for both other categories, as calculated for both the global and for each branch separately .


the number of genes in each gene category is shown in parenthesis.

in all analyses  the sexual gene category had a higher mean ds than the other categories, and the difference was statistically significant . for the global model, and the n. discreta and the n. intermedia branches, the mean ds of the vegetative category was higher than the constitutive category, and the two distributions were statistically significantly different . in the branches delineating n. crassa and n. tetrasperma, the vegetative ds distribution did not differ significantly from that of the constitutive category .

in parallel, we performed the same analyses on the smaller subcategory of the sexual category, the “sexual q <  <dig> ”. all distributions found to be statistically significantly different between the “sexual” category and any of the constitutive and vegetative categories were also found to be statistically significantly different for the “sexual q <  <dig> ” category  and the differences in mean were always in the same direction . thus, the false discovery rate cut off did not change our results.

annotation of rapidly evolving sex-associated genes

a e-value originate from blastp analysis of ncbi nr database, or from the smart protein analysis tool. e-values > 1e- <dig> are not reported.

b candidate genes selected for further examination for site-specific positive selection by sequencing and analysis of additional heterothallic species of neurospora.

c this gene only had a significantly higher than mean dn/ds for the branch delineating n. intermedia.

sites evolving under positive selection in candidate sex-associated genes
to provide site-specific estimates of the evolutionary processes underlying the rapid evolution of five of our candidate fast-evolving sex-associated genes, we increased our statistical power by analyzing the genes from additional species of neurospora , again applying the maximum likelihood program codeml included in the paml package version  <dig>   <cit> . the five candidate genes were chosen from the list of rapidly evolving sex-associated genes  based on their higher than mean dn/ds and existence of suitable primer sites in the 4-way alignment. the additional taxon sampling yielded enough power to demonstrate that three of these genes, ncu <dig>  ncu <dig>  and ncu <dig>  contained up to three individual codons that have evolved under positive selection in neurospora . in ncu <dig>  putatively encoding a superoxide dismutase, the two positively selected sites p <dig> and a <dig> are located outside the cu_zn_superoxide_dismutase family module on the c-terminal side . both ncu <dig> and ncu <dig> are reported as conserved hypothetical proteins and no functional modules were found that can be correlated with the sites under positive selection. however, three transmembrane domains were identified in ncu <dig> and two positively selected sites  are located in a predicted extracellular loop and hence putatively exposed to the external environment . for ncu <dig> and ncu <dig>  we did not detect signs of positive selection at the level of individual codons .


anumber of analyzed codons

bnumber of positively selected codons identified with the models

phylogenetic specificity and chromosomal locations of genes in different gene categories
rapid evolution of sex-associated genes would manifest as enrichment of genes in the sexual gene category among those that were found previously to be lineage specific. correspondingly, vegetative and constitutive genes would be enriched among more phylogenetically conserved gene classes  <cit> . thus, we investigated the proportions of the individual genes falling into different phylogenetic specificity classes , and found that they differed between the gene categories in line with these expectations . specifically, the two phylogenetically most specific classes, neurospora orphans and pezizomycotina-specific genes, were enriched  for sex-associated genes, and the majority of the sex-associated genes  were found in these two classes . furthermore, the phylogenetically broadest gene class  was enriched with genes within the vegetative category . a noteworthy exception is that one of the more specific classes, the pezizomycotina-specific class, was enriched with genes of the constitutive gene category . this result is not in accord with the expectation. furthermore, for the subcategory “sexual q <  <dig> ”, we did not find a statistically significant enrichment in any of the phylogenetic specificity classes, although the neurospora orphans and pezizomycotina-specific genes together comprised the majority of the “sexual q <  <dig> ” genes .


1phylogenetic class from kasuga et al.  <cit>  are defined as the level of specificity in the tree of life at which homologues of the n. crassa genes are found in genomes of other organisms.

* p < <dig> , ** p < <dig> , *** p < <dig> : p-values for enriched classes are due to fisher exact test with benjamini and hochberg multiple testing correction.

when investigating the genomic distribution of genes of different categories, we found no statistically significant difference between observed and expected number for any of the gene categories on any of the chromosomes . furthermore, we did not find differences in codon usage between the gene categories .

correlation between gene length, gene expression and evolutionary rate
the distribution of per-gene estimates of mean absolute expression for the constitutive gene category  was significantly different from the distribution for both the sexual  and the vegetative  categories , while the distribution did not differ significantly between the sexual and vegetative categories . however, we found no statistically significant correlations between the mean absolute expression for each gene and estimated global dn/ds; neither for all genes nor within each category . the distribution of the length of the gene coding regions  based on n. crassa did not differ significantly between the gene categories  and we found no significant correlations between cds length and estimated global dn/ds, for either all genes or within each gene category . thus, the observed differences in dn/ds cannot be explained by differences in protein length or absolute expression levels between genes of different categories.

discussion
we have demonstrated that the previously observed pattern of high rates of evolution in reproductive genes extends to the fungal kingdom. genes up-regulated during sexual reproductive stages in n. intermedia exhibited a higher mean dn/ds than genes with relatively high expression in vegetative stages or genes that were constitutively expressed. thus, the examples of rapidly evolving reproductive genes that were previously revealed in fungi  <cit>  can be considered components of a genome level phenomenon, in accordance with the pattern found in the animal kingdom  <cit> . to our knowledge, this study represents the first genome-scale demonstration of the overall rapid molecular evolution of sex-associated genes in a fungal system.

the sex-associated genes identified in this study exhibited higher mean dn/ds than other genes, indicating rapid evolution on the protein level. the concatenated data from  <dig> species was sufficient to infer the overall evolution of gene categories, but to few taxa were sampled to infer specific codons evolving under positive selection  <cit> . to further analyze the basis of the higher dn/ds, we sequenced more taxa for five of the rapidly evolving sex-associated genes and demonstrated that three of these genes contain specific codons that have evolved under positive selection. our results indicate that positive selection is indeed a factor driving the elevated rate of evolution of the sex-associated genes. however, for the majority of the genes in the sexual gene category, we could not distinguish between directional or stochastic processes as the reason for the increased divergence. for most individual genes identified as rapidly evolving, the estimated dn/ds was below  <dig>  meaning they did not show a clear sign of positive selection averaged across sites. due to the extensive functional constraints of most proteins, in most circumstances only a fraction of all codons in a gene can evolve under positive selection. thus, genes with a high dn/ds that deviates significantly from the mean are candidates for positive selection even if the dn/ds is below  <dig> since the probability of positive selection acting on specific codons increases with higher overall dn/ds estimates .

although data from the five candidate genes suggest that positive selection is at least one of the factors leading to an elevated dn/ds in sex-associated genes, a high dn/ds may also be caused by relaxed selective constraints, and we cannot reject this factor as an alternative/additional cause of the elevated dn/ds of the sex-associated genes observed in this study. first, a mutation that is not deleterious in one tissue may be deleterious in another, and hence selective constraints on a gene increase with the number of tissues where it is expressed. relaxed selective constraints can thus be expected in genes with narrow domains  <cit> , such as those for which expression is specific to the sexual stage in neurospora. second, one may speculate that neurospora spends a relatively high proportion of its life cycle in vegetative growth  <cit>  and that this leads to greater selective constraints on genes expressed in vegetative mycelia as compared to those induced during sexual reproduction. however, both alternative explanations for our results are contradicted by the finding that genes that are found in the constitutive gene category, i.e., genes with broadest function, do not show the lowest dn/ds.

in addition to a higher dn/ds, genes exhibiting relatively high expression in sexual tissue are characterized by both higher estimated dn and higher estimated ds compared with the constitutive and vegetative gene categories. these rates demonstrate that sex-associated genes are fast evolving at both non-synonymous and synonymous sites, a finding that is consistent with animal systems where high substitution rates in sex-associated genes are reported  <cit> . variation in mutation rates, which results in variation of ds, is influenced by factors such as gc content, recombination rate, gene conversions and indel frequency  <cit> . furthermore, a low ds as in the constitutive and vegetative gene categories can be caused by selection for preferred codons  to ensure efficient and accurate translation in highly expressed genes  <cit> , but we did not find general differences in codon usage between the gene categories. interestingly, the ds is higher in the genes that are up-regulated in the vegetative tissue in our study compared to the constitutively expressed gene category . further analyses of mutation rate are needed in order to resolve the effect of mutation rate on ds.

we found that the sex-associated genes are enriched in the two phylogenetically most specific gene groups , indicating that they are overrepresented by novel, or ancient and highly divergent, genes. the enrichment of young genes is in line with studies on animals where sex-associated genes are found to show high levels of novelty as well as high birth and death rates  <cit>  and indicating an over-all rapid evolution of the sex-associated genes on the genome level. further support of high levels of novelty in fungal sex-associated genes is provided by recent observations based on genomic comparison of yeasts: many genes essential for sexual reproduction in saccharomyces cerevisiae seem to be absent in sexually reproducing candida species  <cit> . although the genes investigated in yeasts function in determining cell identity and during meiosis, thus presumably operating at different developmental stages than the genes investigated herein, our studies point in the direction of a high turnover of fungal genes involved in sexual reproductive processes. we note that 57% of the rapidly evolving sex-associated hypothetical proteins are predicted to be surface exposed due to the presence of secretion signal peptides, transmembrane domains, or gpi-anchors. this finding indicates that these proteins interact physically with extracellular proteins or substrates.

the wide array of rapidly evolving reproductive genes in animals and plants is generally explained by a set of different theories that include sexual selection , self/non-self recognition to avoid inbreeding  <cit>  and/or reinforcement of mating barriers between species  <cit> . in contrast to animals, reports on sexual selection in fungi are exceptional  <cit> . as a consequence, there is a general lack of knowledge of the effects of sexual selection in fungal biology, although recent evidence of both female choice and male-male competition has been shown in the basidiomycete schizophyllum commune <cit> . there is no inherent reason why sexual selection should not be applicable to the fungal kingdom, and we suggest that it plays a role in driving the observed divergence of the sex-associated genes in neurospora. indeed, the scarcity of studies demonstrating sexual selection in fungi may be attributable to the difficulty of observing the traits that are under selection: relevant traits are likely to be apparent only at cellular or subcellular levels.

while the male partner in neurospora contributes solely with the fertilizing nucleus, the maternal parent is alone responsible for the allocation of resources to develop the fruiting body and ascospores. if the female is likely to make contact with more than one potential partner, the evolutionary cost of a bad choice can be severe, especially since a mycelium is inhibited from mating again after the mating process is completed  <cit> . extensive crossing experiments performed with the aim of distinguishing between biological species of neurospora <cit>  demonstrate notable differences in mating success within species. one experiment has shown evidence of reinforced reproductive barriers between sympatric populations of n. crassa and n. intermedia <cit> , in the form of earlier abortion of sexual development in hybrid crossings in sympatric populations compared to allopatric. the mechanism by which the hybrid crosses are aborted is unknown, but it seems to operate after mating and before karyogamy  <cit> , which is the time span from which our sex-associated gene category was identified. thus, the sex-associated genes identified in this study may be affected by female choice. in neurospora, there is neither sperm fluid nor specific male organs, and fertilization is possible by nuclear transfer from hyphal fragments acting as male fertilizing units. in addition, the expressed genes identified in the current study most likely originate from the female partner, due to heavy overrepresentation of protoperithecial tissue compared to the low amounts of cells in the conidial suspension used for fertilization. nevertheless, until male and female tissues are analyzed separately, it is not possible to disentangle whether the higher rate of divergence observed in sex-associated genes in this study can be explained by male-specific rapid evolution.

the primary goal of this study was to test whether evolutionary rate differed in vegetative and sex-associated genes. our result that sex-associated genes have evolved faster is robust to differing stringency of categorization based on the expression-data. future studies may reveal the exact driving force and the functional consequences of the changes. several recent studies indicate that initiation and development of the fungal fruiting body is a complex process that involves a specific regulatory program . nevertheless, investigations of the processes underlying rapid evolution of sex-associated genes in fungi are severely hampered by the scarcity of functional studies of fungal mating. with the exception of mating-type genes  <cit> , pheromones and their receptors  <cit> , limited information is available about the proteins and genes involved in the mating process in neurospora. accordingly, functional data are lacking for the vast majority of the sex-associated genes investigated in this study, and they are solely identified based on the assessments of gene expression. this lack of annotation makes it probable that our recognized set of sex-associated genes contain some genes that are not important for mating. additional experimentation is needed to confirm their importance in the sexual reproductive process in neurospora. moreover, our discretely staged experimental design makes it possible that some transiently expressed genes are missed. nevertheless, in the literature we find phenotype data relating to sexual development for mutants of two of the rapidly evolving sex-associated genes, ncu <dig> and ncu <dig>  ncu <dig> is predicted to encode a c2h2-type zinc finger protein, disruption of which results in abnormal development of perithecia and ascospores  <cit> . ncu <dig> encodes a putative homolog to the sordaria macrospora pks polyketide synthase gene. disruption of this homolog in s. macrospora results in an albino phenotype and fragile, but viable, ascospores  <cit> .

microarray data was not well-measured for  <dig> of the genes with a 4-way alignment. the reason for the missing data may be sequence differences between n. intermedia and n. crassa that result in absence of signal during hybridization, which would result in absence of gene category data for the most rapidly evolving genes. this explanation is supported by the fact that we found the highest proportion of individual genes with a higher than mean dn/ds in this group of genes. in addition, our criterion for construction of the 3-way and four-way alignments may have excluded the most divergent genes from our analyses. we cannot deduce whether the inclusion of these “invisible” orthologs in the analyses would have changed any of our results.

CONCLUSIONS
taken together, this study extends the domain of the genome-wide pattern of rapidly evolving reproductive genes from animal systems to fungi. our results demonstrate that positive selection is at least one of the factors driving this rapid evolution. although the precise cause for positive selection of sex-associated genes in neurospora is unknown, we speculate that it may be driven by natural or sexual selection. sex-associated genes that are rapidly evolving between taxa are interesting as candidates for future studies as they may play a role in reproductive incompatibility between neurospora species. correspondingly, the finding that sympatric interspecies matings in neurospora abort earlier than allopatric interspecies matings  <cit>  suggests that mate recognition genes are under selection; a pattern consistent with reinforcement of reproductive barriers  <cit> . future studies addressing the functional roles of the identified genes during reproduction are needed in order to clarify the mechanisms that ultimately result in higher rate of change for sex-associated genes. this functional knowledge will enable us to investigate the generality of diverse theories proposed to explain the rapid evolution of sex-associated genes across kingdoms.

