BACKGROUND
the availability of pathway databases such as kyoto encyclopedia of genes and genomes , what is there? , pathdb, and metacyc opens up various new possibilities for comparative analysis. in particular, information about metabolic pathways in different organisms yields important information about their evolution and offers a complementary approach to phylogenetic analysis. here we present a comparative metabolomic approach to constructing phylogenetic trees that uses physiological functions of the organisms by computing the structural similarity of metabolic networks. the consideration of metabolic components complements the conventional approaches to phylogeny based on genome sequences. recognizing the similarities and differences in metabolic functions between species may provide insights into other applications in biotechnology, ecology, and evolutionary studies. several researchers have attempted to rebuild evolutionary history by comparing ribosomal rna sequences  <cit> , by phylogenomics  <cit> , or by comparing whole genomes to overcome the limitations of the gene-sequence analyses  <cit> .

several recent studies have extended conventional phylogenetic analysis to incorporate metabolic pathway information. forst and schulten  <cit>  presented one of the earliest approaches to extend the conventional sequence comparison and phylogenetic analysis of individual enzymes to metabolic networks. they also presented a method to calculate distances between metabolic networks based on sequence information of the biomolecules involved and information about the corresponding reaction networks. dandekar et al.  combined strategies in a systematic comparison of the enzymes and corresponding sequence information of the glycolytic pathway  <cit> . other approaches involving the reconstructed phylogenies from gene-order data have been based on simulating genome evolution  <cit> , and studying the genome evolution resulting from the metabolic adaptation of the organism to the surrounding environment. liao et al.  presented a method to group organisms by comparing the profiles of metabolic pathways, where the profiling was based simply on binary attributes   <cit> .

whereas the previous approaches incorporated information about the additional metabolic pathways, systematic methods to calculate the similarities between metabolic networks are lacking or contain gaps in some of the biological assumptions. in this paper, we introduce the concept of graph kernels to calculate the similarities between two different network structures. the graph kernel-based approach can compute more efficiently the similarity of two graph structures by the kernel function that can extract important features from the graph. our approach contrasts with that of forst and schulten  <cit>  in that the graph kernel calculates the distance based on the network level instead of on its sequence information on the biomolecules involved.

in their comparative analysis of metabolic pathways, heymans and singh  <cit>  showed that phylogenetic trees could be made from the graph similarities of metabolic networks. they applied a distance measure between metabolic graphs of the glycolytic pathway and the citric acid cycle from  <dig> organisms. however, some of their data on phylogenetic inference did not correspond entirely with the conventional taxonomy and did not provide a global view of the specialization of species according to the scale of analyzed species and metabolic pathways.

several more recent attempts have reconstructed genome trees using different formalisms such as gene ordering  <cit> , measuring gene contents  <cit> , comparing sequence similarities  <cit> , comparing proteome strings  <cit> , and phylogenomics  <cit> . all are based on the principle of genome sequences, but none has applied the concepts of effectible physiology to the phylogenetic analyses. we report on our comparative results and discuss our findings.

RESULTS
we chose nine pathways of carbohydrate metabolism and  <dig> species to perform a comparative analysis of metabolic networks that satisfied the most abundant dataset from kegg . our sample comprised  <dig> species of archaea, eight species of eukaryota, and  <dig> species of eubacteria. the central pathways of metabolism include the glycolytic and pentose phosphate pathways, and the citric acid cycle, which generate biological energy and form the metabolic precursors essential for almost all living cells. to validate the data, we investigated the distribution of each enzyme in the nine pathways. several enzymes appear at a high frequency in all species, and this frequency decreases rather exponentially as the value of x-axis increases , a phenomenon we observed in all pathways studied. because the characteristics of the enzyme distribution did not differ, all pathways can be used in the phylogenetic analysis. we observed no obvious tendency of shift or deviation of the distributions from the overall pattern of pathways.

the phylogeny took two directions: conventional taxonomy that focused on the morphological and physiological features to classify species, and a numerical taxonomy that stressed the historical changes in biological sequences. phylogenies based on the ribosomal rna molecules led to the proposal of a new tripartite scheme of three domains: bacteria, archaea, and eukarya  <cit> . although each approach is feasible on its own, it cannot provide a holistic view of the organism. current phylogenetic studies indicate that horizontal gene transfer may have played a vital role in the evolution of major lineages  <cit> . lake and moore  <cit>  also noted the pitfalls of comparative genomics based on molecular sequences. our kernel-based method provides an alternative to the inference of an evolutionary scenario and allows for a higher-level comparison of the phylogenetic trees by measuring the distances between pathways using metabolic network data to infer an evolutionary scenario.

consistency with conventional taxonomy
inferring hidden order by network clustering
the conventional sequence-based analysis passes over or does not embrace the discordant evolution of each species or the horizontal gene transfer  <cit> . our method can cope with this limitation by taking into account the structural features of individual metabolic networks. the disagreement between the molecular sequence data of operational genes and the rrna tree suggests that different genes have different evolutionary histories  <cit> . to address this problem, li studied the mitochondrial genomes in relation to the problem of whole-genome phylogeny, where evolutionary events, such as genetic rearrangements that include gene transfer from the exterior, make genome alignments difficult  <cit> .

to compare the kernel-based comparative analysis of metabolic networks to the sequence-based phylogenetic analysis, we analyzed two enzyme sequences that participate in carbohydrate metabolism in all  <dig> species together using a multiple sequence alignment ). in the resulting phylogenetic tree, archaea and eukaryota are clustered at each terminal; however, short-distance neighboring node members belong to fairly distant taxonomic groups. the overall structure of the tree eventually becomes remote from not only that of the kernel-based method ), but also from that of current taxonomy . although the phylogenetic tree constructed from the multiple alignment of two enzyme sequences shows a few unusual characteristics, our approach provides a good solution. the cluster mainly comprised archaeal species including the bacterial members chlamydia and chlamydophila, and had long branches at the root of the tree. three eubacterial members  are more closely related to eukaryota than eubacteria. moreover, eubacterial groups are separated over the topology, and the eukaryota are inserted between them ).

this result shows an example of the sequence-based phylogenetic approach when we intend to perform phylogenetic analyses for as many species as possible. the sequence-based phylogenetic analysis can fail to precisely represent evolutionary history without an analysis using a set of whole sequences. unfortunately, analyses using whole sequences require massive computing power and are highly complex. a sequence-based phylogenetic analysis can still be limited to cover a number of species, although alternative approaches exist. however, our method can easily solve this problem by utilizing given resources. in order to measure the quality of our constructed trees, we compared the phylogenetic tree based on our graph kernel method with that of heymans and singh  <cit>  in terms of their similarity to conventional taxonomy. we used a software tool, 'cousins'  <cit> , which compares two alternative phylogenetic trees based on common cousin pairs in the trees. the comparison by cousin pairs is said to more focus on local similarity between two trees because it evaluates the similarity based on a cousin pair within a certain degree. table  <dig> shows the similarity score of our kernel-based method in comparison with  <cit>  for the glycolysis pathways of  <dig> organisms. our method shows a better result in terms of the similarity score with the conventional ncbi taxonomy.

in this paper, we intended to present a meta-level analysis of biological systems to construct a unitary phylogenetic tree that could be used to interpret the context of biological evolution. our results suggest that the phylogenetic analysis with submetabolic network information might also allow us to infer horizontal or lateral gene transfer. our results also support the tripartite scheme of the three domains, bacteria, archaea and eukaryota  <cit> .

comparing the pathogenic bacterial genomes by focusing on the pathways of bacterial and eukaryotic aminoacyl-trna synthesis showed that this pathway is uniquely prokaryotic/archaeal and that it is found widely among the pathogenic bacteria. this suggests that members of this pathway can be used as targets for novel antimicrobial drugs  <cit> . metabolic analysis of pathogenic organisms may play a critical role in the selective treatment or prevention of diseases caused by these organisms by using this innovative concept to develop new drugs.

CONCLUSIONS
biological classification, taxonomy, and systematics are the profound themes in biology. using phylogeny in evolutionary classification implies functional and morphological innovation, adaptive range, parallelism, and convergence. we have used a method based on the graph kernel to compare information on each metabolic network including cardinality, distance, and topology relating to metabolic networks as a type of undirected graph. our results showed that our approach has potential in the macroscopic analysis of phylogenetic relationships among organisms in relation to horizontal gene transfer. to obtain information about each causal mechanism in the context of a similar phenotype, one should first analyze the phenomena at the level of a protein network. the analysis of a metabolic network is an example of this type of analysis. biological entities that interact with the environment and eventually influence adaptation are a function of the activity of proteins and other bioactive molecules rather than gene order or genetic history.

the overall structure of the phylogenetic tree constructed from our experiments supports the tripartite scheme of the three domains archaea, eubacteria, and eukaryota as described in an early report of woese et al.  <cit> . the structures of metabolic pathway deduced from archaea are more similar to those from eukaryota than to those from eubacteria. this agrees with the rooted universal tree of life  <cit>  and the tree of life  <cit> . the metabolic network structures of organisms reflect their functional relationship with the environment, and the similarity might provide a measure of the organism's physiological functions. the trajectory of an organism's adaptation can be explained using the structure of its metabolic contents. our approach can be extended to more organisms and applied to other types of biomolecular interactions, such as physical protein interactions in regulatory networks, to provide a basis for understanding the functional relationships between biological networks in different organisms.

