BACKGROUND
the trypanosomatidae family comprises genera that infect many kinds of eukaryotes: insects, fish, amphibians, reptiles, birds, mammals, and even plants. in the trypanosoma genus, three species are pathogenic for humans . human african trypanosomiasis  is caused by t. brucei and transmitted by tsetse flies . in contrast to most other insect-transmitted parasites, t. brucei spends its entire cycle as an extracellular parasite. to thwart the host immune system, the parasite has developed population survival strategies. through antigenic variation, trypanosomes shield their plasma membrane with a continually switching densely packed layer of  <dig> ×  <dig> dimers of variant surface glycoprotein , which constitutes a surface coat. this coat is indeed composed of a single protein, but the parasite genome has a repertoire of about  <dig>  different potential vsg genes that are expressed in a mutually exclusive manner. the coat also prevents antibodies from gaining access to necessarily invariant surface molecules  <cit> .

hat is lethal when untreated and is a threat for over  <dig> million people living in sub-saharan countries  <cit> . treatment of the disease is difficult and expensive and has potentially life-threatening side effects  <cit> . since today there is no prophylactic chemotherapy, specific, low-cost, and sensitive methods for the early diagnosis of the parasite in human blood samples are needed, as well as novel therapeutic targets for fighting the parasite. a class of particularly interesting proteins are the expressed/secreted proteins , which are specifically secreted by parasites. several esps are involved in various aspects of the pathogenesis  <cit> . in addition, we have previously shown that the secretome of t. brucei inhibits the maturation of dendritic cells and their ability to induce lymphocytic allogenic responses  <cit> . as the majority of esps of the secretome remain unknown, we used a proteomics-based approach to analyze the entire secretome of the parasite.

in this study, we compared three different t. brucei gambiense strains, identified over  <dig> proteins and determined their protomeric status. we isolated microvesicles from the secretion medium and showed in microscopy the budding of these microvesicles at the parasite surface before and after incubation in the secretion medium. moreover, microvesicles were also isolated directly from infected rat serum and the proteome of these microvesicles was similar to the secretome. this extended overview demonstrates that esps play an unexpected major role in the trypanosome survival strategy via these microvesicles and highlights a number of potential therapeutic strategies to control the disease.

RESULTS
parasites amplified from rats were incubated in a secretion medium mimicking blood but containing no proteins. a set of soluble proteins  was recovered after incubation and submitted to proteomic analysis . no protein was obtained after incubation in the secretion medium when the parasites were omitted.

characterization of the secretome of t. brucei gambiense
1- comparison of different t. brucei strains reveals potential strain markers
t. brucei gambiense is divided into two groups  <cit> : the feo and ok strains are two strains belonging to group i, while biyamina belongs to the less homogeneous group ii. all three strains were found to secrete complex sets of proteins ranging from  <dig> to  <dig> kda. reproducibility of the protein profiles has been controlled in several independent experiments ; in addition, sds-page controls on secretion samples taken after a 2-h secretion showed the same profiles as those performed on samples taken after a 30-min stimulation . after extensive sampling of all 1d gel lanes,  <dig> proteins  were identified by lc-esi ms/ms   and grouped into  <dig> main functional classes according to the nonredundant classification system developed for mapman  <cit> . no rat proteins were identified when specified database searches were done with mascot. a summary of the functions of esps is shown in figure  <dig>  for all strains, about 50% of the proteins belonged to three major categories: protein folding and degradation, nucleotide metabolism, and unassigned functions. forty percent of the remaining proteins fell into one of five categories: carbohydrate metabolism, amino acid metabolism, protein synthesis, signaling, and cell cycle and cell organization. in spite of a globally similar functional classification, the contribution of proteins involved in signaling and protein synthesis was quite different between the three strains. in addition, some proteins were specifically identified by one strain  and are therefore potential candidates for strain discrimination and/or to understand their pathogenicity. other than proteins with no known function, these markers included specific isoforms of adenylate kinase and lysophospholipase in feo, a dihydrolipoyl dehydrogenase in biyamina, and a specific isoform of adenine phosphoribosyltransferase and a calpain-like cysteine peptidase, as well as a tryparedoxin for the ok strain.

2- secreted proteins form stable complexes
to further understand the secretome and its interaction network, protein complexes were separated using two-dimensional bn-sds-page   <cit> . with this method, proteins focusing on a virtual vertical lane are potentially part of the same complex, whereas proteins not in a complex are focused at the same molecular weight  in both dimensions and located at the extreme right on the gel . gels have been carried out two times giving similar protein profiles. a total of  <dig> nonredundant proteins were identified by ms/ms . functional classification led to a similar distribution as above . figure  <dig> highlights the importance of a small number of protein spots  that accounted for more than 80% of the total amount of secreted proteins. these proteins included not only the well-known and abundant vsgs , but also enzymes involved in nucleotide and amino acid metabolism , chaperones , and proteases , thus defining a major role for defense and nutrition to the secretome. some monomeric proteins were observed, including for instance two 14-3- <dig> proteins , calreticulin , and ubiquitin , as well as proteins showing more than one protomeric stage, such as the hsp <dig>  chaperone that was in the monomeric state for roughly one half  and acted as a homodimer for the other half . however, most secreted proteins were detected as homo- or heteroligomers. two typical examples were the tcp- <dig> complex and the aminopeptidase m <dig>  the tcp- <dig> complex is a chaperone complex of eight distinct subunit species we identified the tcp- <dig> complex in spots  <dig> and  <dig> corresponding to a native mass between  <dig> and  <dig> kda . aminopeptidase m <dig>  has been reported to form a homohexameric structure  <cit> , and we found this enzyme  with a native mass of approximately  <dig> kda.

another striking feature concerned the proteasome, which we identified in two forms  in the secretome. the 20s proteasome is a 28-mer composed of two stacked heptameric rings of proteolytically active beta subunits, surmounted at each end by another heptameric ring of structural alpha subunits. seven alpha and seven beta paralogs exist in the t. brucei genome and all of the  <dig> different subunits were identified in both lanes, except alpha <dig> in the highest mw complex. the 20s core is regulated by additional 19s or 11s complexes. in t. brucei, a form of the 20s proteasome showing enhanced peptidase activity was previously described, and a 26-kda protein, pa <dig> , was proposed to correspond to the 11s activator known in mammals  <cit> . we identified pa <dig> in both complexes. because of the sizes of the two proteasome complexes  and the average size of the alpha and beta subunits , the two forms of the proteasome complex identified here probably contain a single ring of alpha and beta subunits. moreover, from the size of the highest mw complex and the apparent stoichiometry between pa <dig> and the other subunits in the complex, the highest mw complex may represent the activated form of the complex. finally, it should be pointed out that the 19s and 20s subunits were also identified in the unresolved part of the gel , corresponding to complexes above  <dig> kda, and they could reveal a minor form of the 26s proteasome that has not been identified in t. brucei to date.

3- secreted proteins correspond to a specific subset of the trypanosome proteome
a few proteomic data sets were recently published for members of the trypanosomatidae family, including the total proteome of t. brucei in the procyclic  stage  <cit> , that of the glycosome, a specialized compartment similar to peroxisomes and involved in sugar metabolism  <cit> , and the secretome of the promastigote leishmania donovani, where authors were able to distinguish between actively secreted proteins and cell-associated proteins  <cit> .

to cross-correlate between the secretome and proteome data sets, we first searched for leishmania orthologs in t. brucei using blast  analysis.  <dig> out of the  <dig> leishmania secretome entries were found to have an ortholog in trypanosoma , including  <dig> actively secreted proteins and  <dig> cell-associated proteins. interestingly, a high proportion  of the former was present in our trypanosoma secretome, suggesting a close relationship between the actively secreted proteins in leishmania and the trypanosoma secreted proteins.

in contrast, only 8% of the trypanosoma secretome was shared with the glycosome proteome . we also compared the trypanosome total proteome  and the secretomes from trypanosoma and leishmania. figure  <dig> shows that 41% and 39%, respectively, of the trypanosome and leishmania secretomes were not shared with any of the other proteomes. simultaneously, secretome proteins shared with the trypanosoma total proteome amounted to 47% and 43% for trypanosoma and leishmania, respectively, indicating that a major part of these secretomes resulted from an active secretion process.

finally, these different proteomes were compared at the functional level . interestingly, the two secretomes showed large similarities with almost the same proportion of proteins involved in folding and degradation and protein synthesis or with unassigned function. in contrast, the comparison between secretomes and glycosome functional categories showed major differences, the glycosome proteome displaying an expected bias toward sugar  and lipid metabolism  and, more surprisingly, toward nucleotide metabolism . also, the total proteome differed from all sub-proteomes by a deeper investment in cell organization and rna/dna metabolism. almost half of the total proteome is functionally unassigned.

in summary, comparison of both the protein accessions and the functional categories similarly demonstrated features specific to the different compartments, and a close relationship between the secretome of trypanosoma and leishmania.

how are trypanosoma proteins secreted?
1- secreted proteins do not contain a transit peptide
if trypanosomes use the classical secretion pathway, most secreted proteins should carry an n-terminal extension . signalp is currently the most popular software for predicting the presence of a n-terminal transit peptide and the associated cleavage site  <cit> . we performed a genome-wide screen of the trypanosoma proteome using signalp and identified  <dig> proteins as predicted to contain a transit peptide , 61% without any known function. of the remaining  <dig> proteins, many were known to be secreted or located at the plasma membrane, including  <dig> vsgs,  <dig> invariant surface proteins ,  <dig> procyclin surface proteins,  <dig> bloodstream stage alanine-rich surface proteins ,  <dig> receptors for adenylate cyclase ,  <dig> transporters,  <dig> cysteine peptidases/clan ca/family c <dig> and family c <dig>  seven transialidases, and many enzymes involved in lipid modification, glycosylation, and gpi  anchoring. to focus specifically on the secreted proteins, i.e., proteins with no transmembrane span, we further assessed the occurrence of such domains using the transmembrane predictor tmhmm   <cit> .  <dig> proteins were simultaneously predicted to contain a transit peptide by signalp and not to contain transmembrane domains by tmhmm. quite unexpectedly, only  <dig> out of the  <dig> secretome proteins experimentally identified in this work belonged to the predicted secretome.

although not secreted by the classical secretory pathway, proteins devoid of an n-terminal signal peptide may still be secreted. we used the secretomep software  <cit>  to predict such proteins in the trypanosoma genome . depending on the selected threshold score, different proportions of known proteins and proteins having unassigned functions were computed. a score between  <dig>  and  <dig>  was taken as a convenient trade-off between sensitivity and specificity, so that enough known proteins were identified for validation and avoiding obvious false predictions. in this way,  <dig> proteins were predicted as secreted, 79% of which had unassigned functions. of the remaining  <dig> proteins,  <dig> transporters were found, as well as three procyclins. however, only  <dig> proteins from this set were found to match our experimental data.

thus, taken together, less than 20% of the secreted proteins from our data set were predicted to have a transit peptide  and no transmembrane domain  or to be secreted via the nonclassical pathway , suggesting that most trypanosoma secreted proteins purified so far are secreted by a novel mechanism.

2-possible exocytosis of microvesicles
in trypanosoma, endocytosis and exocytosis occur through a sequestered organelle called the flagellar pocket , an invagination of the pellicular membrane. this traffic is not fully understood and requires clathrin, actin, and gtpase rab proteins  <cit> . we found these proteins in the secretome but electronic microscopy pictures clearly indicate a budding of microvesicles at the plasma membrane and flagellum . in human, many types of cells, such as reticulocytes, dendritic cells, tumor cells, neurones, or mast cells, are able to release microvesicles called exosomes. cross-correlation between different exosome proteomics studies recently identified a set of  <dig> proteins commonly associated with exosomes of various origins  <cit> . of these,  <dig> were found in our data set . moreover, translationally controlled tumor protein  was also shown to be present in small secreted vesicles called exosomes, and participates in inflammatory responses by promoting the release of histamine  <cit> . we found this protein in both the procyclic  and bloodstream form of the t. brucei gambiense secretome .

we also looked at proteins specifically involved in endocytosis/exosome formation, and identified nine proteins, including ubiquitin , clathrin heavy chain , a dynamin , two adaptins , two rab proteins , a protein called cap  , and hsc <dig> .

finally, a modest proportion  of secreted proteins found in this study contains at least one predicted transmembrane span , supporting the idea that vesicles are present in the sample. thus, our secretome data support the hypothesis that trypanosoma could use microvesicles to secrete proteins.

this hypothesis was reinforced by electron microscopic observation showing microvesicles budding at the surface of trypanosome plasma membrane. these vesicles were observed from parasites incubated in secretion medium as well as from parasites directly isolated from the blood of infected rat . to further verify the putative nature of the vesicles present in the sample, a  <dig>  g centrifuged pellet fraction from the secretome  and from trypanosoma-infected rat serum  was layered on a step sucrose cushion . sucrose-fractionated vesicles harvested at the  <dig> - to  <dig> -m,  <dig> - to  <dig> -m, and  <dig> - to  <dig> -m interfaces were pooled together, run on 1d gel, and analyzed by lc-ms/ms. interestingly, the protein profile from sucrose-fractionated sp was nearly identical to the whole secretome profile . in addition,  <dig> trypanosoma proteins were identified in the sucrose-fractionated tirsp  and were compared to the list of  <dig> esps identified previously. table s <dig> highlights the similarity in both membrane fractions of tirsp and esps , suggesting a close relationship between the rat serum pellet and trypanosoma-secreted proteins. moreover, 40% of these  <dig> proteins  have already been identified in other exosome proteomics studies  <cit> . one can note that rat proteins were identified in this sample when specific searches were done but are not reported here. membranes from sp and tirsp were visualized by electron microscopy: 50- to 100-nm vesicle-like structures were observed .

discussion
the secretome of trypanosoma displays unique features
in this study, we combined different proteomics approaches, resulting in the identification of a total of  <dig> proteins excreted or secreted by t. brucei gambiense. these data make up the largest set of secreted proteins characterized to date in trypanosoma and identify a specific pattern of functional categories that differs from the total proteome and from specific subcellular compartments such as the glycosome. in addition, this functional distribution is not a special case, but is shared by different strains covering the two subgroups of t. brucei gambiense. thus, esps may be used as a general identifier of the trypanosoma strains. the analysis of native proteins shows that many of them are in multiprotein complexes and form heteroligomers, again suggesting that this specific set of proteins is functional. furthermore, in some cases, a different or original oligomeric status is observed. taken together, these data strongly suggest that esps are not simply a population of unrelated proteins, but are a functionally oriented set of active proteins. finally, genome-wide bioinformatics shows that although a number of trypanosoma proteins are predicted to be secreted, few esps possess a transit peptide and most probably use a nonclassical secretion pathway. thus, several lines of evidence converge to identify the trypanosoma secretome as an original proteome, showing unique features both in terms of function and origin. it is noteworthy that some of the characteristics above, including the function of proteins and the absence of a transit peptide, were recently observed in the leishmania secretome. this raises the question as to whether these features reveal a generic trait and whether the two parasites share common survival strategies.

function of secreted proteins
our results showed that most esps delineate a quite limited set of functions. generally speaking, the functions identified are not unexpected given the known physiology of trypanosoma and the parasite's requirement for defense mechanisms against its host. however, for a number of proteins, previous evidence exists that they may also have other roles. below we discuss a few examples.

proteins involved in folding and degradation constitute a major class of proteins of the secretome, with more than  <dig> accessions identified here. among proteins involved in folding, and shown here for the first time to be secreted by trypanosoma, are cyclophilin a and hsp . interestingly, these proteins, when secreted, are known to be able to modulate the immune system of mammalian hosts  <cit> , to stimulate macrophages  <cit> , or to act as mediators for intercellular signaling  <cit> . in addition, the secretome appears to be unexpectedly rich in various peptidases, covering more than ten peptidase families or subfamilies , some of which are known to be secreted. several might play a role in the pathology. for instance, we identified two oligopeptidases. one  was previously shown to be secreted by t. cruzi  <cit>  and presumed to facilitate the infection of host cells by degrading the collagen of the extracellular matrix. oligopeptidase b is secreted from t. brucei and t. congolense  <cit> . this enzyme is able to cleave host peptide hormones such as atrial natriuretic factor  <cit> , thus contributing to the increase in blood volume  <cit>  and possibly to the disruption of the blood-brain barrier  <cit> , both associated with the infection. other symptoms of trypanosomiasis, such as the perturbation of the endocrine rhythms  <cit> , could also involve oligopeptidase b. more generally, it can be speculated that oligopeptidases, by cleaving regulatory peptides, could play pleiotropic roles in the pathogenic process developed during hat. in contrast, for m20-m25-m <dig> and m <dig> family peptidases, where evidence also exists for their secretion by other organisms  <cit> , the identification in the secretome of trypanosoma is novel and it is too early to speculate on its functions.

among metallopeptidases, the thimet oligopeptidase a is the first member of the m <dig> family to be identified in protozoa. thus, this protease, which processes neuropeptides in humans  <cit> , may be a good candidate for a specific diagnostic marker. another metallopeptidase in the secretome belongs to the m <dig> family, absent in eukaryotic genomes other than trypanosomatids  <cit> . although of unknown biological function, it might offer attractive drug targets against trypanosoma.

proteins involved in folding and degradation are the major class of secreted proteins. apart from contributing to protecting the parasite against the defense mechanisms of the host, many of them also appear to have the capacity to induce perturbations in the host physiology. given their abundance, one may speculate that they play a genuine role in the pathology. some of these proteins may be promising candidates for diagnosis or therapy. as well as degrading proteins, proteases perform highly specific processing tasks that can affect protein structure, function, life span, and localization. by limited and specific cleavage, proteases can act as switches, turning protein activity on or off, or can modulate protein function in more complex ways, regulating vital processes. indeed, more than  <dig> specific hereditary diseases of proteolysis are recognized and it is therefore not surprising that proteases are implicated in many pathologies. hence, proteases account for 5-10% of drug targets, with protease inhibitor drugs already in use to treat aids  by blocking hiv  protease- <dig>  cardiovascular disease by targeting angiotensin convertase enzyme and rennin, and multiple myeloma by the reversible covalent proteasome inhibitor. in addition, many biomarkers of disease, especially in cancer, are stable fragments generated by proteolysis and found in biological fluids  <cit> .

enzymes of nucleotide metabolism are another major class of esps represented here by more than  <dig> protein accessions. this is not unexpected, as t. brucei is incapable of de novo purine nucleotide synthesis and expresses purine salvage enzymes to recover host purines  <cit> . however, extracellular nucleotides are also signaling molecules that modulate a wide variety of physiological responses in mammalian tissues  <cit>  and are archetypal activators of the innate immune system  <cit> . in this context, both hematophagous insects and endoparasites secrete enzymes degrading nucleotides, thus minimizing inflammatory reactions or purinergic signaling provoked by these mediators  <cit> . as such, the identification of several nucleotide-metabolizing enzymes in the secretome raises the question of whether t. brucei might exploit such strategies to modulate the concentration of extracellular nucleotides, hence affecting a range of inflammatory responses. if so, trypanosoma would not only divert the host nucleotides for its own requirements, but also to evade an immune response.

enzymes involved in glycolysis and carbohydrate metabolism are not a major class of the secretome, but this category still numbers more than  <dig> accessions. trypanosoma have a simplified energy metabolism entirely dependent on external carbohydrate sources, such as blood glucose.

most glycolysis enzymes are compartmented in glycosomes  <cit> , but three are cytosolic: phosphoglycerate mutase, enolase, and pyruvate kinase  <cit> . we found all three in the t. brucei secretome, together with phosphoglycerate kinase, yet this secretome strongly differs from glycosomes. although not yet reported as being secreted in trypanosoma, all four enzymes are secreted by other organisms and may be involved in functions unrelated to glycolysis, such as peptide cleavage or immunosuppressive activity  <cit> . therefore, it cannot be excluded that trypanosoma might use part of its energy metabolism machinery for alternative purposes.

enzymes involved in signaling constitute another group of proteins identified in the t. brucei secretome , and some could also play physiopathological roles. two notable examples here concern calreticulin  and prostaglandin f  synthase. autoantibodies against crt are found in the sera of human hosts of a number of parasitic diseases  <cit>  and it was suggested that the parasite-derived crt could trigger an inappropriate immune response against self-antigens through molecular mimicry  <cit> . the gene encoding pgf synthase is present in t. brucei, and we show that this enzyme can be secreted. given that african trypanosomiasis is characterized by miscarriage, due to pgf overproduction correlated with parasitemia peaks  <cit> , the finding that t. brucei secretes a pgf synthase suggests that this enzyme may well play a role in pathogenesis.

one trivial role of protein secretion in hosts is usually associated with trophic purposes for the benefit of the parasites. several recent proteomics studies highlighted other features, depending on the parasite. for instance, whereas for brugia malayi a large fraction of the  <dig> proteins found to be secreted are involved in energy metabolism  <cit> , for the helminth schistosoma mansoni the  <dig> proteins identified include proteins involved in metabolic pathways and in protein folding, development, and signaling, or immune response modulation  <cit> , and the secretome of plasmodium falciparum is predicted to encompass several hundred proteins to both import nutrients and remodel the host erythrocyte  <cit> . in this work, the  <dig> identified t. brucei-secreted proteins display a specific pattern and, for a number of these, there is evidence for possible alternative functions. the various examples detailed above support the hypothesis that, far from being fortuitous, these features probably reveal an additional role for the secretome in manipulating the host in order to overcome its defenses. as such, the secretome would also play a key role in the pathogenicity of the parasite. more generally, this suggests that, apart from the production of vsgs to elude the host immune system, the secretome might also be another authentic component of the survival strategy of trypanosoma.

origin and significance of the identified secretome for the survival strategy of trypanosoma
only a minority of esps appear to possess a transit peptide, raising the question of the nature of the secretory pathway in trypanosoma. several arguments support the hypothesis that secretion could take place by the release of microvesicles. such small vesicles contain cytosol and proteins from the plasma membrane, but no protein from intracellular organelles. on the one hand, apart from the nine proteins specifically involved in vesicle transport and trafficking, we identified  <dig> out of the  <dig> most common exosome proteins. on the other hand, we found very few proteins from intracellular compartments . the viability of trypanosoma tested with flow cytofluorometric analysis and microscopic analysis suggests that the nonspecific release of material from lysed cells is modest and the yield of secreted proteins is not correlated to viability but is strain-specific . moreover, the comparison between the total proteome and the secretome showed in this study also suggests that contaminations from nonspecific release would be relevant only if the kinetics of release is highly protein-specific. in addition, ubiquitin seems to play a key role in the sorting of proteins into exosomes  <cit> , and we identified ubiquitin and  <dig> related proteins of the ubiquitin/proteasome pathway. thus, the overall picture of the trypanosoma secretome shows homologies with exocytosis occurring in the flagellar pocket and with exosome-related proteomes. interestingly, we have successfully demonstrated for the first time the presence of vesicles at the trypanosome surface using electron microscopy and further shown that similar vesicles are present in the secretion medium. moreover, proteomic analysis of tirsp confirmed the presence of a set of proteins that is very similar  to esps purified from isolated parasites. thus, both approaches converge to strengthen the hypothesis of a new secretion pathway in trypanosoma. indeed, the size of the vesicle-like structure observed on electronic microscopy pictures fits with microvesicles . this situation seems to be shared with leishmania, a close relative of trypanosoma, where the absence of transit peptides in secreted proteins and the presence of microvesicles at the promastigote surface were recently demonstrated  <cit> . this differs from the case of p. falciparum, where a specific host-targeting motif was described for secreted proteins  <cit> .

this could be hypothesized to present several advantages for trypanosoma, in comparison to the classical secretory pathway: it may deliver an avalanche of new epitopes to overwhelm the host immune system or to communicate between trypanosomes themselves by exchanging receptors in the form of non-protein cytosolic compounds or even potentially genomic information. as such, microvesicles could be a flexible way for trypanosoma to reversibly adapt its machinery and to homogenize the survival strategy at the population level.

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides the first overview of proteins secreted by trypanosoma brucei. several of them had not yet been discovered and studied in trypanosomes, and some may be new potential therapeutic targets or diagnostic markers. strikingly, some proteins do not use the classical secretory pathway and many probably play additional roles once secreted. collectively, these data lead to novel hypotheses concerning both the pathogenic role of secreted proteins and the secretion pathway in trypanosomatids, providing insight into the complex survival strategy of t. brucei.

