BACKGROUND
normal brain development requires temporal changes in gene expression. in the human brain, the major changes in spatio-temporal gene expression occur during the late gestation fetal life  <cit> . little is known about development of immune function in the fetal brain, although there is a growing literature that some chronic diseases of the adult, such as hypertension  <cit> , schizophrenia  <cit> , and autoimmune disorders  <cit>  are at least in part the result of immune dysfunction within the brain. several studies have analyzed the effect of diverse stimuli  on the activity of the immune system in the fetal brain and the repercussions in adulthood . despite its importance, the ontogeny of immune cells within the fetal brain is not fully understood. the focus of studies on immune development in late gestation has been on development of these cells in somatic sites . however, a better understanding of the molecular development of the immune system within the brain holds promise for design of novel therapeutics that can redirect the “programmed” brain back to a normal trajectory of development. the purpose of the present study is to model changes and coherence of gene expression in cerebral cortex, brainstem, hippocampus, and hypothalamus in order to obtain a broad view of brain ontogeny throughout the second half of gestation. we found, in addition to expected changes in pathways related to brain structure and metabolism, that there was an over-representation of genes in the hematopoietic pathway. we therefore modeled the changes in genes in the hematopoietic pathway over this period of ontogeny. we expect that the study of genomics related to immune system development in late gestation fetal brain might reveal molecular mechanisms of neuronal protection. moreover, investigation of the genomics of fetal brain development could provide a better understanding of mechanisms underpinning postnatal neurological disorders.

we used the sheep as an animal model to identify co-expressed genes in the above regions of the ovine fetal brain, from mid-gestation  to one day of postnatal life . in the ewe, gestation length averages 147 days. the ovine fetus is an excellent model to study brain development since the entire gestational equivalent of human brain development occurs in utero
 <cit> . altricial species  are not suitable models for human brain development because of the marked immaturity of the brain at birth in these species. using a newly-available ovine array and weighted gene co-expression network analysis  on differentially expressed genes , we identified co-expressed genes in different regions of the ovine fetal brain, from mid-gestation to one day of postnatal life. wgcna determines pair-wise correlations between gene expression profiles to create modules  of co-expressed genes . the resulting modules for each network were related with gestational age to determine gene significance  and module membership  for each gene . top modules were defined as those having the highest positive or negative correlation between gs and mm; i.e., modules with highest increasing or decreasing expression pattern from mid-gestation to 1 day of extra-uterine life . these modules  were selected for further analyses.

RESULTS
enrichment and network analysis
significantly enriched biological processes  of the positively correlated top modules from each brain region are shown in additional file 6: table s <dig>  negatively correlated top modules were mainly enriched with cell cycle. in agreement with other studies  <cit> , groups of co-expressed genes that increase in expression toward the end of gestation are related with response to stress and stimulus, myelination, apoptosis, generation of energy, and angiogenesis, while genes that decrease in expression are mainly related to cell cycle.

these events occur because during the last steps of fetal brain development there is a deceleration in cell division  simultaneous with an acceleration in neuronal developmental and differentiation .

significantly enriched kegg pathways  were compared to identify common enriched pathways between all brain regions . some of the common enriched pathways in the positively correlated top modules were expected in the developing fetal brain, such as those related with metabolism. genes related with endocytosis and lysosomal activity were also expected to be expressed at increasing levels by the end of gestation, since they are particularly relevant in polarized cells like the neurons  <cit> . notably, a common enriched kegg pathway related with the immune function was the hematopoietic cell lineage. we focused further analysis on genes related with the hematopoietic lineage. these genes were visualized as separate networks, according to the brain region, using the cytoscape software   <cit>  and physical and genetic interactions between genes were inferred by use of the genemania plugin  <cit>  . then, these networks were merged together to obtain a single network connecting the nodes corresponding to the genes of interest from the four brain regions. the nodes  that comprise this new network represent markers for different immune cells and at different stages of maturation. therefore, the whole network can be correlated with the hematopoietic lineage , as was indicated by the “hematopoietic cell lineage” as a common enriched kegg pathway.table  <dig> 
significantly enriched kegg pathways in positive correlated top modules from all fetal brain regions

networks composed by nodes  related to the hematopoiesis in the ovine fetal brain. black nodes are genes belonging to the top positively correlated module for each brain region. grey nodes are genes inferred by the genemania plugin. brain regions are cortex , brainsteam , hippocampus  and hypothalamus .
the nodes  of the merged network represent markers for immune cells of the hematopoietic lineage. hsc, hematopoietic stem cell; mpp, multipotent progenitor; lmpp, lymphoid-primed multipotent progenitor; clp, common lymphoid progenitor; gmp, granulocyte macrophage progenitor. hematopoiesis figure reprinted with permission from the nature publishing group. .



these results do not necessarily mean that the brain is a hematopoietic organ similar to liver or spleen during fetal life. nor can it be concluded from this study that hematopoietic stem cells are present in the ovine fetal brain. rather, these results strongly suggest the presence of developing myeloid and lymphoid derived cells in different regions of the fetal brain .

detailed analysis of immune marker genes
marker genes for progenitor immune cells were found in the top positive correlated module of the ovine fetal brainstem. these markers are cd <dig>  cd <dig> cd <dig>  cd <dig> and cd <dig> . cd <dig> antigen is expressed by a subpopulation of cd34+ hematopoietic stem cell  and progenitor cells in the fetal and adult bone marrow  <cit> . an isoform of cd <dig> is expressed on cd34+ cells: hsc and progenitor cells  <cit> . progenitors cells of the myeloid lineage, such as colony-forming unit macrophage/dendritic cells, express the colony stimulating factor  <dig> receptor  for differentiation. the resident myeloid inflammatory cells of the central nervous system  parenchyma are microglial cells. thus, expression of csf1r seems critical for microglia development. in mice, the absence of csf1r  results in essentially no macrophages/microglia  in the embryonic and early post-natal brain  <cit> . in mice, interleukin  <dig>  binds to the csf1r receptor with high affinity to regulate myeloid development and it can substitute for colony stimulating factor  <dig>  in vivo. il <dig> is more highly expressed than csf- <dig> mrna in most of the regions of the developing brain  <cit> . these genes were part of the top positive correlated module in the cortex network, as well as other genes markers of antigen presenting cells, including cd1d, integrin, alpha m  and cd <dig>   indicating the development of microglia in the fetal cns parenchyma.

interestingly, genes related to hematopoiesis increased in expression during fetal life, but genes related to immune system activation and antigen presentation are strongly induced after birth . these genes are those encoding for the mayor histocompatibility complex class i and ii; such as hla-b and b2m  or cd <dig>  hla-dma and hla-drb <dig> , or genes encoding for components of the immunoproteosome necessary to process class i mhc peptides, such as psmb <dig> and psmb <dig> figure  <dig> 
trajectories of gene expression for immune related genes.  genes related with the hematopoietic lineage are increased in expression along fetal age and first day of extrauterine life –day 160-. genes related with immune system activation are strongly induced after birth .  opposite trajectory expression of cd <dig> gene  and mbp gene .



therefore, these results suggest a regulated development of the immune system in the fetal brain. in agreement with this concept, mrna expression of genes markers for mature t-cells including the three chains of the cd <dig> marker  were strongly increased after birth in the ovine fetal hippocampus, when measured by rt-pcr , rising the possibility that t cells are present in the fetal brain.

circulating lymphoid cells could trespass the relatively permeable blood brain barrier  during fetal life and reach the brain parenchyma  <cit> . if any of these cells escape central tolerance, it is possible for them to react against highly antigenic self-proteins which are produced at increasing rate in late gestation, such as the highly antigenic myelin basic protein  causing the autoimmune demyelinating disease of the cns known as multiple sclerosis or in the animal model, experimental autoimmune encephalitis   <cit> .

expression of mbp gene was strongly positively correlated with fetal age for all brain regions. correlations ranged from  <dig>  in hippocampus to  <dig>  in cortex, with an average of  <dig> . the gene encoding for mbp was one of the top positive correlated modules for all brain regions but also showed a strong increasing mrna expression measured by rt-pcr in the ovine fetal cortex . consequently, resident cells of the cns should be able to counteract the action of potential auto-reactive lymphocytes.

remarkably, an immune marker gene that was part of the top negatively correlated modules for all brain regions was cd <dig>  correlations of this gene with fetal age ranged from - <dig>  in hippocampus to - <dig>  in cortex . thus, the expression trajectory for this gene was the opposite of mbp . mrna expression of this gene, as measured by rt-pcr in ovine fetal cortex was dramatically decreased with fetal age . cd <dig> is a surface glycoprotein that is strongly expressed by immature b- and t- lymphocytes, but which disappears from t cell surface as t cell mature. however, activation of t cells resulted in a rapid induction of cd <dig> expression  <cit> . cd <dig> is also expressed on resident cells of the cns  <cit>  and it is able to inhibit the proliferation of immature neurons  <cit> .

expression of cd <dig> in both t cells and non-t host cells is required for the development of eae  <cit> . expression of cd <dig> in t cells actively inhibits clonal deletion  allowing the expansion of autoreactive t cells  <cit> . expression of cd <dig> in the cns resident cells, including microglial cells and astrocytes, costimulates myelin antigen specific t cells and promotes their effector function, promoting the autoimmune inflammation in the cns  <cit> . taken together, these data imply that cd <dig> is involved in the autoimmune reaction to myelin antigens.

microglia cells are able to acquire a dendritic cell phenotype and mediate peripheral tolerance to avoid progression of eae  <cit> . moreover, protection from eae development, mediated by dendritic cells, was exclusively associated with low expression of cd <dig>  when compared to eae controls  <cit> . thus, we speculated that the strong downregulation of cd <dig> with advancing fetal age results in a tolerance mechanism necessary to avoid an autoimmune reaction to myelin antigens, such as mbp, which could be related to the susceptibility to this type of disease later in life.

accordingly, genes related with immune tolerance followed a pattern of increasing expression in late gestation. the fc fragment of igg, low affinity iib, receptor  for example, is an inhibitory receptor on myeloid cells that can regulate t cell tolerance and promotes t-regulatory cell induction by increasing interleukin  <dig>  production  <cit> . both il <dig> and transforming growth factor, beta  <dig> , another cytokine involved in t-regulatory cell induction, showed an increased expression in the cortex with fetal age as measured by microarray and qrt-pcr .

CONCLUSIONS
this study provides insight into the dramatic changes in gene expression that take place in the brain during the fetal life, especially during the last stage of gestation.

results from the present study propose a regulated development of the immune system in the ovine fetal brain. this concept implies induction of tolerance mechanisms, to protect fetal myelin from a possible autoimmune attack, and activation of the immune response after birth, which could be part of the physiological adaptation of the newborn for the extrauterine life. these findings could provide the basis for new investigation in this area, in order to understand key regulators of fetal brain development.

