BACKGROUND
extracellular matrix  in the central nervous system  is deposited in the extracellular space of the neuropil and around a subset of neurons in the form of distinctive perineuronal nets , coverings of matrix that ensheath perikarya, proximal dendrites and axon initial segments. the components of this matrix are aggregating proteoglycans , termed lecticans, that interact with tenascin and hyaluronan to form complexes which maintain an anionic environment in the extracellular milieu of the cns  <cit>  . the core proteins of lecticans bear covalently-linked, highly negatively-charged, linear chondroitin sulfate  chains that consist of glucuronic acid/n-acetylgalactosamine repeats, sulfated to varying extents at the  <dig> and  <dig> positions  <cit> . methods developed to detect the lecticans in fixed brain sections have employed: 1) antibodies that recognize cs epitopes of the lecticans, 2) antibodies that recognize initial disaccharides of cs chains exposed on the core protein after digestion with chondroitinase abc , 3) labeled lectins that recognize "selective" monosaccharide components of cs, and 4) antibodies that recognize the core protein.

wisteria floribunda agglutinin  is a lectin that binds to terminal n-acetylgalactosamine residues  <cit>  and decorates various structures, including pnns in the cns, where its reactivity has been well-documented  <cit> . various rostral-caudal layers of rat cerebral cortex, and particularly the retrosplenial cortex, thalamus, cerebellum and brain stem are regions that contain numerous pnns prominently labeled by wfa  <cit> . in rat neocortex, several types of functional morphology are associated with wfa-reactive pnns  <cit> . some data indicate that lectin binding identifies terminal n-acetylgalactosamine present on neuronal cell surface glycoproteins  <cit> , whereas others suggest the reactivity seen with wfa may detect cs directly. importantly, wfa binding in nervous tissue co-localizes with signal from antibodies raised against css  <cit> , and signal is lost when tissue sections are pre-treated with chase  <cit> , suggesting that wfa binds indirectly or directly to cs. thus, wfa reactivity has become a standard method of identifying cs-containing subsets of neurons in the cns that are surrounded by pnns.

the lecticans, including brevican, aggrecan and the v <dig> isoform of versican, are highly expressed in the adult brain. the deposition of these lecticans is heterogeneous in the complex ecm of pnns and in the neuropil  <cit>  . functionally, cs side chains of the lecticans inhibit neurite elongation and even may stabilize synapses in neural networks  <cit> . among the lecticans, brevican is highly abundant in brain, where various isoforms are found including a >  <dig> kd molecule that carries 1– <dig> cs chains , a core  <dig> kd protein without cs , a  <dig> kd glycosylphosphatidylinositol-linked membrane-bound form, and  <dig> kd n-terminal, and  <dig> kd c-terminal fragments  that are the result of endopeptidase cleavage of the holoprotein. the proteases mainly responsible for cleavage of brevican are glutamyl-endopeptidases, the adamtss  . several of these multi-domain proteases  <cit>  are expressed in brain   <cit>   and cleave aggrecan  <cit> , versican  <cit>  and brevican  <cit>  . adamts-cleaved fragments of each lectican are found in untreated nervous tissue extracts  <cit> , indicating that adamtss are active proteases capable of cleaving lecticans in a "normal" nervous system. fragments of lecticans may be localized in brain tissue sections by using antibodies raised against the terminal, neoepitope sequence of the core protein that is exposed after adamts cleavage  <cit> . using an antibody that recognizes the c-terminal residues  that are uncovered after adamts-induced release of the n-terminal fragment of brevican  <cit> , we noted that the distribution of this immunoreactivity in rat hippocampus was markedly different from wfa reactivity in the same region. we expected that the distribution of the signal from both reagents would be similar, since both n- and c-terminal fragments of brevican appear to be stable after cleavage  <cit> , and the preponderance of the c-terminal fragments bear cs chains. thus, the purpose of this study was to describe the distribution and characteristic immunoreactivity for the adamts-cleaved fragment of brevican, and compare this with wfa binding in the rodent cns. the results show a marked discordance between the two, with the breadth of distribution of the adamts-derived brevican fragment being much wider than that of wfa reactivity.

RESULTS
brevican exists in rodent brain ecm as a holoprotein, in part, with a central region that bears cs chains and globular terminal domains which do not. when brevican is detected on western blot using an n-terminal region antibody, a  <dig> kd, n-terminal fragment of brevican is prominent. the predominant protease responsible for this cleavage is adamts-derived, glutamyl-endopeptidase activity. the neoepitope antibody used in these experiments, anti-eavese, represents the c-terminal sequence exposed on the n-terminal,  <dig> kd fragment of brevican after adamts cleavage  <cit>  . to verify that this antibody recognizes adamts-cleaved brevican, the cs-bearing form of brevican was partially purified on a deae anion exchange matrix, and the pg-containing eluant was incubated with active human recombinant adamts <dig>  as shown in fig.  <dig>  when a western blot of the deae extract was probed using an n-terminal region monoclonal, anti-brevican antibody, a smear >  <dig> kd was observed . after digestion by adamts <dig>  the abundance of the holoprotein was markedly reduced with the appearance of a  <dig> kd n-terminal fragment . when probed with polyclonal anti-eavese, little or no anti-eavese immunoreactive fragment was present in the deae extract prior to digestion  , however, after cleavage of brevican by human recombinant adamts <dig>  the same  <dig> kd fragment was apparent . this indicates that n-terminal, adamts-cleaved brevican is recognized by anti-eavese as a  <dig> kd, n-terminal fragment, the same fragment detected using a general n-terminal region anti-brevican antibody.

in an effort to identify the molecular species in rodent brain detected by the n-terminal region, anti-brevican antibody, those detected by anti-eavese, and by biotin-wfa, cortical homogenates from rat and mouse brain that were either pre-treated with chase or were left untreated were subjected to sds-page and probed with the reagents . when soluble brain extracts were probed with the n-terminal region anti-brevican antibody, the pattern of brevican immunoreactivity included a smear of immunoreactivity found at >  <dig> kd, a distinct  <dig> kd band and a  <dig> kd, n-terminal fragment of brevican . chase treatment eliminated the smear in the mouse sample with an associated increase in the  <dig> kd holoprotein without cs in both the mouse and rat samples . chase treatment did not alter the intensity of the  <dig> kd fragment, and this same n-terminal fragment was identified  when the membrane was probed with anti-eavese  or anti-eamese  . interestingly, signals observed with streptavidin-hrp to identify proteins on blots that bind to biotin-wfa did not correspond to the molecular weight of any isoform of brevican. in fact, the very high molecular weight smear observed in cortical extract was the only wfa-reactive species modestly diminished after incubation with chase . two of the major bands seen in this blot, however, were non-specific binding signals that were present when membrane was probed with streptavidin-hrp alone . when brain homogenates were differentially centrifuged to obtain "membrane" and "soluble" fractions, the majority of brevican immunoreactivity was found in the soluble fraction , yet the generalized and adamts derived fragments were found in both fractions . however, the major signals observed after probing with biotin-wfa were found mainly in the "insoluble", membrane fraction . these results indicate that brevican isoforms were undetected when probed with biotinylated wfa on membranes. to verify that the effect of chase on the high molecular weight, wfa reactive smear was due solely to degradation of polysaccharides , samples were treated with chase in the absence and presence of protease inhibitor cocktail . in both rat and mouse samples, the pattern of wfa reactivity was identical, whether or not the samples contained protease inhibitor cocktail. these results suggest that wfa does indeed bind to a high molecular weight, cs moiety that is removed after chase treatment, but that is clearly different from brevican. to verify the effectiveness of chase digestion, the same membrane was probed with anti-brevican antibody which showed complete removal of cs chains and a marked increase in the abundance of the core protein in chase-treated samples  with no change in the abundance of fragment.

this discordance between biotin-wfa and anti-brevican reactivity was not region specific, because when cerebellum, brain stem, temporal lobe and diencephalon extracts were probed with anti-brevican, anti-eamese and biotin-wfa, similar results were observed . nonetheless, biotin-wfa was highly effective at identifying neurons in the cns that were surrounded by pnns, and minor reactivity was also found in the neuropil in both rat and mouse tissue sections . note the abundant pnns in retrosplenial cortex  and scattered pnns in parietal cortex. the intense signal was nearly abolished by pre-incubating the tissue section with high concentrations of chase . when streptavidin-alexa  <dig> was incubated alone, the section was completely blank . in addition, immunoreactivity for anti-eavese was not influenced at all by chase pre-treatment of a tissue section . these results suggest that whatever moiety is bound by wfa is released upon treatment with chase, yet the n-terminal brevican fragment that does not bear cs chains is unaffected by chase as would be predicted.

there are several regions of the brain where there is distinctive and discordant reactivity between wfa and the adamts-derived n-terminal fragment of brevican. particularly, the reticular thalamic nucleus shows prominent staining with wfa in both the rat and mouse  whereas the barrels of the ventral posteriolateral and posteriomedial thalamic nuclei are most evident in the rat, compared to the mouse . in contrast, anti-eavese immunoreactivity is weak in the reticular thalamus, but highly prominent between the barrels in the posteriolateral and medial nuclei . there were also striking differences seen in the hippocampus and surrounding cortex as well. mostly the neuropil layers of the dorsal hippocampus contain weak to absent staining with wfa, the exceptions being the ca2-ca <dig> transition region, the molecular layer of the lateral blade and the polymorphic layer  of the dentate gyrus and the fasciola cinereum . however, clear pnns were found in and just adjacent to the pyramidal cell layer in the stratum oriens in ammon's horn. these hippocampal neurons containing pnns were more abundant in the mouse compared to the rat . in addition, the white matter regions of the corpus callosum, external capsule and alveus were all intensely stained by wfa; however, at least a portion of this staining was not eliminated after chase treatment of the sections . staining by anti-eavese showed comparatively intense immunoreactivity in the hippocampal neuropil, especially the stratum oriens, and this staining reached the pyramidal cell layer  where there was a cobblestone appearance of this layer . scattered pnns were noted in and around the pyramidal cell layer, similar to wfa staining, and some of these appeared to co-localize with wfa reactivity in the mouse . in the cerebellum, the lobular molecular layer was weakly stained by wfa, the granular layer contained heavily labeled neuropil and pnns and lobule white matter . the white matter was perfectly negative for reaction product to eavese, however, marked immunoreactivity was observed in the granular layer, especially as pnns surrounding the aligned purkinje cells that make up the molecular-granular layer interface . interestingly, these aligned purkinje neurons have previously been shown to be labeled with parvalbumin but not by wfa  <cit> .

neurons with pnns that contain eavese fragment are not quite as abundant as those identified by wfa, but they appear to have a broad distribution. pnns containing the brevican fragment were broadly distributed in cerebral cortex in layers distinct from pnns surrounded by wfa reactivity, . in murine cerebral cortex, anti-eamese immunoreactivity was found mostly in deep cortical layer iv where sporadic neurons containing wfa-reactive pnns were located. for wfa reactivity, an intensely-stained region was primary somatosensory cortex . however, most neurons with wfa reactive pnns were found in layer iii, and the superficial region of layer iv was deficient in pnns positive for wfa or anti-eamese . both reagents show a similar distribution in the rat . another region of cortex that is intensely labeled by both wfa and anti-eavese was retrosplenial cortex . anti-eavese immunoreactive pnns and intense fiber staining were found in the horizontal limb of the diagonal band, the medial septum and in piriform cortex .

immunoreactivity for brevican holoprotein was distributed throughout the cns neuropil and in pnns as has been identified by others  <cit> . neurons with pnns that contain brevican immunoreactivity are clearly more abundant than those identified by wfa. brevican immunoreactivity was broadly distributed in cerebral cortex in layers distinct from pnns surrounded by wfa reactivity, , although there was a higher percentage of brevican immunoreactive cells that co-localize with wfa compared to that of eavese immunoreactivity. in murine cerebral cortex, anti-brevican immunoreactivity was found in neuropil and pnns of cortical layers ii, iii and deep layer iv and v, whereas the most abundant distribution of neurons containing wfa-reactive pnns were found in layer iii. both reagents showed a similar distribution in the rat . a higher magnification of cortex reveals pnns that are positive for brevican and wfa reactivity . a confocal micrograph of retrosplenial cortex stained with anti-brevican, biotin-wfa and dapi, demonstrated that there are clearly pnns that co-localize and are reactive for both reagents . while many pnns were immunoreactive for brevican, other pnns were reactive toward wfa alone, . pnns reactive with wfa and not brevican, expressed other cs-containing pgs or n-acetylgalactosamine containing molecules. a complete localization of anti-brevican, anti-eavese, and biotinylated wfa pnns and their reactivity in the neuropil of the cns, with semi-quantitation for both reagents may be found in additional files    .

discussion
recent evidence indicates that ecm molecules are important regulators of structural neural plasticity, and regional expression in the cns may be indicative of their role. localization of brevican by immunohistochemistry  <cit>  and in situ hybridization  <cit>  within the cns revealed high expression in cerebellar and cerebral cortex, hippocampus and thalamic nuclei and brain stem. it is localized perisynaptically, it inhibits neurite outgrowth  <cit>  and it is thought to stabilize neural networks in the adult  <cit> . in contrast, conditions that augment the proteolytic cleavage of brevican, especially adamts-induced cleavage, are associated with enhanced neural plasticity  <cit> . here, an antibody which selectively recognizes the neoepitope sequence of brevican that is uncovered upon proteolysis by an adamts was used to map the distribution of this fragment in untreated rodent cns. this pattern was compared to the distribution of pnns and neuropil stained by the classical reagent wfa. by both western blot and immunochemistry, the adamts-derived fragment of brevican appeared to be stable, abundant and widely-distributed. there was a discordance between the regional and local expression of classical pnns identified by wfa and regions where the proteolytic fragment of brevican was most highly expressed. in addition, there appeared to be an association between regions with significant deposition of the brevican fragment and areas known to be involved in neural plasiticity , supporting the involvement of adamtss in neural plasticity mechanisms  <cit> . wfa staining in these regions was notably low.

a significant proportion of total brevican immunoreactivity in brain extracts was found as a fragment formed by proteolytic cleavage of the intact holoprotein. in fact, all antibodies raised against the brevican holoprotein, intended only to detect the holoprotein, inherently recognize either the n- or c-terminal proteolytically-cleaved fragment. proteolysis of lecticans may be an important mechanism by which the nervous system overcomes inhibition exerted by pgs during periods of neural plasticity. after systemic injection of the excitotoxin, kainic acid  <cit>  or after discrete, unilateral lesion of the entorhinal cortex  <cit> , there was an increase in the abundance of an adamts-derived brevican fragment in the dentate gyrus, the target of projections from entorhinal cortex and a region where sprouting occurs in response to the lesion. thus, proteolytic cleavage of pgs may be a key mechanism involved in sprouting and reorganization of the dentate gyrus, whereas intact pgs may promote neural stabilization.

there is debate in the literature about which molecule in the cns are labeled by wfa, and here we investigated whether wfa binds to the cs-bearing lectican, brevican. wfa is a lectin that binds to n-acetylgalactosamine-linked α or β to the  <dig> or  <dig> position of galactose  <cit> . wfa is often used as marker for pnns that contain cs chains, yet only indirect evidence suggests that wfa binds to cs polymers. our data show that wfa clearly did not recognize cs-containing brevican on western blot of soluble brain extracts, although there was at least one high molecular weight wfa reactive band that was diminished upon treatment with chase. no corresponding bands were observed at the molecular weights representing any isoform of brevican. in addition, the preponderance of brevican was found in the soluble fraction of brain extract, whereas wfa reactivity was mainly located in the particulate, insoluble fraction after differential centrifugation of brain extract. these results reveal that wfa binds molecules that differ from the lectican, brevican, although the possibility that wfa has a differential affinity for selected sulfated forms of cs cannot be excluded. murakami et al has gathered convincing data that indicates that wfa binds to cell surface glycoproteins. this group showed that terminal n-acetylgalactosamine residues, which are present on neuronal cell surface glycoproteins, are responsible for the pnn reactivity seen with wfa lectin binding  <cit> . based on a series of studies using degradative enzymes to define the presence or absence of polysaccharides bound to ecm proteins, their model suggests that perineuronal proteoglycans, such as brevican, bind to these cell surface glycoproteins. chase treatment removes the terminal n-acetylgalactosamine from these glycoproteins, thereby releasing the lectican from its binding partner on the cell surface. this may, in part, account for the discordance in reactivity seen here between brevican and wfa.

no direct evidence exists, to our knowledge, of wfa binding to any specific cs-containing pg, including the lecticans. however, the reactivity observed with wfa and antibodies generated against cs chains are similarly distributed in rat brain  <cit>  , such as in pnns, and binding of wfa to fixed brain sections is diminished or lost after chase treatment  <cit> . nonetheless, there may be a host of proteins present in ecm complexes and it is possible, in fact likely, that wfa binds to a molecule that may be indirectly bound to cs. in any case, no biochemical evidence is available to show that wfa binds to large polymeric chains of repeating disaccharides that contain n-acetylgalactosamine.

the differential distribution between wfa and the fragment of brevican may relate to their functional environment, i.e. greater abundance of intact cs-bearing pgs chains in regions stained with wfa  whereas increased in proteolytic cleavage stained the neoepitope fragment in regions that are capable of undergoing neural plasticity. these findings are intriguing since we observe intense immunoreactivity for the adamts-derived brevican fragment in areas thought to be highly plastic such as the hippocampus. therefore, the relative abundance of cleaved proteoglycans, such as brevican, in a particular region suggest a functional change in surrounding ecm complexes which may contribute to overall neural plasticity. however, the data presented here only begin to uncover the intricate molecular environment around individual neurons that modulate their function and structure.

CONCLUSIONS
a marked discordance was observed in the regional localization between wfa and brevican or the proteolytically-derived n-terminal fragment of brevican. functionally, this difference may correspond to regions with varied prevalence for neural stability/plasticity.

