BACKGROUND
rnai is an emerging technology using a natural mechanism to inhibit gene expression via the degradation of target mrnas through sirna. we have been exploring rnai for the purpose of modifying the vascular response to injury especially during graft implantation, employing endothelial cells and vascular smooth muscle cells, under various conditions and technology for sirna delivery . although these studies have displayed promise of rnai therapy as an alternative means to treat vascular diseases, there is so far no study discussing how transfection reagent alone and in combination with non-targeting  sirnas affect gene expression level.

our group is interested in developing sirna based therapies to treat vascular bypass grafts, both vein and prosthetic, to prevent vascular graft failure. injury to the graft and the host artery during graft implantation is the most important trigger for the downstream graft failure. vascular smooth muscle cells play a major role in the failure process and thus are often targeted for therapeutic intervention. thus in the present study the cells chosen were haosmcs .

when determining the effectiveness of sirna silencing of a target gene, the standard control has been a comparison with control sirna. in our laboratory we have used a series of controls. for example, if using a transfection reagent, our controls would be:  <dig>  saline alone.  <dig>  transfection reagent alone.  <dig>  transfection reagent plus control sirna. we have noticed differences between these controls with regard to expression of the target gene, raising the question of the control effects on total genomic expression. for example, if the transfection reagent alters target gene expression and that is different from the transfection reagent plus the control sirna, which is the better control? can we count on the control sirna to have no effect on target gene expression? should saline or balanced salt solution be the appropriate control as it is least likely to affect target gene transcription? in this study, experiments were designed to determine the global effects on gene transcription of saline, a transfection reagent, and the transfection reagent plus control sirna using rna sequencing. since our goal is to treat vascular bypass grafts with sirna, we chose a transfection reagent pei, as this is frequently used for in vivo applicability. control sirnas were obtained from invitrogen and dharmacon.

RESULTS
unsupervised clustering suggests that untreated  and haosmcs treated with p, pi and pd are transcriptionally different
haosmcs were either treated with pei alone , invitrogen control sirna complexed with pei  or dharmacon control sirna complexed with pei  for  <dig> h. haosmcs that were left untreated  served as the experimental control. after treatment, cells were subjected to rna isolation as described above. after preprocessing and normalization of rna sequencing data we performed unsupervised analysis using pca to determine relationship between different treatment groups as well as samples within each group. the unsupervised analysis demonstrated that samples are separated on the basis of transfection that is nt versus p, pi and pd along primary component   <dig> . the samples from pei alone group depicted maximum transcriptional differences as compared to control nt, pi and pd groups along primary component   <dig>  biological replicates from most of the groups clustered together indicating similar transcriptome profile.fig.  <dig> principle component analysis  of haosmcs that were treated as follows: no treatment , pei alone , pei combined with control sirna from invitrogen  and pei combined with control sirna from dharmacon sirna . pca analysis of three replicates in each treatment group suggests that nt and haosmcs treated with p, pi and pd form different clusters indicating that these treatment groups are transcriptionally different from each other



inflammation and apoptosis related genes are upregulated/activated due to pei transfection
pei , which comes in two forms; linear and branched polymer, has been extensively used as a non-viral cationic carrier to deliver drugs or genes into the cells via proton sponge effects  <cit> . the supervised comparison of nt samples with p only samples identified  <dig> significantly differentially expressed genes with false discovery rate < <dig> % and at least 2-fold change. out of  <dig> differentially expressed genes,  <dig> and  <dig> were significantly downregulated and upregulated respectively . treatment with p upregulated multiple genes linked to cell-mediated immune response and inflammatory response including prostaglandin-endoperoxide synthase   <dig>  nicotinamide phosphoribosyltransferase , most prominently several chemokines and chemokine receptors genes such as chemokine  ligand - <dig>  cxcl- <dig>  cxcl- <dig>  il-1a, il- <dig>  chemokine  ligand - <dig> and colony stimulating factor - <dig> .fig.  <dig> transcriptional and biological characterization of alteration in haosmc induced by pei.  heatmap of genes that are significantly differentially expressed due to treatment with pei alone  compared to no treatment . in the heatmap, rows depict differentially expressed genes and columns depict three replicates each of nt and p treated haosmc. the relative expression level of genes is shown using a pseudocolor scale from − <dig> to + <dig>  colors indicate standardized values .  functional categories enrichment analysis of all significantly differentially expressed genes, and  pathways enrichment analysis of all significantly differentially expressed genes



to understand the underlying biological mechanism of alterations induced due to pei treatment, we performed gene-ontology  categories and canonical pathways analysis. the go analysis of differentially expressed genes identified significantly affected categories  that include cytokine activity, inflammatory response, chemokine activity and immune response . furthermore, pathways analysis on the list of differentially expressed genes identified significant pathways  that include, granulocyte adhesion and diapedesis, peroxisome proliferator-activated receptor  signaling, il- <dig> signaling, and il- <dig> signaling . these pathways that are triggered by immune systems in response to pei transfection, play a critical role in multiple diseases including cancer, immunological and neurodegenerative diseases. the activation of immune and inflammatory pathways  <dig> h after in vitro transfection with pei at the vendor recommended n/p ratio in haosmcs suggests toxicity associated with pei.

transcriptional alterations due to control sirna compared to pei alone
to understand the non-specific transcriptional alterations induced by control sirna when combined with pei, we performed global rna sequencing on samples transfected with control unlabeled sirna from invitrogen or dharmacon combined with pei. the transfection of samples with control unlabeled sirna from invitrogen or dharmacon compared to pei alone significantly altered   <dig> and  <dig> genes respectively . a significant number  of genes were commonly altered by unlabeled sirna from invitrogen or dharmacon  suggesting similar mechanisms that may affect transcriptional profile of the cells. to understand the biological mechanism underlying the alterations induced by control sirna transfection, we performed functional and pathways enrichment analysis on the genes that were commonly altered by both invitrogen and dharmacon control sirna. the functions uniting commonly differentially expressed genes were dominated by functions involved in cell proliferation and growth and immune/inflammatory response . further pathways analysis on commonly affected genes depicted significant enrichment in inflammatory response pathways including granulocyte/agranulocyte adhesion and diapedesis. these pathways are the primary line of host defense against infection by bacterial pathogens and are rapidly recruited to sites of bacterial invasion suggesting that control sirnas are probably recognized as foreign entities  <cit> .fig.  <dig> transcriptional characterization of alteration induced in haosmc by transfection with pei combined with control sirna from invitrogen  or dharmacon .  heat map of significantly differentially expressed genes due to transfection with pi or pd,  functional categories significantly altered due to transfection with pi,  functional categories that depict pattern of alteration  due to transfection with pd. no functional category was found significant after multiple test correction, and  venn diagram depicting genes common between haosmc treated with pi and pd



control sirna and pei lead to immune systems and inflammation related transcriptional changes
compared to nt, transfection of cells with either pi or pd resulted in significant transcriptional changes . the transfection of cells with pi resulted in dysregulation of  <dig> genes , mostly dominated by genes linked to inflammation related pathways including “agranulocyte/granulocyte adhesion and diapedesis”, “farnesoid x receptor/ retinoid x receptor  activation”, “acute phase response signaling”, “dendritic cell maturation”, “il- <dig> signaling”, “p <dig> mitogen-activated protein kinase  signaling”, and “ppar signaling” . similarly, transfection of cells with pd resulted in dysregulation of  <dig> genes , which are dominated by genes linked to inflammation related pathways comparable to pi . thus, transfection with both dharmacon and invitrogen non-targeting control sirnas resulted in inflammation response similar to host defense response against infection of bacteria’s or viruses described above. the analysis identified a core set of  <dig> overlapping genes that are significantly altered due to transfection of cells with p, pi or pd . this core set of overlapping genes is dominated by genes linked to immune/inflammatory and cell proliferation including kinesin family member -1a, stat- <dig>  ccl- <dig>  superoxide dismutase - <dig>  il-36b, csf- <dig>  and il3-6rn . these genes have also been linked to vascular dysregulation and the associations are listed in table  <dig> fig.  <dig> transcriptional characterization of alteration induced in haosmc by pei alone  or pei combined with control sirna from invitrogen  or dharmacon .  venn diagram depicting overlap among the genes that are differentially expressed in haosmc due to p alone, pi or pd as compared to no treatment ,  functions significantly altered due to transfection with pi and pd,  pathways significantly altered due to transfection with pi and pd, and  heatmap of  <dig> common significantly differentially expressed genes due to transfection with p, pi or pd



systems biology oriented analysis of control sirna transcriptional changes to identify key master regulators
to gain further insight into the impact of control sirna transfection of cells, we performed systems biology oriented analysis on the transcripts that are differentially expressed after transfection with pi or pd. the regulatory analysis was performed using ingenuity pathway analysis   <dig>  . the regulatory analysis of the transcripts that were differentially expressed after transfection with pi depicted activation of il- <dig> response . il- <dig> is a key inflammatory cytokine and its overexpression leads to inflammatory responses by initiating nuclear factor kappa beta  cascade, edema, and the growth of leukocytes  <cit> . in addition to il <dig>  there was also a strong activation of immune response as illustrated by the upregulation of multiple proinflammatory chemokines and cytokines as well as nfkb cascade -4) and their upstream and downstream target molecules . similar analysis of pd transfected cells revealed involvement of cell proliferation and growth related molecules such as gata- <dig> and ezh- <dig>  these results suggest that control sirna, irrespective of the brand  can lead to activation of the immune and growth pathways at the transcriptional level.fig.  <dig> interactive network of top regulatory molecules significantly altered in haosmc by treatment with pei combined with control sirna from invitrogen  or dharmacon . a pi, and  pd



validation of changes in key genes using qrt-pcr
to confirm our findings from the rnaseq study using qrt-pcr we validated a few key genes that were differentially regulated and are known to be involved in vascular dysfunction . our results confirm that as compared to nt, haosmc treated with p, pi and pd show an upregulation of ccl <dig>  stat <dig>  il-1a and il-1b gene expression . consistent with our rnaseq data, most significant effects were observed with hoasmc treatment with p and pd. with significant changes in global gene expression, housekeeping genes may also show differential expression, making them unreliable and thereby discrediting the qrt-pcr analysis. pei is known to affect the gene expression of commonly used housekeeping gene glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate dehydrogenase   <cit> , hence in this study we used another commonly used housekeeping gene, b2m. expression of b2m gene was not different between the different treatment groups suggesting that b2m could be used reliably as a housekeeping gene.fig.  <dig> validation of differentially regulated genes using qrt-pcr in haosmc that were either left untreated  or treated with pei alone , pei combined with control sirna from invitrogen , or dharmacon . gene expression of  ccl <dig>   stat <dig>   il-1α,  il-1β, and  raw ct value of b2m. 



discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
we have examined in detail the transcriptome response to a commonly used transfection reagent, pei alone or in combination with one of two commonly used control sirnas . our results demonstrate a broad and significant change in the transcriptome in response to the transcription reagent and a further change as a result of addition of the control sirna.

our data demonstrate that the transcription reagent pei induces an extensive transcriptome response in cultured aosmc. the affected genes include several genes that might be seen as targets in an rnai therapeutic strategy such as for the treatment of vascular diseases, cancer or modifying the inflammatory response. for example, ptgs <dig> or cylcooxygenase - <dig> that are altered in our present study are associated with atherosclerosis and have been shown to be upregulated by the prostacyclin-mimetic, iloprost in human vascular smc  <cit> . similarly, another altered gene in the study, nampt, is also linked to atherosclerosis and its inhibition has attenuated atherosclerotic plaque formation through cxcl- <dig> mediated activities on neutrophils  <cit> . the pei effect is additionally altered when the control sirna is combined with the pei. pathways analysis of commonly affected genes showed significant enrichment in inflammatory response pathways including granulocyte/agranulocyte adhesion and diapedesis. the genes involved in these pathways are the primary line of host defense against bacterial infection and are rapidly recruited to sites of bacterial invasion  <cit> . system biology analysis further demonstrated overexpression of inflammatory ctyokines such as il- <dig>  ccl- <dig>  gata- <dig> and ezh- <dig>  il <dig> and ccl <dig> are prominent inflammatory cytokines implicated in multiple inflammatory diseases such as atherosclerosis, rheumatoid arthritis  and alzheimer’s diseases  <cit> . gata  <dig> is involved in transcription and cell maturation and has been shown to be associated with multiple cancers and cardiovascular diseases . ezh- <dig> activation results in increase in histone methylation causing inhibition of multiple tumor suppressor genes resulting in cancer progression. it is interesting to note that our results are contradictory to the findings obtained in the study of off-target effects in human fibroblast cells after being transfected with control sirnas obtained commercially  <cit> . while present study showed enhancement in inflammatory responses, their study demonstrated inhibition of innate immune system through the reduction of nfκb signaling after the cells were transfected with control sirnas  <cit> . however, it could be possible that this is a cell-specific effect. we have previously reported differential susceptibility of endothelial and smooth muscle cells to different transfection reagents  <cit> .

in the end, the transcriptome of a commonly used control for rnai experiments is no longer representative of the transcriptome of untreated cells. whether this response to pei will hold for other transfection reagents remains to be seen. however until proven otherwise it is prudent to assume that is the case and not limit controls in rnai cell culture studies to the transfection reagent combined with a control sirna. the present study justifies the use of two additional controls: untreated cells, and transfection reagent alone. these controls will determine if the target gene expression is altered and whether it is a consequence of the transfection reagent alone or transfection reagent combined with a control sirna.

our data show that gene silencing studies using pei in conjunction with either of the two popular control sirnas must be regarded as relative to a very altered transcriptome. this places limits on the predictive value for clinical application of many gene-silencing experiments. for example, an experiment might be designed to see if sirna can effectively diminish expression of il- <dig>  a key inflammatory cytokine involved in numerous diseases. demonstration of effectiveness might then lead to consideration of therapeutic use of il- <dig> sirna to control the disease. however, the consequences of the transfection reagent and the control sirna may increase expression of il- <dig> to the point where, even with relative silencing, the expression of il- <dig> is actually greater than in the resting cell state. it would then be a mistake to assume that the same rnai strategy would be effective as a therapeutic in the control of the disease using il- <dig> as a target. in fact, it might be harmful because the net effect would be an increase in expression of the undesired gene. our data show the multiple biologic systems that respond to the transfection reagent, especially inflammatory and immune related pathways. this is understandable based on the cell membrane injury associated with pei. less clear is the source of the additional transcriptome response precipitated by the control sirna.

with regard to therapeutic strategies, global expression consequences of a transfection reagent and non-coding sirna might also be harmful by increasing expression of off target genes that have undesired effects. or, the strategy might decrease expression of genes that have desired effects. of note here, is that we have examined one time point,  <dig> h. however it is possible that dysregulated off target genes seen at  <dig> h might subsequently have downstream effects on the chosen target at a later time-point. these are important considerations in designing translational experiments using in vivo models. before predicting the ultimate outcome of silencing a high profile target, it is necessary to follow the complete flare of the transcriptome response to the transfection reagent plus sirna. this is extremely important for our work focused on the use on sirna-based therapy for the prevention of graft failure. vascular graft failure is a multi-factorial and sequential phenomenon with complex components including smooth muscle and endothelial cells. the work presented here is an attempt to understand the basic response of the smooth muscle cells to pei and the different control sirnas. eventually, we will be conducting similar study in other cell types including endothelial cells before embarking on the use of pei in an in vivo study. more importantly, irrespective of the disease model, any sirna-based therapy will be subjected to a similar scrutiny before its use in an in vivo system.

based on our study, it can be argued that the global transcriptome response of any rnai based strategy should be determined before commencing clinical trials. off target effects must be assumed and should be clearly defined to minimize the risk of doing more harm than good.

