BACKGROUND
the tunicate pyura chilensis molina  <dig>  is a solitary ascidian found along the humboldt current system  from 10°s to 44°s along the southeast pacific coast  <cit> . they are found in subtidal rocky habitats, as solitary individuals and as patches that vary in size from a few to thousands of individuals. when living together, they form a matrix structure. the tunics are cemented to the substratum, either attached to rocks or to floating structures such as ropes, buoys, boats and ship hulls. adult hermaphrodites and a short-lived free larva characterize the life history of p. chilensis. it is a digonic protandrous hermaphrodite that even though it has the ability to self-fertilize, cross-fertilization is the main reproductive strategy when conspecifics are close enough  <cit> . the larvae spend from  <dig> to 24 hours in the water column, providing the species with a relatively low intrinsic dispersal potential. pyura chilensis is intensively harvested along its distributional range for human consumption, especially towards the southern area. it is considered an important benthic resource and is subject to regulations and management practices. in chile, restocking programs can be established for benthic resources such as p. chilensis, upon request of the fisherman’s association in charge of a management area. pyura chilensis is not only relevant as a resource by itself, but also as an ecosystem component that favors the presence of the highly priced muricid gastropod concholepas concholepas. because of its ecological and economic relevance, restocking programs have been undertaken even in the absence of baseline knowledge of the genetic structure of the species. the only population genetic study to date on p. chilensis was carried out using two allozyme loci and three local populations  <cit> . the study revealed slight but significant differentiation between individuals from the southernmost locality analyzed. given the low number of loci and populations analyzed, the result can be considered as preliminary with respect to the understanding of the genetic structure of the species. however, the greater differentiation of the southern populations could be reflecting a real signature of the geographic variation of the genetic diversity of p. chilensis. since allozymes are highly conserved markers when compared to dna sequences, individuals of p. chilensis from the southern area of the species geographic distribution will probably also be significantly differentiated with commonly used phylogeographic markers such as mitochondrial dna.

phylogeographic patterns of marine species do not follow a simple predictive arrangement within a biogeographic region or a taxon and contradictory results have highlighted the overall complex idiosyncrasy of genetic structure patterns . exceptionally, the geographic structure of the genetic diversity of coastal species along the hcs has shown a consistent association between dispersal potential  and the degree of genetic homogeneity based on several analyses of mitochondrial dna sequence data . additionally, most taxa with low dispersal potential studied so far along the hcs display a phylogeographic break coincident with a biogeographic transition zone in the vicinity of 30-33°s in the chilean coast .

although scarcely studied along the coast of chile, paleoclimatic events such as the pleistocene climatic oscillations have been shown to shape the genetic structure of some marine taxa. the last 130000 years have been characterized by strong climatic variations in sea-surface temperature and sea level. species with short-lived larvae may have been more affected by sea-level changes, because local populations may become isolated during low sea level due to vicariant barriers. additionally, species with broad geographic distributions with respect to their dispersal potential and species with large population sizes are more likely to show past evolutionary events . subsequent sea level rises could provide the opportunity for secondary contact between divergent lineages  <cit> . depending on interbreeding capabilities, secondary contact could lead to greater variability within the species or cryptic speciation. the pleistocene contraction-expansion model invokes repeated population fluctuations linked to glacial and interglacial periods  <cit>  and that have engendered genetic signatures on several marine species  <cit> . even in the same geographic area species may differ in the effect of past paleoclimatic events, and on which event triggered the effect. for example, pleistocene climatic oscillations, including the last glacial maximum  and previous events, have affected some coastal species of the northeastern pacific while others show stasis  <cit> . for the coast of chile, paleoclimate’s influence has been suggested as a possible cause for transient allopatry, resulting in two closely related lineages of the kelp lessonia <cit> . other phylogeographic studies that focused on southern chile, at 43°s and higher latitudes where pleistocene glaciation cycles were intense, also have linked genetic patterns with paleoclimate  <cit> . however, for taxa that live along the hcs, there are no clear examples of the effects of paleoclimate on current genetic structure.

the goal of this study was to characterize the genetic structure of p. chilensis along ca. 1800 km with data from the mitochondrial gene cytochrome oxidase i , and the nuclear gene elongation factor  <dig> alpha , to determine the geographic distribution of the genetic diversity and differentiation, and evaluate the main drivers of the genetic structure. species of the hcs with low dispersal potential  are expected to have strong genetic structure, a phylogeographic break at 30°s, and a pattern of isolation by distance. results will provide a base-line scenario of the genetic diversity of p. chilensis to orient decision-making associated with management strategies, specifically restocking practices.

results revealed a contraction-expansion scenario of pyura chilensis coi lineages associated to pleistocene’s climatic oscillations, specifically sea level. coi lineages with wide sympatric geographic distribution had a degree of nuclear admixture consistent with lack of reproductive isolation of coi lineages. only one locality had individuals highly differentiated, with little nuclear admixture, and population substructure, but overall, p. chilensis showed a greater degree of homogeneity than expected given its life history.

RESULTS
phylogenetics of pyura chilensis
partial sequences of the coi and ef1a genes were obtained from individuals of pyura chilensis from eight local populations along the coast of chile from 26°08′s to 41°52′s . final truncated alignments consisted of  <dig> and  <dig> sequences of  <dig> and  <dig> nucleotides in length, for coi and ef1a, respectively. alignments of both genes had full open reading frames and matched with coding regions of the respective genes from genbank. the gene coi had a larger number of variable sites  than ef1a . of the variable sites,  <dig>  and  <dig>  were parsimony informative. data sets did not have evidence of mutation saturation  considering all data together or for each codon position separately. neutrality tests based on rates of synonymous  and non-synonymous  substitutions, did not allow rejecting the null hypothesis of neutral evolution for coi and ef1a sequences. both codon-based and sequence analyses dn were significantly lower than ds .
pyura chilensis, 
sampling localities and number of individuals analyzed of coi and ef1a

cytochrome oxidase i ; elongation factor  <dig> alpha .

phylogenetic reconstructions of the gene coi revealed three highly divergent, reciprocally monophyletic, and well-supported lineages within p. chilensis . hereon these coi haplogroups will be referred to as hg <dig>  hg <dig> and hg <dig> according to their relative abundances among the analyzed individuals of p. chilensis. the three haplogroups of p. chilensis showed a considerably lower divergence among them than there was between species pairs of the genus pyura . the coi hg <dig> was the basal haplogroup of p. chilensis ; this was also the most differentiated haplogroup bearing the longest branch . estimated times of divergence of the coi data based on a 3% myr- <dig> mutation rate indicated that from an ancestral lineage of p. chilensis, hg <dig> and hg <dig> diverged ca. 470000 years ago, while hg <dig> diverged from hg <dig> 260000 years ago. these time estimates have to be interpreted cautiously because of uncertainties in mutation rate, which could be much greater than the already high 3% myr- <dig> rate considered  <cit> . estimated dates matched cold marine isotope stages   <dig> and  <dig> of the pleistocene, cool glacial periods of low sea level.

the geographic distribution of the coi haplogroups reveals that two of them are sympatric throughout most of the range analyzed. the southern area has a greater overall coi diversity, because all three haplogroups are present there . coi hg <dig> was found at all sites, with a preponderant presence, and was the only one present in the northernmost site pa . this was the most abundant haplogroup at all localities excepting lm  . hg <dig> was found at cp  and southward , with greater frequency in the southern area, specifically in tl  and ac  . lastly, hg <dig> had a geographic distribution restricted to the two southernmost localities , and had greater relative abundance in lm  .

most ef1a sequences grouped in a star-like relationship, which separated with moderate support from a clade composed of  <dig> % of the individuals of the hg <dig> of lm . the ef1a gene tree neither provided resolution for coi hg <dig> or hg <dig>  nor for almost half of the individuals of the hg <dig> 

genetic structure of the ef1a snps of pyura chilensis
the ef1a sequence data had eight polymorphic sites  with over 5% of polymorphism. these were used to perform diallelic analyses, albeit using caution, given the highly linked loci analyzed. locus by locus and site by site tests for hardy-weinberg equilibrium  denoted  <dig> out of  <dig> comparisons out of equilibrium , six of them were in lm. most of these departures were associated with positive and significant f
is
 values . likewise, multilocus probabilities associated to hwe were non-significant except for lm  . when lm is subdivided according to the two divergent groups , both groups of lm accommodate to hardy-weinberg expectations, suggesting that the lack of hwe in lm is due to a wahlund effect.
pyura chilensis


p 
f


is

f


st

expected heterozygosity ; observed heterozygosity ; probability of deviation from hardy-weinberg equilibrium ); p  in bold indicate significant hwe departures after bonferroni correction; inbreeding coefficient ; fixation coefficient ; significant values are in bold .

based on the ef1a snps, only lm was significantly differentiated at the site level . population pairwise f
st
 values were in general low and non-significant; only lm was significantly differentiated from all other populations . isolation by distance was also non-significant  , and allele frequencies were similar between localities; only lm showed marked differences .

bayesian clustering analysis also supports the distinctiveness of lm based on ef1a snps. three clusters were recovered in the most likely scenario ; two widespread and currently admixed, and one that was present mostly in lm and that showed very low admixture . over 50% of the individuals of coi hg <dig> and coi hg <dig> were assigned with greater probability to bayesian k-cluster  <dig>  for these two haplogroups, there was also a high percentage of individuals assigned with greater probability to k-cluster  <dig> , showing that these two haplogroups have mixed nuclear ancestry. very few individuals of these two coi haplogroups were assigned to k-cluster  <dig>   <dig> % and 0% for hg <dig> and hg <dig>  respectively. coi hg <dig> shows a contrasting pattern, with  <dig> % of individuals assigned with greater probability to k-cluster  <dig>  and a smaller percentage assigned to k-clusters  <dig> and  <dig>   <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively .

genetic structure of haplotype data of coi and ef1a of pyura chilensis
haplotypic data of the coi gene had  <dig> haplotypes and the ef1a sequences led to  <dig> haplotypes. overall, diversity was very high in both genes analyzed . total haplotypic and nucleotidic diversities were  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the coi gene, and  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the ef1a gene. all coi haplogroups had the haplotypic diversity over  <dig> , while nucleotidic diversity ranged from  <dig>  in hg <dig> to  <dig>  in hg <dig> .
pyura chilensis


n
h
s
h
number of analyzed sequences ; number of haplotypes ; number of segregating sites ; haplotype diversity ; nucleotide diversity .

the geographic distribution of the genetic diversity varied between markers and coi haplogroups . coi hg <dig> had the highest diversity and number of private haplotypes in northern localities, while towards the south the proportion of shared alleles was greater. for coi hg <dig> and coi hg <dig> there is no clear diversity trend; hg <dig> had more private haplotypes than shared at most sites and hg <dig> was highly variable with most individuals sampled bearing a different haplotype. ef1a has a slightly greater diversity in the south than the north .

pairwise genetic differentiation values  of the haplotype data were in general low and non-significant. just as with the ef1a snp data, lm was significantly differentiated for the entire coi dataset, coi hg <dig> and for ef1a haplotypes . for the entire coi dataset and for coi hg <dig>  other sites were also significantly differentiated, yet not for coi hg <dig> or the ef1a haplotype data. coi hg <dig> appeared undifferentiated at all sites. samova analyses of haplotypic data consistently separated lm from other localities regardless of the data set used, although the optimal number of groups was generally  <dig> and the third group varied between data sets . the evaluation of isolation by distance revealed that none of the data sets  had significant correlations between genetic differentiation and geographic distance  and the association between the linearized genetic differentiation and geographic distance showed a poor correlation .
pyura chilensis


pairwise Φst estimates below the diagonal and snn values above diagonal. significant values in bold .

demographic structure differed between data sets . all coi, coi hg <dig>  and coi hg <dig> had significant tajima’s d and fu & li’s f values, which indicate a disequilibrium condition due either to the effects of natural selection or to a demographic and/or geographic expansion  <cit> . the five northern localities of coi hg <dig> had similar demographic signature based on tajima’s d and fu & li’s f values and on their mismatch frequency distributions . hg <dig> has more heterogeneous mismatch distributions per site, suggesting greater demographic independence between sites. mismatch frequency distribution analyses of coi hg <dig> and hg <dig> had higher p values associated with the geographic rather than with the demographic expansion model , and thus, the geographic model was used to estimate expansion times for the five northern sites of the coi hg <dig> and all coi hg <dig> data. based on a 3% myr- <dig> rate of substitution for coi, the estimated expansion times derived from the mismatch distribution’s τ values were 124000 years ago for the five northern sites of hg <dig> and 69000 years ago for hg <dig> . bayesian skyline plots displayed congruent estimates of expansion times .
pyura chilensis


d
f
p 
p 
p 
p 
tajima’s d ; fu & li’s f ; significant values in bold. sum of square deviation of the mismatch frequency distribution of the number of pairwise nucleotide differences ; probability associated to ssd ); harpending’s raggedness index ; probability associated to r ). values of ssd and r calculated for mismatch distribution expectations according to the demographic expansion model and the geographic expansion model.

discussion
isolation with divergence followed by expansion and admixture
phylogenetic analyses of coi sequences of p. chilensis revealed three reciprocally monophyletic haplogroups along the chilean coast, which are currently sympatric. the nuclear gene ef1a showed that coi haplogroups are admixed, especially the two that are geographically widespread. the divergence of the haplogroups coincides with low sea level and glaciated periods of the pleistocene. during low sea level periods bays and shallow sections of the coast could become isolated, as peninsulas and other coastal features, and thus, could cause vicariant events. a likely scenario is that p. chilensis underwent isolation with divergence of three coi haplogroups due to vicariant events associated to low sea level. divergence of hg <dig> and hg <dig>  occurred at separate times, mis  <dig> and  <dig> of the pleistocene, respectively. pleistocene glaciations have had a relevant role in diversification patterns of p. chilensis, as well as other marine species or species complexes  <cit> . for example, the mud crab scylla paramamosain, the sand goby species complex pomatoschitus minutus, and the spinefoot fish siganus fuscescens, all had population reductions associated to sea level regressions during the early pleistocene  <cit> .

after divergence in isolation, the two coi haplogroups of p. chilensis that are currently in sympatry, expanded their geographic ranges during sea level high-stands of the late pleistocene. tajima’s d, fu & li’s f values, mismatch frequency distributions, and bayesian skyline plots, evidenced expansions of coi hg <dig> and coi hg <dig>  estimated expansions were  <dig>  and  <dig>  years ago, during the last interglacial and sea level high-stand . in this time, sea level was higher than in the present time  <cit>  . the lgm did not leave strong genetic signatures nor did it erase signatures left by the previous paleoclimatic events. consistent with the inferences made for p. chilensis, many marine taxa had a constant population size throughout the last glaciations and lgm, with population expansions predating the lgm . sea level increases have been suggested to trigger demographic and/or geographic expansions in many marine taxa whose expansions pre-date the lgm  <cit> . for example, populations of the mud crab s. paramamosain, and many haplogroups of goby sicyopterus lagocephalus, experienced expansions during the same interglacial  that affected expansions of p. chilensis <cit> . water quality and shoreline characteristics change with sea level, which can lead to strong differences in habitat quality and population connectivity. most importantly, sea levels raises would abolish vicariant barriers that may have persisted throughout low sea level glacial periods  <cit> . in p. chilensis, sea level variations would have led to the current sympatric distribution of the three coi haplogroups that diverged in allopatry.

some of the individuals of the two widely distributed and sympatric coi haplogroups show mixed ancestry. bayesian clustering analyses of the snps of the nuclear ef1a gene showed that two of the three ancestral clusters identified were admixed in some individuals, indicating that the coi haplogroups did not become reproductively isolated from the acquired divergence. the topology of the ef1a gene tree of individual sequences  was also consistent with an admixture scenario; almost half of the ef1a sequences of the individuals of coi hg <dig>  grouped closer to the individuals of the other coi haplogroups. in the absence of admixture, all coi hg <dig> individuals would have grouped separately from hg <dig> and hg <dig>  there was a much higher degree of admixture between coi hg <dig> and coi hg <dig>  probably, secondary contact between coi haplogroups during interglacial times of the late pleistocene allowed nuclear admixture in p. chilensis. further analyses with more variable nuclear markers should highlight the degree of admixture of each pair of the coi haplogroups along the chilean coast.

ef1a did not show evidence of strong selection, and in specific aspects, ef1a showed a concordant pattern with the coi data. mainly, both markers showed that the local population in lm was highly differentiated . however, phylogenetic analyses showed a mismatch between the information content of each maker. it is worth noting that discordance between markers from different genomes has been frequently reported for other taxa, becoming a common and expected pattern in animals . both incomplete linage sorting and nuclear admixture-introgression can shape these seemingly contrasting phylogenetic patterns  <cit> . on the one hand, the isolation period that led to the coi divergence may have not been long enough to erase shared ancestral polymorphisms in the more conserved ef1a gene. the mitochondrial genome has a faster lineage sorting because it has one quarter of the effective population size of the nuclear genome, and incomplete lineage sorting is usually invoked when explaining significant differences in the patterns of differentiation of mitochondrial and nuclear sequences  <cit> , as the one observed between coi and ef1a of p. chilensis. on the other hand, detected phylogeographic patterns and nuclear admixture suggest that the discordant patterns of differentiation between mitochondrial dna and the ef1a gene are also a consequence of the nuclear admixture that occurred after secondary contact of the coi lineages, when they became sympatric.

some genetic structure, but less than expected
the degree of diversity encountered in the haplotype data was high even for ascidians e.g.,  <cit> , which are known to bear high genetic diversity presumably due to their large effective population size  <cit>  and fast mutational rate  <cit> . in spite of the degree of variation, and the short dispersal larval stage, in general, p. chilensis had low levels of differentiation and no isolation by distance was detected for any data sets. genetic differentiation and isolation by distance are expected when larval dispersal limits connectivity in species with wide geographic distributions. the short-lived larvae of p. chilensis should lead to greater differentiation with increasing geographic distance if larvae are the only means of connectivity. although lack of isolation by distance pattern does not directly imply connectivity, the detected diversity and structure , considered in conjunction with the life history of the species, shows that local populations of p. chilensis differ from the pattern expected for low dispersers in the hcs along the coast of chile . since p. chilensis is a hull biofouling species, the generalized low genetic structure, detection of admixture between two lineages, and lack of isolation by distance pattern, could be the consequence of effective gene flow mediated by maritime transport. commonly, species that disperse as biofouling show patterns of genetic structure that are dissociated with geographic distance. for example, the worldwide coi genetic structure of the tunicate styela plicata, a biofouling species, did not follow a pattern of isolation by distance, and there was non-significant structure between ocean basins  <cit> . many ascidians have spread by biofouling  <cit>  and as p. chilensis, they tend to have high genetic diversity .

ef1a snp data and haplotype data of coi and ef1a revealed that lm was unique with respect to the other analyzed local populations. lm showed high genetic diversity  and significant genetic differentiation. additionally, lm was the only site out of hardy-weinberg equilibrium , which could be due to strong evolutionary forces or to a wahlund effect. each divergent group within lm was in hwe when analyzed separately, supporting a scenario of a spatial wahlund effect in lm, i.e. population substructure and cryptic diversity. in addition to the genetic evidence of a wahlund effect, cross-fertilization is the predominant reproductive strategy of p. chilensis <cit> , reducing chances of inbreeding. heterozygote deficit linked to wahlund effects have been reported several times for ascidians  <cit> , now summing p. chilensis to the number of known ascidians that harbor cryptic diversity, at least in lm. another possible explanation for a strong apparent wahlund effect is that lm has been subject to restocking from source populations with differing genetic structure, and that restocking has been successful. however there are no records associated to formal restocking plans in the area to validate this possibility.

the uniqueness of lm, with high diversity and highly differentiated with both genes, could be due to lower maritime transport. ship routes along the coast of chile connect most localities analyzed, except lm that is located in a protected area distant from main shipping routes  <cit>  . the distance of lm to the main routes of transportation could explain the lower connectivity and higher differentiation of this locality. the possible effects of biofouling on the genetic structure of p. chilensis have to be further investigated with an appropriate sampling scheme and highly variable markers.

for management purposes it is worth noting that the southern area of distribution of p. chilensis harbored greater diversity, for the overall coi data and for the ef1a data. thus, the two molecular markers with different modes of inheritance detected that the southern area of the geographical distribution of p. chilensis, particularly lm, harbored an overall greater diversity and was highly differentiated from the rest. using allozymes, astorga and ortiz  <cit>  found that p. chilensis from puerto montt , the southernmost of the three locations analyzed , was the most differentiated. pm is at a latitude similar to ac from this study, however it is located on the eastern side of chiloe, in a more protected area. the most protected site we analyzed was lm. posibly p. chilensis from pm could be genetically similar to those from lm, considering their more sheltered habitat. given the high diversity and differentiation, the area around pm, described in astorga and ortiz  <cit> , and lm, studied herein, should be genetically characterized at a mesoscale to define population limits and estimate connectivity. the southern area should be considered as a strategic area in management plans. if restocking has to be programmed, plans should avoid affecting the genetic diversity in the vicinity of lm , or use it as a source area. ideally, movement of individuals between sites should be restricted to pairs of sites that are genetically/demographically undifferentiated and that have similar relative frequencies of coi haplogroups.

CONCLUSIONS
the use of mitochondrial and nuclear markers allowed detection of divergent mitochondrial haplogroups and nuclear admixture revealing no reproductive isolation between coi lineages. both the geographic isolation that led to the divergence of coi haplogroups and the geographic range shifts that led to current sympatry and admixture of coi haplogroups seem to have been forced by pleistocene’s glacial and interglacial cycles.

hull fouling cannot be discarded as a means of dispersal for p. chilensis given that there is a general homogeneity. the only site that had significant mitochondrial and nuclear differentiation, los molinos , was the one located the furthest from main maritime routes. the distance of lm to the main routes of transportation could explain the lower connectivity and higher differentiation of this locality. if restocking of p. chilensis has to be programmed, plans should avoid affecting the high and unique genetic diversity in the southern area of its distribution, particularly in los molinos .

