BACKGROUND
the properties of the bacterial cell envelope are pivotal for the interaction of bacteria and the host organism  <cit> . enterococcus faecalis expresses several cell-wall glycopolymers that make up the cell envelope, including capsular polysaccharides  <cit> , cell-wall carbohydrates  <cit> , cell-wall teichoic acid, lipoteichoic acid   <cit> , and glycolipids  <cit> . we have recently constructed a deletion mutant of the glycosyltransferase bgsa in e. faecalis  <cit> . deletion led to a profound shift of the equilibrium of the two main cell wall glycolipids: monoglucosyldiacylglycerol  accumulated in the cell membrane of the bgsa mutant, while the production of diglucosyldiacylglycerol  was completely abrogated  <cit> . the bgsa mutant displayed normal cell morphology and growth characteristics but was impaired in attachment to colonic epithelial cells, and biofilm formation was almost completely abolished  <cit> . remarkably, the lta content of the mutant was higher due to the increased length of the glycerol-phosphate polymer.

the role of glycolipids in membrane physiology has been investigated in the cell wall-less bacterium acholeplasma laidlawii, which produces glycolipids that are chemically identical to mglcdag and dglcdag of e. faecalis  <cit> . in acholeplasma, the ratio of dglcdag to mglcdag governs the lipid bilayer's elasticity, curvature, and surface-charge density  <cit> . interestingly, the pathway of glycolipid synthesis is highly conserved, and the type  <dig> family of ndp-glucose glycosyltransferases contains  <dig> udp-sugar glycosyltransferases of bacterial, fungal, and plant origin  <cit> . aside from their role as cell membrane components, glycolipids are also involved in the synthesis of lta in bacteria with low g+c content  <cit> . lta has a number of important functions in bacterial physiology including cation homeostasis, resistance to antimicrobial peptides, autolysin activity, non-covalent anchoring of cell-surface proteins, attachment to host tissues, and biofilm formation  <cit> . glycolipids also function as acceptors of the glycerol-phosphate polymer during lta synthesis, although the exact mechanism underlying this process is still under investigation  <cit> . if the processive glycosyltransferase ypfp is inactivated in staphylococcus aureus, dag instead of dglcdag is utilized as a building block in lta synthesis, suggesting that glycolipids are not essential acceptors of the lta polymer  <cit> .

a second glycosyltransferase  is located immediately downstream of bgsa. to our knowledge, the function of this gene locus of e. faecalis or its homologues in streptococci is still unknown. in the current study, we report the construction of a deletion mutant of ef_ <dig> that we designated bgsb and studied the role of glycolipid metabolism in lta biosynthesis and bacterial physiology.

RESULTS
construction of a deletion mutant of the glycosyltransferase bgsb
immediately downstream from bgsa, we identified a putative  <dig> -diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase  by basic local alignment search tool  search . this glycosyl-transferase shows homology to yp_ <dig>  of acholeplasma laidlawii   <cit>  and to lmo <dig> of listeria monocytogenes   <cit> . we designated this gene bgsb. to study the requirement of bgsb for glycolipid production, lta synthesis, and bacterial physiology, we constructed a deletion mutant by targeted mutagenesis using the strategy previously applied for the bgsa deletion mutant. unmarked deletions were created by allelic exchange, and all gene deletions were confirmed by pcr. in the resulting mutant, an internal fragment of  <dig> bp was deleted from the bgsb gene . single gene reconstitution of bgsb in e. faecalis 12030Δbgsb completely restored the wild-type phenotype, including the glycolipid expression profile in cell membrane extracts  and biofilm formation .

deletion of bgsb leads to a complete loss of glycolipids from the cell membrane and to expression of lta with increased chain length
we hypothesized that, because it is located immediately downstream from bgsa and has high homology to almgs in acholeplasma laidlawii, the gene product of bgsb glycosylates diacylglycerol to yield mglcdag. to test this hypothesis, we extracted the total lipids of the cell membrane, separated them by thin layer chromatography , and stained glycolipids with α-naphthol . as shown previously, inactivation of bgsa resulted in accumulation of mglcdag in the cell membrane . in contrast, no glycolipids were visualized in 12030Δbgsb extracts, suggesting that bgsb encodes for a glycosyltransferase that glycosylates dag to form mglcdag. mglcdag is the substrate of bgsa, which adds a second glucose to yield dglcdag . since bgsa does not accept dag as a substrate, inactivation of bgsb results in the loss of all glycolipids from the cell membrane .

we recently showed that inactivation of bgsa also affects lta synthesis, increasing the chain length of the glycerol-phosphate polymer  <cit> . inactivation of bgsb has a similar effect on the lta chain length . to estimate the chain length of the glycerol-phosphate chain by 1h-nmr analysis, we used the fatty acid signals of the molecule as an internal reference and compared the integration values of h <dig> of glucose and -ch <dig> of alanine to the -ch <dig> and -ch2- signals  of the fatty acids  <cit> . the integral ratios yielded higher amounts of glucose and alanine incorporated into the lta of 12030Δbgsb and 12030Δbgsa compared to the wild type, suggesting an increased length of the glycerol-phosphate polymer . these results are supported by quantification of lta from butanol extracts by elisa . approximately fourfold more lta was recovered from butanol extracts of cell walls of 12030Δbgsb and 12030Δbgsa than from wild-type bacteria. to determine whether increased amounts of lta were also released into the culture medium, we blotted the culture supernatant onto pvdf membranes and performed semi-quantitative immuno-dot blot analysis . for both mutants, 12030Δbgsb and 12030Δbgsa, increased amounts of lta in the liquid medium were detected, indicating a higher turnover of lta in the cell envelope. previous studies in s. aureus and listeria monocytogenes have shown that substitution of dglcdag by mglcdag or dag as the glycolipid anchor of lta retards the migration of the molecule in sds-page  <cit> . lta extracted from both mutants displayed a slower mobility in sds page than wild-type lta, with lta from 12030Δbgsb migrating faster than lta from 12030Δbgsa . this suggests that both mutants express different lipid anchors from those in the wild type. as dag is the only substrate available for lta synthesis in 12030Δbgsb, it likely serves as lipid anchor in this strain.

lta and glycolipids are also major determinants of cell-surface charge density. therefore, hydrophobicity of wild-type and mutant bacteria was determined by measuring the adherence to dodecane. reduced adherence was observed for both 12030Δbgsa and 12030Δbgsb . however, 12030Δbgsb had higher hydrophobicity than 12030Δbgsa .

bacterial physiology is not significantly impaired in a bgsb deletion mutant
previous studies have shown that lta and glycolipids play important roles in growth, cell envelope integrity, and cell division  <cit> . however, despite the complete lack of glycolipids in the cell membrane and increased production of lta, important characteristics of 12030Δbgsb did not differ from wild-type bacteria: mutants did not differ from wild-type bacteria in their growth kinetics in broth culture . cell morphology of 12030Δbgsb determined by transmission electron microscopy was not affected . likewise, autolysis was not affected in 12030Δbgsb . since phosphatidylglycerol from the cell membrane is used as a substrate for polyglycerolphosphate synthesis by ltas  <cit> , we investigated whether increasing chain length of lta affects cell membrane content of phosphatidylglycerol in the mutant. however, the semi-quantitative analysis of extracts of total membrane lipids by tlc and staining with molybdenum blue did not reveal differences in phospholipid composition . the composition and total amount of aminophospholipids as assessed semi-quantitatively by tlc also did not differ between the wild type and 12030Δbgsb . neither did analysis of non-covalently bound surface proteins by sds-page reveal major differences between the bgsb deletion mutant and the parental strain .

deletion of the glucosyltransferase bgsb has no effect on resistance to complement, antimicrobial peptides, and opsonophagocytic killing
lta has been shown to be critical for resistance against killing by cationic antimicrobial peptides  <cit>  and has been identified as a target of opsonic antibodies against e. faecalis  <cit> . to characterize the sensitivity of 12030Δbgsb to host defense mechanisms, we assessed its resistance to antimicrobial peptides nisin, polymyxin b, and colistin. for nisin, no difference was found between the wild-type and the bgsb deletion mutant . a two-fold lower concentration of polymyxin b and colistin was required for killing of 12030Δbgsb compared to the isogenic wild type strain. at a serum concentration of  <dig> %, sensitivity to complement-mediated phagocytosis did not differ between the  <dig> wild type and 12030Δbgsb . furthermore, rabbit antibodies raised against whole bacterial cells of e. faecalis  <dig> mediated opsonophagocytic killing of 12030Δbgsb comparable to levels obtained for the wild-type strain .

the loss of glycolipids from the cell membrane is associated with reduced adherence to caco- <dig> cells and impaired biofilm formation
we recently showed that deletion of bgsa leads to loss of biofilm formation on polystyrene and to reduced adherence to caco- <dig> cells  <cit> . partial deletion of bgsb also strongly impaired biofilm formation, reducing production by 50% . this defect in biofilm formation was not a result of decreased initial attachment ; rather, it was due to defective accumulation of biofilm mass after initial attachment . over a period of  <dig> h, biofilm mass of wild-type bacteria on polystyrene grew in a linear fashion. in contrast, the amount of biofilm produced by bgsb and bgsa mutants remained constant at the level of initial attachment. adhesion to colonic epithelial cells  was also impaired in 12030Δbgsb, reaching only 50% of the adhesion of wild-type bacteria .

bgsb contributes to virulence during bacteremia in mice
previous experiments with a bgsa deletion mutant in e. faecalis showed that it leads to an attenuation of virulence in a mouse bacteremia model  <cit> . to assess whether cell membrane glycolipids or glycolipid anchoring of lta is required for the pathogenesis of enterococcal infections, we employed the same model to investigate the bgsb mutant. as mentioned above,  <dig> wild-type and respective mutants had comparable growth characteristics. for virulence studies, we infected balb/c mice  <dig> -  <dig> weeks old by i.v. injection, sacrificed the animals after  <dig> days, and enumerated the viable bacteria. pilot experiments indicated that, with a high inoculum of  <dig> ×  <dig> bacteria, infected mice are bacteremic up to  <dig> days without succumbing to the infection. compared to the wild type, mice infected with 12030Δbgsb or 12030Δbgsa cleared significantly more bacteria from the bloodstream . no difference in virulence between 12030Δbgsb and 12030Δbgsa was detected in this model.

discussion
although mglcdag and dglcdag are the major glycolipids in many gram-positive bacteria, distinct differences are found between species in biosynthetic pathways. in staphylococci and bacillus, a single processive glucosyltransferase ypfp adds two glucose residues to dag to synthesize dglcdag  <cit> . depending on the bacterial species and strain background, the deletion of this enzyme may result in an increased lta content and turnover  <cit> , or loss of lta from the cell membrane, associated with a reduced rate of autolysis and impaired biofilm formation  <cit> . in listeria, streptococci, and enterococci, genome analysis revealed two putative glycosyltransferases involved in the biosynthetic pathway of glycolipids  <cit> . homologues of a  glucosyltransferase have been investigated in listeria , group b streptococci , and e. faecalis   <cit> . in group b streptococci, deletion of iaga results in the absence of capsule expression, reduced retention of lta on the bacterial cell surface, and increased release of lta into the culture medium  <cit> . inactivation of lafa in l. monocytogenes strongly depletes lta from both the cell wall and the culture medium  <cit> . in contrast to these findings, deletion of bgsa in e. faecalis results in an increased concentration of lta in the bacterial cell envelope, most likely related to the longer glycerol-phosphate polymer. the different makeup of glycolipids and lta in this mutant strongly impaired biofilm-formation and affected virulence in vivo  <cit> .

in the current study, we constructed a deletion mutant by targeted mutagenesis of the putative glycosyltransferase bgsb located immediately downstream of bgsa. after inactivation of bgsb in e. faecalis  <dig>  no glycolipids or glycolipid-derivatives were recovered from the cell envelope of the 12030Δbgsb mutant, indicating that bgsb is a  <dig> -diacylglycerol 3-glucosyltransferase. bgsa cannot take the place of bgsb, which suggests that bgsa has higher substrate specificity than ypfp in s. aureus and b. subtilis  <cit> . the putative function assigned to bgsa and bgsb by this work is in agreement with data obtained for their homologues lafa and lafb in l. monocytogenes  <cit> . although the lipid anchor of lta from 12030Δbgsb was not characterized chemically, indirect evidence suggests that dag instead of dglcdag anchors lta to the cell membrane in this mutant. lta extracted from 12030Δbgsb migrated more slowly than wild-type lta in sds page, a feature that has been described for homologous lta molecules substituted with dag instead of dglcdag in s. aureus and l. monocytogenes  <cit> . in staphylococci and listeria it has been also demonstrated that, in the absence of glycolipids, the enzyme that transfers glycerolphosphate residues to the glycolipid anchor  can utilize dag as glycerolphosphate acceptor for the synthesis of the lta backbone  <cit> . deletion mutants of the glucosyltransferases bgsb and bgsa enabled us to study the individual roles of the two major glycolipids mglcdag and dglcdag in the physiology and virulence of e. faecalis. to our surprise, the complete loss of glycolipids from the cell membrane in 12030Δbgsb had only minor effects on bacterial morphology, cell growth, and autolysis.

in contrast, mglcdag and dglcdag are critical for cell membrane elasticity and fluidity and important for the function of membrane-bound proteins in acholeplasma laidlawii  <cit> . it is possible, however, that up-regulation of other cell membrane amphiphiles may compensate for the lack of glycolipids in the bgsb mutant  <cit> . in fact, the concentration of lta was increased in 12030Δbgsb and possibly compensates for the loss of phosphoglycolipid derivatives of mglcdag and dglcdag in the 12030Δbgsb mutant  <cit> . a characteristic feature of both mutants is the increased chain length of the glycerol-phosphate polymer. however, the mechanism underlying this alteration in lta structure remains unclear and deserves further attention.

the most notable feature of 12030Δbgsb is its impairment in biofilm formation and adherence to colonic cells. as observed previously in the bgsa mutant, initial attachment to polystyrene was not impaired in 12030Δbgsb, but the accumulation of bacteria in the growing biofilm was impaired. this is in contrast to other biofilm-defective mutants in e. faecalis, in which attachment to the foreign surface is the feature primarily affected and underlines the importance of cell envelope amphiphiles in the retention of bacteria within the biofilm architecture  <cit> . several mechanisms may explain the biofilm phenotype of the mutants. as in the bgsa mutant, impaired biofilm formation in 12030Δbgsb was associated with reduced hydrophobicity, a well-known determinant of biofilm formation in bacteria  <cit> . also, increased lta concentration in the cell envelope of the bgsb-mutant may impair biofilm formation by increasing the net negative charge of the cell envelope. the impact of the higher negative charge of the lta molecule on biofilm formation has been demonstrated by mutants in the d-alanine-d-alanyl-carrier protein ligase dlta  <cit> . finally, the increased amount of lta released into the biofilm matrix  may act as a biosurfactant, promoting detachment of bacterial cells from the biofilm and thereby impeding its growth  <cit> . in contrast to our results the inactivation of the glycosyltransferase ypfp in s. aureus leads to depletion of lta from the cell surface and to a reduced ability to form biofilm  <cit> .

aside from its effects on biofilm formation, the increased density of negative charges of the lta molecule of the mutant may also explain the slight increase in sensitivity of 12030Δbgsb to the antimicrobial peptides colistin and polymyxin b. if this difference explains the significantly impaired virulence in our mouse bacteremia model, however, is unclear. on balance, we observed a 2-log reduction in the number of cfu recovered for both mutants, suggesting that glycolipids, either as a cell membrane component or as an anchor of lta, play a critical role in the cell envelope of enterococci during infection. in general, mutation of the glycosyl-transferase bgsa and bgsb yielded similar phenotypes, suggesting that the phenotypic changes observed for both mutants are mainly the result of the depletion of dglcdag or altered lta structure. on the other hand, mglcdag seems to play a minor role in bacterial physiology and virulence.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown that the bgsb gene is responsible for the glycosylation of dag to form mglcdag, the first step in glycolipid synthesis in e. faecalis. bgsb deletion led to reduced biofilm formation and attachment to colonic cells, and to impaired virulence in vivo.

