BACKGROUND
microorganisms account for a major proportion of our planet’s biological diversity and thus present an enormous and largely unknown resource that can be utilised in the discovery of novel genes, bioactive molecules  <cit>  and new biocatalysts. these may be exploited to improve industrially relevant processes  <cit> . the traditional approach to tap into this resource is via the cultivation of microorganisms and screening for individual strains with the desired phenotype. however, more than 90% of microbes in complex microbial communities are not culturable by standard laboratory techniques  <cit> . the nature of these complex microbial communities is being realised in culture-independent approaches, collectively known as metagenomics  <cit> . these approaches range from the amplification and deep sequencing of phylogenetically informative genes and regions within community dna  to assess community structure, shotgun sequencing of community dna to determine their coding potential, through to targeted functional screens of libraries constructed from community dna .

the fermentative forestomach of ruminant animals, known as the reticulo-rumen, is one of the most complex microbial ecosystems investigated via metagenomic studies  <cit> . since the 1980s, the rumen has been used as a source for the discovery of enzymatic activities involved in the degradation of the lignocellulosic components of the plant cell wall for both agricultural and biofuel production applications . it is estimated that the rumen harbours up to  <dig>  bacterial species, the majority belonging to the phyla firmicutes and bacteroidetes, with species belonging to the proteobacteria, fibrobacteres and spirochaetes also present .

rumen microorganisms metabolise plant structural carbohydrates using a broad spectrum of carbohydrate-active enzymes, commonly known as cazymes  <cit> , including glycoside hydrolases , carbohydrate esterases , glycosyltransferases  and polysaccharide lyases . many cazymes are modular, containing one or more catalytic domain and ancillary non-catalytic modules including carbohydrate binding modules . cbms are thought to increase the efficiency and specificity of the catalytic module by attachment to a specific sugar moiety . a feature of some rumen microbes is the association of cazymes with cell wall-bound multienzyme structures called cellulosomes  <cit> . cellulosomal cazymes contain signature domains  that anchor the enzymes to cognate domains , of a bacterial envelope-bound scaffold composed of one or more proteins called scaffoldins  <cit> . the synergistic action of cazymes that assemble as cellulosomes is usually associated with improved fibrolytic function, rendering these surface complexes a desirable target for identification and functional characterisation  <cit> .

secreted cazymes, including the non-catalytic cellulosome components , are but a small fraction of the surface and secreted proteins that make up the “secretome” of a microbial community  . proteomics, despite its power in analysing water-soluble proteins, allows a very limited detection of cell-surface and membrane proteins. furthermore, at the scale of microbial communities, proteomic approaches are highly dependent on the preparation method and only detect the most abundant secreted or membrane proteins, with the low-abundant proteins escaping identification  <cit> . most secretome proteins have membrane-targeting signal sequences and transmembrane α-helices, including the classical type i, type ii lipoprotein, type iv prepillin and the twin arginine translocon  signal sequences  <cit> . these sequences can be used to predict secretome proteins from sequenced genomes using various algorithms . despite the ability to predict metasecretome proteins in silico, direct analysis of metasecretome proteins  is desirable to confirm their functions .

recently, phage display technology has been adapted for the direct selection and display of secretome proteins, and was applied at a single genome scale to lactobacillus rhamnosus and mycobacterium tuberculosis <cit> . sequence analysis and affinity screenings of the resulting phage display secretome libraries allowed characterisation of surface proteins with functions of interest . this technology has potential application at a scale of an entire microbial community, where cultivation-independent methods are required to enable discovery and functional characterisation of products encoded by complex microbial communities. phage display allows affinity screening of large libraries for functions of interest due to the physical connection of the displayed proteins to the phage-encapsidated coding nucleic acid; displayed proteins can also be easily purified as part of the virion . however, given that the published secretome-selective phage display system is limited by the e. coli inner membrane translocation systems for the display of secretome proteins, it was uncertain whether this method would limit the diversity of displayed secretome proteins from the taxonomically diverse species that constitute the rumen microbial community.

in this study we applied the secretome-selective phage display method at a metagenomic scale, in combination with next-generation sequencing, and showed that it efficiently displayed functionally and taxonomically diverse secretome proteins, further focusing sequencing effort onto a subset of biologically relevant sequences from a very complex microbial community. in doing so, this approach permitted the discovery of a large assortment of new secreted cazymes from the bovine rumen microbial community, in particular, expanding the known diversity of cellulosome components, likely to be involved in ruminal fibre degradation.

RESULTS
efficiency of metasecretome phage display library selection, secretion signals and phylogenetic diversity
a shot-gun library was constructed in a phagemid/helper phage secretome-selective phage system as described in jankovic et al.  <cit>  . to maximise the probability of identifying extracellular proteins involved in fibre degradation, a plant-adherent fraction of the rumen microbial community from pasture-fed cows was used as a source of dna for library construction. a small pilot library was initially constructed in the secretome-selection phagemid vector pdj <dig>  <cit> . the primary size of this library  was 4 ×  <dig> clones, and the insert size range was approximately  <dig>  to 5 kb. the library was subjected to secretome selection, producing a recombinant clone pool enriched for secretome proteins, in the form of recombinant phagemid single stranded dna   <cit> . to assess the efficiency of selection, ssdna was transformed into e. coli tg <dig> and  <dig> individual transformants were analysed by sequencing the phagemid inserts.figure  <dig> 
overview of metasecretome library construction and selection.  a shotgun metagenomic library was constructed by cloning metagenomic dna into the piii cloning cassette of pdj <dig> phagemid vector that does not contain a signal sequence. a small proportion of metagenomic inserts contain signal sequences or other membrane-targeting sequence motifs .  recombinant phagemids replicate as plasmids inside the cells, or alternatively, in the presence of the helper phage, they are packaged as recombinant virions called phagemid particles .  after infection of the library with the giii-deleted helper phage vcsm13d <dig>  the pps derived from the recombinant clones that do not contain a membrane-targeting sequence lack the piii-made cap structure . in contrast, the pps derived from the recombinant phagemids that encode a membrane-targeting sequence in frame with piii contain the cap structure formed by insert-piii fusion. due to the lack of the piii virion cap, the pps that do not encode membrane-targeting signals were disassembled in the presence of ionic detergent sarcosyl , while the secretome protein-displaying pps were resistant to sarcosyl , and this was used as a basis for selection.  after the removal of ssdna released from the disassembled sarcosyls pps, the ssdna from the intact sarcosylr pps was purified and used to:  transform e. coli to obtain an amplified metasecretome plasmid library for preliminary assessment of metasecretome diversity by sanger sequencing of clone inserts and  as a template for metasecretome analysis by next-generation sequencing.



it was found that  <dig> of the  <dig> inserts analysed  contained  <dig> distinct orfs encoding secretome proteins with typical signal sequences in-frame with piii. of the remaining five inserts , one contained an orf encoding a polypeptide in frame with piii that was shorter than  <dig> amino acid residues and was considered “background” . the remaining four inserts contained a single orf without typical membrane-targeting sequence. further analysis using secretomep  <dig> , which discriminates between non-classically secreted proteins and cellular proteins based on amino acid composition, secondary structure and disordered regions, gave score <  <dig> , which indicates that polypeptide encoded by this orf is not secreted via non-classical secretion pathways. blast analysis was used to predict localisation of the putative protein based on sequence homology. the protein showed homology to a conserved hypothetical protein with predicted cytoplasmic localisation, and was therefore also considered “background” that was not eliminated by selection .figure  <dig> 
types of membrane-targeting signals detected in metasecretome pilot library orfs. abbreviations used for membrane-targeting signal types: ss, signal sequence; type i ss, classical ss; type ii ss, lipoprotein ss; type iv ss, pilin-like ss; tmh, n-terminal or internal transmembrane α helix/helices; background - orfs without membrane-targeting signal or shorter than  <dig> amino acids.



based on the average proportion of secretome orfs in bacterial genomes , and the probability of the insert being in the same orientation , and in-frame  with gene giii to create an in-frame protein fusion with piii, we expect only ~ <dig> % of the inserts in the library to be selected. therefore, the efficiency of selection was estimated by comparing the frequency of secretome insert-containing recombinant phagemids after selection 85/ <dig>  with the theoretically predicted frequency . the enrichment of the secretome insert-containing recombinant library clones was 29-fold, indicating that the stringency of selection was high, and that most recombinant phagemids containing non-secretome inserts  were eliminated.

the types of membrane-targeting signals predicted from the pilot metasecretome phage display library orfs are summarised in figure  <dig>  while the membrane-targeting sequences and detailed analysis are presented in additional file  <dig>  the majority of orfs  contained type i signal sequences while the remainder consisted of transmembrane α-helices with n-terminal transmembrane anchors , multiple transmembrane α-helices or single internal transmembrane α-helices , type ii or lipoprotein signal sequences , and a single type iv  signal sequence. selection of protein-piii fusions containing type ii signal sequences or transmembrane helices has been observed in genomic secretome-selective display  <cit> , despite the fact that the native piii signal sequence is type i. it appears that a predicted transmembrane α-helix and dependence on the secyeg translocon is the condition for assembly of sarcosyl-resistant recombinant virions. the absence of the tat signal sequences likely stems from the fact that their export depends on the specific tatabc translocon, involved in the transport of folded substrates. it was shown that tat pathway is not suitable for targeting of the piii fusions to the virion, since protein-piii fusion typically folds in the oxidising environment of the e. coli periplasm, in contrast to the tat-dependent proteins that fold in the reducing environment of the cytoplasm  <cit> .

to identify the organisms from which metasecretome clones were derived, taxonomic assignments were designated for the predicted proteins of each insert, based on the best blastx hits, where the e-value was less than 1 × 10− <dig> and query coverage greater than 30%. the most abundant assignments were to the genera prevotella , clostridium , butyrivibrio , ruminococcus , bacteroides  and fibrobacter ; genus-level assignments could not be made for 50% of the inserts analysed. these results indicate that the metasecretome selection method captured representatives of the main genera comprising the core bovine rumen microbiome, as previously determined by pyrosequencing of 16s rrna genes of other rumen microbial communities  <cit> .

metasecretome characterisation by next-generation sequencing
the small scale of the pilot metagenome library and metasecretome selection that included transformation bottleneck and standard sanger sequencing did not allow access to the large diversity of the rumen microbial metasecretome. therefore, to improve on the representation of the metasecretome, an upscaled primary metagenomic library was constructed with a final size  of ~5 ×  <dig> primary clones. furthermore, the secretome selection protocol was combined with the next-generation sequencing of inserts. after secretome selection  <cit> , the inserts from the resulting metasecretome ssdna pool were pcr-amplified and processed by enzymatic and mechanical shearing to fragments of a suitable size range  for  <dig> gs flx sequencing. a total of  <dig>  obtained sequence reads were obtained and processed , resulting in  <dig>  de-replicated reads that were further analysed .

to predict the putative functions that were enriched in the metasecretome library, the metasecretome sequence data was compared to a  <dig> gs flx shotgun sequenced metagenome derived from the plant-adherent rumen microbial fraction of two new zealand cows grazing a similar pasture-based diet . annotation of the metasecretome and metagenome sequence reads via img/m system  <cit>  resulted in 35% and 49% pfam  <cit>  assignments of the total protein coding genes, respectively, which were further categorised into cog-based functional categories . the functional category with the most assignments was “carbohydrate transport and metabolism” for both the metagenome  and the metasecretome datasets  . metasecretome phage display also enabled enrichment of proteins predicted to be involved in the “cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis”  and peptides with unknown function . proteins of unknown function are generally overrepresented in the secretome fraction of bacterial genomes  <cit> , and their enrichment is consistent with enrichment of the metasecretome. in contrast, the functional categories of “replication, recombination and repair”  and “coenzyme transport and metabolism” , comprised mainly of intracellular proteins, were under-represented in the metasecretome dataset.figure  <dig> 
relative abundances of pfams within the metagenome and metasecretome-enriched sequence datasets. relative abundances of img/m annotated cog-based functional categories of protein family  conserved domains within the metagenome  and metasecretome-enriched  sequence datasets. abbreviations for the functional categories, grouped by general functional role: information storage and processing : j – translation, ribosomal structure and biogenesis, a – rna processing and modification, k – transcription, l – replication, recombination and repair, b – chromatin structure and dynamics; cellular processes and signalling : d – cell cycle control, cell division, chromosome partitioning, y – nuclear structure, v – defence mechanisms, t – signal transduction mechanisms, m – cell wall/membrane/envelope biogenesis, n – cell motility, z – cytoskeleton, w – extracellular structures, u – intracellular trafficking, secretion and vesicular transport, o – posttranslational modification, protein turnover, chaperones; metabolism : c – energy production and conversion, g – carbohydrate transport and metabolism, e – amino acid transport and metabolism, f – nucleotide transport and metabolism, h – coenzyme transport and metabolism, i – lipid transport and metabolism, p – inorganic ion transport and metabolism, q – secondary metabolites biosynthesis, transport and catabolism; poorly characterized : r – general function prediction only, s – function unknown. significant difference between metasecretome and metagenome datasets within given functional category is represented by asterisks .



carbohydrate-active enzyme  diversity and abundance of cellulosome components within the metasecretome selected library
the metasecretome  orfs were analysed using the dbcan database to determine the diversity of cazyme families captured by the metasecretome selection . the dbcan database uses hidden markov models  of the signature domain regions for all cazyme families, and incorporates the most complete set of metagenomic cazyme genes published so far  <cit> . the analysis identified  <dig>  putative cazyme hits in the metasecretome library with a significant match to at least one catalytic domain or associated module belonging to  <dig> different cazy families while the analysis of metagenome  identified  <dig> cazy families .table  <dig> 
comparison of cazyme classes between plant-adherent rumen microbial metasecretome and metagenome datasets



carbohydrate-binding modules

carbohydrate esterases

glycoside hydrolases

glycosyl transferases

polysaccharide lyases

auxiliary activities

cellulosome components*

abbreviations: ms, metasecretome dataset; mg, metagenome dataset. *numbers in parentheses refer to the cazyme hits clustered at 100% sequence identity to remove duplicity and were used in analysis of cellulosome hit frequencies.



in both datasets we captured an assortment of cellulases, endoxylanases, carbohydrate debranching enzymes and oligosaccharide-degrading enzymes, as well as a suite of carbohydrate esterases responsible for deacetylation of xylans and xylo-oligosaccharides, and polysaccharide lyases. the gh profile of the metasecretome dataset was also similar to other reported bovine metagenomes except that gh <dig> , responsible for degradation of galactans and arabinogalactans, and gh <dig>  were detected in abundance  <cit> . when compared to the control metagenome dataset, xyloglucanases gh <dig> and gh <dig>  and other oligosaccharide degrading enzymes belonging to gh <dig> and gh <dig> families occurred at higher frequency in the metasecretome dataset. in contrast, endohemicellulases  and debranching enzymes  occurred at lower frequency in the metasecretome dataset. other gh class members that were enriched and significantly more abundant in the metasecretome compared to the metagenome dataset belong to families gh <dig> , gh <dig>  and gh <dig> . in the cazy database, gh family  <dig> has only one characterised enzyme while a prokaryotic representative of gh family  <dig> has not been yet characterised. the cbms prevalent in metasecretome, cbm <dig> and cbm <dig>  are usually associated with catalytic modules of gh <dig> and gh33; however, representatives of these gh families were not found in large numbers in this dataset. in concordance with their extracellular function, several ce families involved in hemicellulose  and pectin  degradation detected in metasecretome were enriched and significantly more abundant than in the metagenome. the analysis of glycosyl transferases , the enzymes that assemble glycans , showed a decrease from  <dig> % in the metagenome to  <dig> % in the metasecretome, consistent with the evidence that the majority of bacterial gts are located in the cytoplasm  <cit> .

a high number of putative components  of complex carbohydrate-degrading surface complexes – cellulosomes were detected . analysis of metasecretome orfs with hits to cellulosome-associated modules, clustered at 100% sequence identity to remove duplicity, revealed that  <dig> % of the total clustered cazyme hits were to dockerins . of those,  <dig> % hits were to a hmm representing a single dockerin repeat;  <dig> % were to presumably complete dockerin domains  and  <dig> % were to single dockerin repeat in combination with another cazyme module. two other modules present in cellulosomes, cohesin and slh, were also detected .figure  <dig> 
frequency of cellulosome modules in three bovine rumen microbial datasets. frequency of three cellulosome signature modules: cohesin ; dockerin  and surface layer homology  domains  were compared between three datasets: ms, metasecretome; mg, metagenome  and dmg, published deep-sequenced metagenome dataset derived from the bovine switchgrass-adherent microbiome, isolated from switchgrass that was incubated in the rumen of a fistulated cow for 72 h  <cit> . the total number of distinct cazyme hits, obtained after clustering all dbcan hits at 100% sequence identity threshold using the cd-hit algorithm  <cit> , were: ms,  <dig> ; mg,  <dig> ; dmg,  <dig> .



the phylogenetic diversity of the translated cazyme orfs predicted to contain cellulosome modules was determined by family-level taxonomic assignment based on the best blastp hit , and the recently proposed reclassification of clostridium spp. based on extensive molecular phylogenetic data  <cit> . around two thirds of cohesin modules containing sequences were assigned to the firmicutes , with the remaining assigned to bacteroidetes . the vast majority of dockerin-containing sequences were assigned to the firmicutes  and bacteroidetes representation was mainly within the bacteroidaceae , and prevotellaceae . among the best blastp hits, many were to species that have been previously reported as cellulosome-producers, such as acetivibrio cellulolyticus, clostridium acetobutylicum, ruminococcus albus, r. flavefaciens, ruminiclostridium cellulolyticum , ru. josui  and ru. thermocellum   <cit> . in contrast, 97% of putative slh domains were assigned to firmicutes .figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic diversity of cellulosome modules predicted in the rumen metasecretome-enriched dataset. translated metasecretome orfs that were predicted to contain cellulosome modules  were compared to the non-redundant protein database using blastp. family-level taxonomic assignments were made for the host organism of the best blast hit and the chart shows the abundance of each family for each cellulosome module. for the dockerin data, only sequences that contained two dockerin modules  are shown.



phylogenetic diversity of the selected metasecretome
we used an img/m similarity-based binning approach for the taxonomic assignment of the predicted protein-coding sequences, and to determine their phylogenetic distribution . the majority of assigned sequences belong to bacteria ,  <dig> % to archaea and  <dig> % to eukaryota, while  <dig> % remained unassigned. approximately 28% of the sequences assigned to eukaryota were most similar to fungi and around 14% to plants, which may reflect the presence of low levels of plant and fungal material within our plant-adherent microbiome samples. virus hits were rare . at the phylum level, bacteroidetes  and firmicutes  dominated, with minor contributions from proteobacteria, actinobacteria, spirochaetes and cyanobacteria. the main taxonomic assignments are in agreement with predominant phyla determined in the 16s rrna gene based studies of bacterial diversity of other rumen microbial communities  <cit> . a higher representation of sequences from gram-negative bacteria was apparent in the metasecretome dataset relative to the metagenome dataset. this was consistent with taxonomic representation of the metasecretome pilot library inserts, and might be due to a somewhat higher efficiency of gram-negative relative to gram-positive membrane-targeting signals in e. coli as a host strain.figure  <dig> 
phylogenetic profile of the metasecretome-enriched dataset. the taxonomic assignment of the metasecretome reads derived from the rumen adherent microbial fraction was based on distribution of best blast hits of protein-coding genes at 30% blast identity. slices of a pie chart are corresponding to the percentage of total best blast hits at phyla level. the “other” contains orfs with database hits belonging to a phylogenetic group of low abundance in the dataset , while the “unassigned” corresponds to predicted orfs with hits below 30% identity cut-off.



discussion
improving the digestive processes of ruminant animals, or degradation of lignocellulosic feedstocks for biofuel production, requires an understanding of the enzymatic processes involved in the depolymerisation of plant structural carbohydrates. the majority of the information currently available has been generated from the study of individual microbes and their enzyme complements, but in nature the breakdown of plant polysaccharides is initiated by microbial consortia and their secreted enzymes. this is much more complex and difficult to study, but the recent development of high-throughput sequencing and associated metagenomic techniques opens up new opportunities to begin to understand this complex process. in this study we have assessed the rumen metasecretome, using a secretome-selective phage display technology that enables the focusing of next-generation sequence analysis to this portion of the metagenome. this is, to our knowledge, the first report of selective sequence analysis as a method to focus on the sequences encoding secreted proteins from a metagenome. the rumen microbial metasecretome is specialised for the initial degradation of plant fibre through the action of surface-associated and secreted enzymes. consistent with this, the metasecretome display approach has considerably enriched for secretome proteins in the “carbohydrate transport and metabolism” functional category. this functional category was represented in the metasecretome dataset with a wide diversity of gh catalytic modules, assigned to  <dig> gh families, accompanied by a variety of cbms , ces  and pls .

the selectivity of the method was apparent when the abundance of two subcategories of cazymes: gts and cellulosomal modules  were compared to corresponding groups in a metagenome dataset. the relatively lower representation of gts in the metasecretome is consistent with the current knowledge of gts cytosolic localisation in bacteria  <cit> . on the other hand, proteins containing cohesin and dockerin domains are secreted or membrane-bound, as described for several anaerobic bacteria, notably ru. thermocellum and c. cellulovorans, and r. flavefaciens fd <dig> . a striking difference in comparison with reports from previous rumen microbiome studies and our metagenome lies in the presence of a high frequency of putative cohesin and dockerin modules. for example, comparison of the abundance of cellulosome-associated modules in our metasecretome dataset, with those in a switchgrass-adherent bovine rumen microbial metagenomic sequence dataset  <cit> , predicted using the same database and search parameters  <cit> , showed a prominent enrichment for cohesin and dockerin modules . other published rumen metagenomic datasets have detected even lower proportions of cellulosomal modules  <cit> . the majority of the metasecretome inserts predicted to encode dockerin and cohesin modules showed strong homology to sequences from members of the ruminococcaceae  <cit> . this finding is reasonably consistent with the taxonomic affiliations of known cultivated cellulosome producing-bacteria, which are also predominantly from the ruminococcaceae  <cit> . our results suggest that, within the plant-adherent rumen microbial fraction, members of the ruminococcaceae also have the greatest potential to produce cellulosome-like structures. a number of cohesin  and dockerin  containing inserts were assigned to the bacteroidaceae, suggesting potential for this family to produce cellulosomes. however, currently there are no reports of cellulosome-producing organisms from this family. interestingly, one of the earliest reported cellulosome producers, bacteroides cellulosolvens <cit> , is now recognised as a member of the ruminococcaceae where it has been reclassified as ruminiclostridium cellulosolvens <cit> . in the metasecretome dataset, almost 18% of the dockerin-encoding inserts were most similar to sequences from members of the clostridiaceae, although curiously, cohesin-containing orfs that are also associated with this family were not detected. in total, only  <dig> sequences with hits to cohesin domains were detected in this study, as compared to more than  <dig> predicted dockerin-containing sequences. within the genomes of cellulosome-producing organisms, scaffoldin genes encoding cohesin domains are not nearly as abundant as those encoding dockerin motifs, thus we may have simply missed capturing the cognate clostridiaceae-derived cohesin encoding genes by chance. at  <dig> amino acid residues, the cohesin hmm is longer than that for a dockerin repeat  within dbcan. therefore, with metasecretome library inserts being generally small in size, partial capture of cohesin sequences may not have enabled their in silico detection. moreover, in case of r. albus strain  <dig>  a putative cellulosome producer with many genes predicted to encode dockerin-containing enzymes for which putative cohesin domain-encoding genes have not been yet identified, it was speculated that closely related rumen bacteria may produce cognate cohesin-bearing scaffoldins that could enable appropriation of the dockerin-containing enzymes produced by r. albus  <dig>  <cit> .

a small number of dockerin and cohesin module-containing sequences appeared to be associated with a number of bacterial families that are not known to produce cellulosomes, such as the coriobacteriaceae, erysipelotrichaceae and porphyromonadaceae. it is thus uncertain whether these are from cellulosome-producing organisms. alternatively, they may be associated with proteins that mediate roles in interactions that are not involved in cellulosomal function, but rather in proteolysis , oxidative reduction  or dephosphorylation   <cit> . it has been hypothesised that in the complex ecosystems different organisms could use cohesin and dockerin modules to interact in a form of intespecies cell-cell adhesion. alternatively, these proteins may evolve to attain different roles unrelated to cell-adhesion  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
the metasecretome phage display method combined with next-generation sequencing has the power to functionally select for, and reveal, the diversity of low-abundance surface and secreted proteins that would otherwise require large metagenomic sequencing efforts to reveal. this approach allowed the identification of a large number of cellulosomal module-containing proteins and produced a rumen microbial metasecretome display library that is currently being used to explore the roles of rumen bacterial cellulosomes and other cazymes via standard phage display affinity selection and protein display methodologies. the novel cazyme genes and domains identified from this study represent valuable candidates for further analysis, starting from the metasecretome library as a resource. for example, interacting pairs of cohesins and dockerins could be determined by affinity-panning of the metasecretome library using expressed cohesins as baits, whereas carbohydrate binding modules of interest could be identified by screening the metasecretome library using the complex carbohydrates as baits. furthermore, screening of the protein repertoire displayed on the surface of metasecretome library virions for novel biocatalysts of interest  <cit> , using the reaction product-based trapping strategies or by colony-based colorimetric detection, could be used to explore the enzymatic activities that could be potentially exploited in industrial processes involving fibre degradation.

