BACKGROUND
while intense research efforts have focused on understanding how gene expression is regulated in model organisms, there are thousands of species important to human health, the environment, and global economies whose transcriptional control mechanisms are not well represented by current biological models. one such species is the apicomplexan parasite responsible for the most lethal form of malaria in humans,plasmodium falciparum. when the p. falciparum genome sequence was published in  <dig>  it was revealed that the nucleotide composition was unusually at-rich  with approximately 60% of the predicted genes possessing no known function  <cit> . furthermore, initial analyses of the genome using blast and profile-hidden markov model searches suggested an apparent dearth of transcription factors  <cit>  leading to much speculation that the parasite relied primarily on post-transcriptional regulatory mechanisms for control of its gene expression.

however, over the past  <dig> years, several investigators have identified on a gene-by-gene basis using traditional experimental approaches regions of gene promoters, and in some cases specific sequence elements, that are important for proper gene expression  <cit> . additionally, microarray expression data have shown that for the majority of genes, transcript levels vary significantly between different stages of the parasite life cycle  <cit>  and the recent applications of more sensitive bioinformatic methods such as two-dimensional hydrophobic cluster analysis coupled with profile-based search methods have identified additional components of the core transcription machinery  <cit> . thus, although post-transcriptional mechanisms such as anti-sense transcription  <cit> , selective repression of transcript translation  <cit> , or epigenetic mechanisms  <cit>  are likely to play crucial roles in the regulation of parasite gene expression, a central role for transcriptional regulation in regulating proper gene expression in p. falciparum cannot yet be ruled out.

with the recent emergence of genomic sequences and associated transcriptome datasets for many species, in silico methods of cis-regulatory element discovery offer much promise towards rapidly elucidating mechanisms of transcriptional control. this is especially true in non-model organisms such as p. falciparum where traditional genetic and biochemical experimental methods have been slow to yield insights. some examples of the most commonly used approaches include meme  <cit> , alignace  <cit> , mdscan  <cit> , and weeder  <cit>  . most of these methods utilize some type of statistical background-modeling approach to identify putative transcription factor binding sites as sequence motifs that occur in the promoter regions of co-expressed genes in greater frequency than would be expected if a random set of promoter regions were considered . although successful when applied to organisms possessing well-annotated genomes of at contents between 40% and 70%  <cit> , we have found that these methods tend to produce an undesirably high number of false positive regulatory elements when applied to at-rich p. falciparum promoter sequences. thus, to overcome the challenges posed to in silico cis-regulatory element discovery by the at-rich p. falciparum genome, we have developed an algorithm called gene enrichment motif searching .

when applied to the p. falciparum genome, gems was able to identify putative cis-regulatory elements in the repeat-sequence-rich base-biased genome by: 1) using a hypergeometric-based scoring function to analyze empirical sequence data without the use of repeat masking; 2) eliminating the guesswork of mismatch and similarity threshold selection by using an exhaustive parameter optimization routine to determine the best representation of putative cis-regulatory elements as position-weight matrices .

when applied to promoter regions of genes contained within  <dig> functionally-enriched co-expression gene clusters generated from p. falciparum life cycle microarray expression data using the semi-supervised clustering algorithm ontology-based pattern identification   <cit> , gems identified  <dig> high-confidence putative cis-regulatory elements including many of cis-regulatory elements previously described in p. falciparum literature. these  <dig> motif candidates were found in the promoter regions of genes associated with a wide variety of parasite processes including sexual development, antigenic variation, cell invasion, sporozoite development, ribosome function and dna replication, thus supporting the hypothesis that cis-regulatory elements play an important role in the transcriptional control of a diverse array of p. falciparum biological processes. additional support for the biological relevance of these motifs was given by comparative genomic analyses of orthologous promoter sequences from rodent malaria species and detection of element positional enrichment relative to gene start codons. furthermore, the function of a regulatory element associated with cell invasion genes described herein was characterized using reporter gene and electrophoretic mobility shift assays . collectively, these results provide much needed robust starting points for the future biological characterization of cis-regulatory elements in p. falciparum and demonstrate in general that in silico approaches to understanding transcriptional regulation mechanisms can be successfully used to predict regulatory elements in non-model organisms possessing unusual genome characteristics.

RESULTS
gene cluster generation using ontology-based pattern identification
central to in silico methods of cis-regulatory element discovery is the assumption that co-transcribed genes involved in similar biological processes are also likely to be controlled by common regulatory mechanisms. thus, if one is interested in finding potential promoter regulatory elements important to these transcriptional control mechanisms, one should search the upstream regions of co-expressed or functionally-related genes for conserved sequence motifs common to these genes but not abundant in the remainder of the genome. every gems analysis therefore begins with a cluster of genes hypothesized to share upstream cis-regulatory elements. these gene clusters, defined as positive gene sets, often times are generated simply by using criteria such as common function or membership within a sub-cellular complex. although successful in some instances  <cit> , this approach by itself is not well suited for analysis of p. falciparum as approximately 60% of genes in the genome have no known function  <cit> . thus, use of annotation alone in cluster formation results in positive sets that are relatively incomplete for many parasite-specific processes and sub-cellular structures. furthermore, and at a more fundamental level, common function is not necessarily the best indicator for whether two genes will share a common regulatory element as many times two genes of similar function will exhibit very different expression patterns throughout the life cycle as is the case with many kinases and proteases.

co-expression at the mrna level represents a better basis for identifying putative regulatory elements because steady state mrna levels are a more direct estimation of the effects cis-acting regulatory elements have on transcriptional activity. with this in mind, we chose to use the semi-supervised clustering algorithm opi that utilizes the information currently available on p. falciparum gene function from sources such as the gene ontology  database  <cit>  to guide the clustering of genes based on microarray-derived life cycle mrna expression patterns  <cit> . this resulted in the generation of clusters that contain genes that are both functionally related and highly co-expressed. from the  <dig> gene clusters derived from  <dig> p. falciparum asexual and sexual stage expression microarray data sets obtained in our most recent opi analysis of  <dig> genes differentially expressed   <cit> , we selected  <dig> representing a broad range of biological functions and expression patterns as the basis for subsequent gems analysis. additionally, we also assembled a sporozoite-specific set of genes to seed a new opi cluster  recognizing that mosquito stage gene functions are not well represented in the available go gene annotation . this opi analysis of go:gnf <dig> resulted in a cluster of  <dig> genes containing  <dig> of the  <dig> seed genes .

regulatory element discovery using gene enrichment motif searching
in all,  <dig> gene clusters representing a diverse set of parasite functions and processes were used as a basis for motif-finding efforts . intergenic regions in p. falciparum are on average  <dig> base pairs in length  <cit> . therefore, we chose to focus our efforts on finding conserved 5– <dig> mers motifs located within the  <dig> base pairs upstream of gene start codons. initially, we attempted to apply commonly used motif-finding implementations including mdscan  <cit>  and meme  <cit>  to our promoter sets, both with and without repeat masking routines, as well as the application of various sequence-trained backgrounds models . these efforts resulted in the identification of many motif candidates that were either extremely at or gc-rich, or found upstream of well over half of the genes in the genome . the results of these early efforts led us to the development of gems in order to identify more reliably putative cis-regulatory elements from the extremely at-rich and repetitive p. falciparum genome.

to best illustrate how gems was applied to each opi cluster to identify putative regulatory elements, consider the following example outlining the identification of the motif pfm <dig>    from the upstream regions of genes contained within the sexual development cluster  . for all the genes contained within a given positive set , all unique 5– <dig> mers  occurring in the  <dig> base pair defined sequence space were assigned a p-value enrichment score using a hypergeometric-based scoring approach . this produced a long list of words with associated p-values representing the probability of word enrichment in the positive versus negative gene set. these words were then listed in ascending order with the most enriched candidates  serving to seed the construction of pwms one at a time. in this case, the seed word gtacatac with a log10p of - <dig>   led to the subsequent identification of the putative element pfm <dig>  . next, all sequences differing from the seed word by one mismatch were identified and re-listed by ascending log10p values . a pwm was then generated by individually weighing each word by its log10p score into the pwm .

the resulting pwm represents the probability of any given nucleotide occurring at a corresponding location in the putative regulatory element. the similarity of any sequence  can be compared to this pwm through the calculation of a similarity score, which is the geometric mean of the corresponding matrix elements associated with the sequence. next, a similarity threshold was selected to determine how similar any given sequence in a promoter region must be to the pwm to be considered an actual instance of the putative regulatory element. we found from trial-and-error use of various thresholds that this selection is very important for the biological quality of elements eventually obtained. thus, rather than simply guessing this threshold for each motif, we designed gems to utilize an exhaustive parameter optimization routine similar to the probability minimization protocol used in the opi clustering algorithm  <cit>  to identify optimal similarity thresholds. this was done by first sorting all words by similarity to the pwm . then p-values were re-calculated as more dissimilar words to the pwm were considered as motif instances  thus identifying the similarity threshold that led to the lowest possible p-value . this entire process was repeated from the original seed word using two and three mismatches up to 40% of the word size to optimize mismatch levels in addition to similarity thresholds . the similarity and mismatch parameters that resulted in the lowest p-value were considered the best representation of a putative cis-regulatory element. for pfm <dig> , one mismatch with a similarity threshold of  <dig>  resulted in the best representation of this putative regulatory element . lastly, because many seeds led to motif candidates that were subsets of one another, a tanimoto distance metric that considered positional information was applied to merge non-unique regulatory element candidates .

for each cluster, this gems analysis resulted in a large number of putative regulatory elements possessing widely varying p-values. in order to determine the p-value range most likely to represent true positives, we performed gems analyses on  <dig> independently selected random positive sets of promoter sequences to estimate the likelihood of obtaining any given p-value by chance. these exercises demonstrated that p-values for motifs identified from these random promoter sets were consistently higher than 10- <dig>  whereas in comparison p-values for the top motifs identified using a promoter positive set derived from the sexual development opi cluster  were well below 10- <dig> . these results suggested biological relevance for the top scoring motifs identified by gems using opi cluster-derived promoter sets, as similar p-value scores could not be obtained in the absence of biological-based co-expression data . in contrast, when mdscan was applied to the same sexual development opi cluster positive promoter set and randomly selected positive promoter sets, the delimitation between scores for motifs identified from the true positive set and  <dig> random positive sets was much less pronounced . this indicates the best scoring motifs identified using mdscan may not be necessarily biologically relevant as similarly scored motifs can be obtained from randomly selected sets of sequences. application of meme to the same cluster resulted in motifs with extremely high e-values or very insignificant group-specificity scores.

judging from the results of the gems analyses of random positive promoter sets, the top  <dig> motifs possessing the lowest p-values from each of the  <dig> clusters were retained for completeness   <cit> . to further pare down the list of candidate motifs to a more manageable number for subsequent biological analysis, we identified those motifs that were most conserved in the upstream regions of orthologous rodent plasmodium parasites species genes. to do this, the orthologs of p. falciparum genes were identified in plasmodium yoelii, plasmodium berghei, and plasmodium chabaudi and the degree of motif enrichment in these orthologous gene upstream regions were calculated using the hypergeometric function just as was done in p. falciparum. in general, these p-values were less significant due to the fact that only ~60% of the genes in p. falciparum have clear rodent orthologs. for motifs to be further considered as putative cis-regulatory elements, we required them to have an enrichment score of log10p ≤ - <dig> in at least one of the three rodent malaria species. this filtering step resulted in  <dig> evolutionarily conserved putative cis-regulatory elements . since the gems analysis is run in a parallel fashion for all opi clusters and because some of these opi clusters represent processes with similar expression profiles, some of the  <dig> motifs contained within this list represented the same regulatory element rediscovered from multiple opi clusters. as a result, the  <dig> motifs were clustered one final time using a compareace-equivalent algorithm with a similarity cutoff of  <dig>  resulting in a final list of  <dig> unique and high-confidence putative cis-regulatory motifs candidates . motifs that were clustered together in this process were labeled pfm#. <dig>  pfm#. <dig>  pfm#. <dig>  etc., with the lowest p-value candidate being considered the final best putative cis-regulatory element.

the final list of  <dig> best representative motif candidates originated from a diverse array of clusters . in addition to the many novel motifs, most of the previously described motifs from the literature were also rediscovered demonstrating the robustness of gems analysis on opi-generated gene clusters for elucidating transcriptional control mechanisms within the context of the at-rich p. falciparum genome . as an additional metric for the biological significance of each motif, the distribution of motifs found upstream of genes within the seed clusters was plotted side-by-side with the positions of the motifs found upstream of all other genes in the genome as biologically active motifs are likely to exhibit some positional enrichment with respect to the start codon  <cit> . for example, pfm <dig>  derived from the sexual development cluster  exhibited a positional enrichment 600– <dig> base pairs upstream of the start codon of genes contained within the cluster suggesting for this element to be functional, its positional context may be important .

gene enrichment motif searching analysis of gene introns
as it is known that cis-regulatory elements also sometimes reside within gene introns, we also applied gems to search for putative regulatory elements within these areas of the p. falciparum genome. overall, we used a similar approach as was taken for the gems analysis of upstream regions, but with a few minor modifications. in all, 54% of p. falciparum genes possess introns, with the average length of these regions being  <dig>  base pairs  <cit> . thus, to generate an intron search space, all exons were masked out from the differentially expressed genes sequences leaving intron sequences from a total of  <dig> genes. to accommodate for the variable lengths of introns in each gene, the hypergeometric calculation of motif p-values was slightly altered to use base pair counts instead of gene counts . gems analysis of intron regions resulted in the identification of  <dig> motifs in total  <cit> . then, for intron-derived motifs to be further considered as putative cis-regulatory elements, motifs were required to have an enrichment score of log10p ≤ - <dig> in p. falciparum, and log10p ≤ - <dig> in at least one of the three rodent malaria species. this filtering step resulted in  <dig> evolutionarily conserved putative cis-regulatory elements. again, due to the parallel fashion in which gems was run, some of these  <dig> motifs represented the same regulatory element rediscovered from multiple opi clusters and so a compareace-equivalent algorithm with a similarity cutoff of  <dig>  was applied to obtain a final list of  <dig> intron-derived cis-regulatory motifs candidates. these candidates were labeled pfmintron#. <dig>  pfmintron#. <dig>  etc with the lowest p-value candidate being considered the final best putative cis-regulatory element .

sexual development regulatory elements
of all the gene clusters analyzed, the sexual development cluster  yielded the most upstream region motif candidates  . this cluster contains genes whose expression is upregulated as the parasite prepares to transition from the human host to the mosquito vector as it was derived from expression analysis of a mixed population of developing male and female gametocytes. for two of these motifs, existing biological evidence from the literature suggested they played roles as cis-regulatory elements of transcriptional control . for example, the best scoring motif, pfm <dig>   , is contained within the longer sequence cagacagc present in the promoter of pgs <dig>  a gene encoding a major surface antigen in the avian malaria parasite, p. gallinaceum. using linkage scanner mutagenesis and emsas, chow and co-workers demonstrated that disruption of this element reduced luciferase reporter expression by 65% in p. gallinaceum ookinetes and that unknown trans-acting factors present in p. gallinaceum ookinete nuclear extracts bound this element in a sequence-specific manner  <cit> . further investigation of pfm <dig>  on our part also revealed that this motif is very well conserved in the rodent malaria parasite species p. yoelii , p. berghei , and p. chabaudi  and that it is enriched in the promoter regions of go annotated microtubule-based movement genes in p. falciparum . the core sequence agaca was also present in the promoters of  <dig> of the  <dig> p. falciparum male-specific p. berghei gametocyte genes, but only  <dig> of the  <dig> p. falciparum female-specific p. berghei gametocyte genes identified in a recent proteomic analysis performed on p. berghei male and female gametocytes  <cit> . examples of some of these male-specific genes included dynein-associated protein , dynein light chain , dynein heavy chains  and kinesin  suggesting that pfm <dig>  may play a potential role in regulating the production of the microtubule-rich flagellum specific to male gametocytes. furthermore, because we also observed that although pfm <dig>  occurs at a moderate frequency in the genome , with many genes containing the motif possesses two or more copies , cooperative binding of trans-factors within the proper genomic context may be important for the proper function of this motif.

cell invasion regulatory elements
malaria parasites possess unique sub-cellular organelles  that perform parasite-specific functions during red blood cell invasion. studies in s. cerevisiae have demonstrated that genes whose proteins are co-localized to macromolecular complexes or sub-cellular organelles such as the ribosome often exhibit tight transcriptional co-expression regulated by similar cis-regulatory elements  <cit> . thus, we hypothesized that co-expressed genes whose products are recruited to these parasite-specific sub-cellular complexes might also be regulated by common cis-regulatory elements. analysis of the cell invasion cluster revealed three candidate motifs  of which pfm <dig>   and pfm <dig>    were of particular biological interest. pfm <dig>  was found upstream of five of the eight characterized microneme genes encoding proteins localized to the peripheral surface of the merozoite including the apical membrane antigen ama- <dig>  <cit> . pfm <dig>  was found to be associated with genes encoding proteins localized to the rhoptries including the rhoptry-associated proteins  rap <dig> and rap <dig>  pfm <dig>  was also well conserved in upstream regions of homologous genes in the rodent malaria species p. yoelii and p. berghei  as well as upstream of the p. vivax rap <dig> gene . closer inspection of all the annotated rhoptry genes in p. falciparum revealed that highly similar sequences to pfm <dig>  were found within  <dig> bases upstream of the start codon of nine of the ten rhoptry genes described by cowman et al.  <cit>  and that in all but one instance, two copies of this motif were separated by six or seven nucleotides, gtgcagtgca . other genes expressed during schizogony bearing this larger dyad motif were the uncharacterized genes mal6p <dig>  and pfd0295c, both of which encode homologous proteins to components of the toxoplasma gondii rhoptries as identified by proteomic analysis  <cit>  . furthermore, the motif is generally not found upstream of other genes expressed during the invasive stages of the erythrocytic cell cycle that are localized to different cellular locations  indicating this motif is likely involved in rhoptry-specific gene expression.

a version of pfm <dig>  was previously identified as the spe <dig> motif in a study on var gene expression  <cit> . var genes, of which there are approximately  <dig> in the p. falciparum genome, encode extremely antigenically variable erythrocyte membrane-localized proteins that are subject to complex mechanisms of gene silencing  <cit> . using emsas and promoter deletion mapping, voss and co-workers demonstrated that the spe <dig> motif is bound by a protein in the late stages of the intraerythrocytic cycle  and that elimination of the spe <dig> motif repeat array resulted in an approximately 2-fold increase in promoter activity  <cit> . the authors interpreted these data to suggest that the spe <dig> motif serves as part of a silencing mechanism as var genes are exclusively transcribed during the late ring stages of the intraerythrocytic cycle  <cit> . however, the schizont-specific emsa shift of the spe <dig> motif also supports our gems results that suggest pfm <dig>  is the binding site for a rhoptry-specific transcriptional activator potentially responsible for activation of cell invasion genes during the late stages of the intraerythrocytic cell cycle. the notion of a binding protein serving a dual role in var gene silencing and rhoptry-gene activation has precedent in the literature as in the case of the yeast repressor-activator protein rap <dig> which both activates and silences transcription of mating-type genes in s. cerevisiae  <cit> . furthermore, the spe <dig> motif identified by voss and co-workers was found in tandem copies approximately  <dig> bases upstream of telomeric var genes unlike the 400– <dig> base pair location of most of the pfm <dig>  instances we found using gems suggesting location of the motif relative to gene transcription start sites may be of importance for biological function .

we further investigated the role pfm <dig>  may play in rap gene expression using transient transfection luciferase reporter gene assays and emsas. specifically, we chose to explore the role pfm <dig>  played in rap <dig>  expression because this gene had a simple structure with no introns making the identification of the true start codon relatively straightforward. transient transfection of synchronized parasites with a luciferase construct driven by the native ~ <dig> base pair promoter region upstream of the rap <dig> start codon resulted in expression pattern that was consistent with previously published microarray data   <cit> . however, precise deletion of the two copies of pfm <dig>  and interspersed sequence the pfm <dig>  at  <dig> base pairs upstream of the rap <dig> start codon abolished of distinct stage-specific expression pattern demonstrating pfm <dig>  is essential for proper control of transcript levels .

next, we performed emsas to investigate if pfm <dig>  was bound by trans-acting factors. specifically, a 34-mer oligonucleotide probe containing pfm <dig>  and surrounding sequence from the rap <dig> promoter was radiolabeled using klenow fragment and incubated with nuclear extracts isolated from mixed asexual stage parasites. this resulted in formation of several shift complexes that could be competed away with cold probe of identical sequence in a concentration dependent manner , but not by random 80% at and 20% at probes suggesting sequence specificity for this binding event . furthermore, the multiple shifts diminished equally with addition of competitor indicating that the various observed complexes are most likely the result of a disassociation of protein complex or proteolysis. overall, these data support the hypothesis that pfm <dig> /spe <dig> is an activator of rhoptry gene expression in addition to its role as a possible silencer of var gene expression.

protein biosynthesis regulatory elements
analysis of the gene cluster "cytosolic ribosome " resulted in the identification of three motifs  of which the most statistically significant was pfm <dig>   . pfm <dig>  is positionally enriched occurring in highest frequency between  <dig> to  <dig> bases upstream of gene start codon . this is in contrast with motifs identified from other processes such as sexual development or cell invasion where motif distributions are generally found predominately in the range of  <dig> to  <dig> bases. there was also evolutionary support for this motif as it was well conserved in the rodent malaria species p. chabaudi and p. yoelii . this motif was also the approximate reverse complement of the "g-box" motif  previously discovered by militello and co-workers using an alignace analysis of the promoter regions of annotated p. falciparum heat shock genes  <cit> .

a long-standing question in malaria research is whether environmental or drug stimuli trigger transcriptional responses in genes active in the affected biological pathways. in s. cerevisiae, specific components of signaling pathways have been identified using a dna microarray-profiling approach to analyze the yeast transcriptional responses to various drug pressures  <cit> . if p. falciparum behaves in a similar fashion to yeast, insights could be gained into the biological targets of certain anti-malarial drugs for little is known regarding specific modes of action. since pfm <dig>  was originally identified as the g-box motif using heat shock annotated genes, it provided us with an opportunity to test the biological specificity of transcriptional responses in p. falciparum to heat shock. if the application of heat shock resulted in a specific transcriptional response mediated by a cis-regulatory element, we hypothesized that we would be able to re-identify pfm <dig>  from a list of differentially expressed genes obtained from experimental heat shock transcriptional response data. to test this hypothesis, we exposed a mixed asexual culture p. falciparum to a 42°c heat shock for one hour and identified differentially expressed genes relative to a negative control by hybridization to our whole genome high-density microarray. the greatest fold change for any one gene between heat shock and negative control was  <dig>  demonstrating that transcriptional responses to environmental stimuli are not as robust in p. falciparum as has been reported in other organisms such as yeast and humans . however, by defining the top  <dig> differentially expressed genes identified by a non-parametric mack-skillings as a positive set  and searching the  <dig> bases upstream of these genes, gems analysis was able to rediscover a motif similar to pfm <dig> /g-box motif   <cit> . although this motif was the 12th best scoring motif in this analysis, the fact that gems was able to rediscover the g-box equivalent motif even from this modest heat shock transcriptional response was encouraging. since versions of pfm <dig>  were also discovered from clusters of genes that show similar expression patterns to ribosomal genes, namely mitotic cell cycle  and trna metabolism  , as well as from intron regions of genes involved in trna metabolism  and the ribosome  , it is possible that in general the g-box motif is primarily associated with highly expressed trophozoite-specific metabolic genes and that identification of the g-box through heat shock gene promoter analysis by militello et al. was merely fortuitous as heat shock genes are highly-expressed during these same stages.

antigenic variation regulatory elements
in p. falciparum there are several gene families  that encode proteins expressed on the surface of infected red blood cells that are important for parasite cytoadherance and virulence. although the coding regions of members of these gene families are extremely variable enabling the parasite to switch expression of isoforms of these surface proteins to successfully evade host immune system detection, the promoter regions of these are remarkably conserved  <cit> . it is therefore necessary to take great care in interpreting the results of any gems analysis of promoters of these genes as the exceptionally high-scoring motif candidates can result simply because the promoter regions of these antigenic variation genes are duplicated across members of the same gene family. for instance, the top-scoring motif pfm <dig>    obtained from analysis of the antigenic variation cluster  was identified because large swaths of the promoter regions of these antigenic genes were conserved. this was illustrated by its strong positional enrichment 100– <dig> base pairs upstream of gene start codons. in another case however, the motif pfm <dig>    was found upstream of members of the rifin and var gene families in regions where sequences upstream or downstream were not conserved as represented by a still present, yet less pronounced, positional enrichment 400– <dig> base pairs upstream of gene start codons. therefore, while positional enrichment of motif location relative to start codons can be used as functional support when the motif is derived from genes of multiple functions, a high-degree of positional enrichment can also be used to identify a motif as a potential artifact if the genes come from a highly-duplicated gene family as is the case for antigenic variation genes.

sporozoite-specific regulatory elements
the sporozoite stage of the parasite life cycle is the subject of intense investigation because transcripts or proteins present during this stage are likely responsible for the effectiveness of the irradiated sporozoite malaria vaccine  <cit> . the most significant motif gems identified associated with sporozoite-stage gene expression was pfm <dig>   . pfm <dig>  was found in the promoters of  <dig> of the  <dig> genes in the sporozoite-specific cluster  including the well-known genes sporozoite surface protein  <dig> , csp, and maebl . both trap and csp are major vaccine targets and identifying other genes that are co-regulated could point to additional vaccine targets. furthermore, csp appears to be involved in host immune modulation so that the transcription factors that bind to the element and control the expression of this gene could represent promising drug targets. interestingly, two other genes whose promoters contained pfm <dig>  included the genes succinate dehydrogenase and citrate synthase that are nearly adjacent in the mitochondrial tricarboxylic acid  cycle. both these genes, as well as other components of the tca cycle are for the most part highly expressed in sporozoites and gametocytes  <cit> , therefore suggesting an active tca cycle during the insect stages of the parasite life cycle .

motifs are highlighted in bold. start and stop locations are relative to start codons.

cell metabolism and dna replication regulatory elements
motifs associated with cell metabolism and dna replication genes overall were less striking. for example, pfm <dig>   , identified from the dna replication and chromosome cycle cluster , was found relatively ubiquitously potentially because it is involved in the regulation of a large cohort of genes expressed during middle to latter parts of the intraerythrocytic life cycle. another motif of slightly greater interest was pfm <dig>   , which was identified from the isoprenoid metabolism cluster . this motif was found upstream of four of the seven annotated isoprenoid metabolism pathway genes  <cit> . isoprenoid metabolism occurs in the apicoplast, a plastid organelle unique to apicomplexans that is involved in the synthesis of lipids and heme  <cit> . thus, transcription factors that regulate this entire pathway through pfm <dig>  may serve as promising drug targets for the inhibition of this entire parasite-specific metabolic pathway.

key aspects of gene enrichment motif searching
the two aspects of gems that appeared critical to its success in p. falciparum were: 1) the use hypergeometric scoring function based on empirical sequences derived from highly co-regulated opi gene clusters; 2) mismatch and similarity threshold optimization routine that objectively identified optimal pwms. on the first point, when dealing with repetitive and base-biased genomes such as p. falciparum, hypergeometric-based scoring approaches seem to have an advantage over background-modeling approaches because they compare the frequency of full motifs occurring in empirically derived positive and negative sequence sets rather than merely relying on an estimation of background nucleotide frequencies. thus, with hypergeometric-based approaches, repetitive sequences present both in positive and negative sets cancel one another out where many low-order background-modeling approaches would identify the same repetitive sequences as potential motifs because they vary significantly from the background estimation. indeed, it has been previously observed that hypergeometric-based scoring functions in general tend to produce better p-value scores in motif ranking criterion when compared to light-weighted map functions  <cit> . it should also be noted that we are not the first to use hypergeometric-based scoring approaches for motif discovery in p. falciparum. militello and co-workers previously applied the alignace algorithm, which uses a hypergeometric-based scoring function for efficient post-processing of motif candidates scores  <cit> , to identify the g-box element in the promoter regions of hand-selected set of p. falciparum heat shock genes  <cit> . similarly, van noort and co-workers applied a more sophisticated alignace-based approach to identify  <dig> highly-abundant putative regulatory elements in the p. falciparum genome  <cit> .

the second key to the success of gems appeared to be the implementation of the automated mismatch and similarity threshold optimization routine that objectively identified optimal pwms. a pwm without a similarity threshold is meaningless because it is simply a probabilistic description of base frequency for a motif based on collection of possible cis-regulatory elements. as a result, many motif-finding algorithms that employ pwms to represent regulatory elements require manual selection of similarity thresholds, which can be an arbitrary and tedious process. however, selection of these thresholds is critical to obtaining quality pwms that best represent regulatory elements whose enrichment in positive gene sets can best explain the co-regulation of the gene cluster. by using an opi-like parameter optimization routine, much of the arbitrariness of similarity and mismatch threshold determination is bypassed and pwms are optimized based on a biologically relevant p-value minimization rather than by often times vague user assumptions. this is especially important for organisms about which little is known regarding regulatory elements since in these cases it is difficult to minimize false positives and negatives through element rediscovery trial and error due to lack of information. the optimization routine is also automated, which is particularly important when gems is applied to many gene clusters resulting in 100s to 1000s of motifs for which manual determination of similarity and mismatch thresholds would be impractical.

false positives and false negatives
as with any in silico regulatory element discovery process, the possibilities of false positives and false negatives was always considered during our analysis. although false positives are best addressed by analyses of randomly selected promoter sequences  and the consideration supporting evidence such as evolutionary conservation or motif positional enrichment relative to start codons to identify those highest confidence candidates for validation using more traditional experimental techniques, there are several improvements that could be made in the future to potentially lower the false negative rates. a recent analysis of p. falciparum cdna libraries revealed that an estimated ~24% of p. falciparum open reading frames may have errors in their annotated structure  <cit> . as a result, the delimitation of the promoter sequences we chose in this study in some instances may have been less than ideal. in the future, a better approach would be to use transcription start sites instead of start codons to define upstream promoter sequences for motif discovery. for this study, however, comprehensive information was not readily available for p. falciparum as attempts to map transcriptional start sites have yielded ambiguous results  <cit> . the inclusion of transcriptional start sites would serve to improve accuracy of our gems analysis since it would allow the better distinction between conserved elements that are potentially bound by the core transcriptional complex versus those that act as enhancer/repressor binding sites. it is also possible because we focused our search space primarily on the  <dig> bases upstream of start codons that elements presented herein may be an overrepresentation of core transcriptional complex binding sequences. lastly, another potential disadvantage of the gems is that it is not well suited for discovery of long motifs that may be separated by spacer elements. we attempted to search for larger motifs as part of the gems analysis by searching for associations between individual 5– <dig> mers due to their physical linkage on the chromosome as was done in the rediscovery of the gal <dig> binding site ccg) in yeast  <cit> . however, applying this type of method in p. falciparum did not reveal many larger sites that were more impressive than the half sites alone, with the notable exception being the cell invasion-related motif pfm <dig> .

beyond the consideration of the promoter input sequences and motif search spaces, improvements in the clusters provided to gems for analysis will likely also improve our false negative discovery rate in the future. we primarily relied on go annotations as the basis for the opi clustering of genes showing differential expression across the parasite life cycle. as our understanding of p. falciparum gene function improves and as additional expression profiles from the liver, early sporozoite and mosquito midgut stages of the parasite life cycle are obtained, the quality of opi clusters will improve thus providing better starting points for gems analysis. having expression data from related parasite species will also likely improve confidence in genes that are expressed at low levels, resulting in larger sets of co-expressed genes and higher-confidence motif detection. while cdna and some limited microarray data are available for some of these stages and species at present, we have not used this information to date because these data were collected on a variety of different platforms using different normalization methods and to different degrees of completeness thus making their incorporation into our algorithms difficult. lastly, although in this study we only considered life cycle expression data in the main analysis, the inclusion of microarray data of transcriptional responses to various drugs or conditions could also be used for the basis of opi clustering and gems analysis to elucidate components of drug response pathways. in the future we aim to incorporate data acquired from these p. falciparum life cycle stages and drug treatments as well as corresponding rodent malaria expression data using a high-density microarray platform.

CONCLUSIONS
in silico approaches of regulatory element discovery promise to serve as a rapid and efficient means for generating high quality hypotheses for further biological investigation in organisms where little is known regarding transcriptional control mechanisms. we have demonstrated through the development of gems and its application to opi-generated microarray gene clusters that in silico regulatory element discovery is indeed feasible for even the most challenging repeat-sequence-rich base-biased genomes, such as that of p. falciparum. by utilizing a hypergeometric-based scoring function and a pwm optimization routine, gems predicted with high-confidence  <dig> putative regulatory elements from the upstream regions of genes contained within a diverse array of functional gene clusters, thus supporting the hypothesis that cis-regulatory elements play an important role in the transcriptional control of many p. falciparum biological processes. we also provided biological support for the importance of one cell invasion-related element  by emsa and reporter gene assay thus demonstrating that these putative elements hold much promise for further biological characterization. overall, the many putative regulatory elements described herein will serve as much-needed starting points for future decoding of the currently poorly understood basis of gene regulation in malaria parasites. knowing precisely how transcription is controlled in these systems will improve our ability to genetically engineer parasites, test hypotheses about gene function, and eventually develop novel therapeutics against malaria.

