BACKGROUND
chimeric mrnas fused by two previously separate genes located on different genomic loci may allow a limited number of genes to encode a substantially large number of mrnas and proteins. they are expected to increase proteomic diversity through chimeric proteins or altered regulation. as a consequence, gene fusion can change the properties of precursor proteins and can even perturb normal regulatory pathways and initiate or stimulate neoplastic cell growth. a well-known example is the bcr-abl <dig> fusion gene, which is the result of the chromosomal translocation t and is responsible for 90% of chronic myelogenous leukemia cases
 <cit> . in this sense, chimeric genes can be used as desirable therapeutic targets for cancers. for instance, matinib mesylate  can target the oncogenic kinase activity of bcr-abl <dig> in chronic myeloid leukemia
 <cit> . therefore, the identification and analysis of novel chimeric genes will pave the way for a greater understanding of the role of gene fusion.

chromosomal translocation is generally responsible for the generation of some chimeric mrnas in cancer cells. therefore, chimeric mrnas are often viewed as potential diagnostic biomarkers for tumours caused by chromosomal translocation. however, a low amount of a chimeric rna  was detected in normal endometrial tissues, joining the jazf <dig> gene on chromosome band 7p <dig> to the jjaz1/suz <dig> gene on chromosome band 17q21
 <cit> . chimeric rnas and proteins are identical to those produced from a chromosomal rearrangement found in human endometrial stromal tumours
 <cit> . the explanation generally offered for this finding is that specific chromosomal rearrangements occur within small numbers of cells in healthy tissues. however, no rearranged bands t were detected in normal cells
 <cit> . given the absence of any detectable rearranged dna in cells producing chimeric rnas, the obvious explanation is the rearrangement at the rna level. after incubation of mixed extracts from a human endometrial stromal cell line and from a rhesus monkey fibroblast cell line, rhesus jazf <dig> exons were joined to human jjaz <dig> exons, implying that the jazf1-jjaz <dig> rna is a result of trans-splicing
 <cit> .

in eukaryotes, trans-splicing is a special event in rna processing where exons from two different primary rna transcripts are joined from end to end and then ligated. in simulating the rna cis-splicing mechanism, a cdna is thought to be generated by trans-splicing when it is aligned to multiple non-contiguous genomic loci and the fusion junction obeys canonical gu-ag splice site. however, how precursor genes find each other before splicing remains to be elucidated, and where the trans-splicing event takes place is still poorly understood.

some chimeras are derived from a non-spliceosome mechanism
 <cit> . short homologous sequences are proposed to be associated with the generation of chimeric mrnas in eukaryotes, suggesting that the ‘misaligns’ of short homologous sequences could guide the chromosomal interaction for the proximity of distal genes
 <cit> . in addition, read-through/splicing is another way of generating chimeric mrnas
 <cit> . in this process, an mrna starts from the upstream gene, reads through intergenic regions, and ends at a termination point of the adjacent downstream gene, with the region in between removed by splicing. however, read-through/splicing cannot explain the chimeras derived from different chromosomes or opposite strands. some chimeric mrnas may have originated from the strand-switching feature of the reverse transcripatase
 <cit> . in some cases, chimeric mrnas are considered as artefacts from the reverse transcription polymerase chain reaction 
 <cit> .

the presence of chimeric mrnas in normal cells is a critical issue because the important pathways in normal cells would be disrupted by the potential therapy targeting chimeric mrnas and proteins. the identification of chimeric mrnas in normal cells will provide a wealth of biological information for this issue. the pig  is an economically important species and a potential medical model for some human health issues
 <cit> . therefore, research on chimeric mrnas in normal cells can benefit from pigs. results from the present study provide the first broad overview of chimeric mrnas in pigs, and their analysis in normal tissue will aid in the further understanding of the molecular mechanisms of gene fusions.

RESULTS
identification of putative chimeric rnas
after inspecting the chromosomal loci of mrnas from the pigs, many mrnas were located on non-contiguous positions. an issue whether any of these mrnas are real chimeras fused from two previously separate transcripts was raised. highly qualitative alignments of mrnas to the s. scrofa chromosomes  in the genome browser database of the university of california santa cruz 
 <cit>  may shed light on this issue. alignments having at least 96% sequence identity and a minimum length of  <dig> nt were used in this study. we only used mrnas that were matched on two non-contiguous loci to ensure that inferred chimeras were results of actual fused transcripts rather than alignment artefacts. alignments from two non-contiguous loci were required not to possess long similar sequences at the putative junction sites to discard false positive results from homologous, paralogous, or random spurious hits. in this step, we only allowed overlaps or gaps of up to  <dig> nt within the fusion junction to accommodate small errors in alignment that occur at the edges of the alignment. consequently,  <dig> mrnas were inferred as putative chimeras , including  <dig> inter-chromosomal and  <dig> intra-chromosomal junction events. in the intra-chromosomal events,  <dig> and  <dig> mrnas were inter-strand and intra-strand junction events, respectively. only three candidates involved mrnas from the mitochondrial genome. figure
 <dig> displays the distribution of putative chimeric mrnas in chromosomes, showing that inter-strand events are overrepresented in the set of predicted chimeric mrnas.

for the confirmation of a hybrid transcript candidate, we inspected whether the fusion point corresponded to a pair of known splice sites. we separately extracted the chromosomal dna sequences of the 5′ and 3′ partners of an inferred chimera and then connected the two non-contiguous genomic sequences to an artificially fused genomic sequence. each inferred chimera was aligned to the corresponding artificially fused genomic sequence using the sim <dig> program
 <cit>  to take into account consensus splice signals. the alignment around the fusion point was checked. only the fusion points that were aligned precisely, without a gap or overlap, were retained. in addition, the reading frame must have structural integrity. finally,  <dig> candidates had clear trans-splicing sites,  <dig> of which obeyed the gt/ag rule .

to confirm further the trans-splicing events,  <dig> chimeric candidates were randomly selected for the rt-pcr assay using rna from a number of tissues . an rt-pcr product was required to span the fusion point. through this assay,  <dig> out of randomly selected candidates showed identity with the expected fusion sequences . given that the transcription of mrnas may vary in different tissues or stages of life, the selected samples for the rt-pcr assay may not be suitable for their expression. in addition, all mrnas used in the present study have prior biological studies annotated in databases of the ucsc and the ncbi . thus, the rate detected by the rt-pcr assay might underestimate the positive rate of chimeric mrna identification. the use of expressed sequence tag  and rna-sequencing data from more tissues or stages would supply the gaps of the rt-pcr assay.

putative chimeras were aligned to ests downloaded from the ucsc database to seek support from external experimental evidences and verify the putative fusion junctions. if at least  <dig> nt of the sequence on either side of a putative fusion point overlap with the ests, this candidate was retained for further analysis. the  <dig> candidates were supported by at least three ests .

mapping putative pig chimeras to known human chimeric transcripts
putative pig chimeric mrnas were aligned to known human chimeric transcripts annotated in the chimera database  to estimate the relationship between two kinds of transcripts
 <cit> . the fusion junctions of  <dig> putative pig chimeric mrnas were matched to known human chimeric mrnas . however, only two putative pig chimera variants  whose fusion junction was overlapped with that of a known human chimeric mrna  were found.

validation by transcriptome sequencing
we collected  <dig>  million sequence reads from the transcriptome sequencing of liver tissue samples from  <dig> adult bama miniature pigs . this procedure was done to verify that the putative chimeric mrnas were real expressed genes rather than involved in exonic coding sequences shared among multiple genes or homologous pseudogenes. the illumina genome anlayzer ii was employed to sequence these samples. two length types of single-end reads,  <dig> and  <dig> nt, were generated . for the uniformity of the read length,  <dig> nt reads were trimmed to  <dig> nt from a low-quality  end, which would increase the quality of  <dig> nt reads.

reads from different samples were mapped on the pig genome  using the bowtie software 
 <cit> . this bowtie version does not report gapped alignments. hence, a read mapped on the genome was derived from a contiguous genomic locus. in this sense, some unmapped reads may have originated from non-contiguous genomic loci and may therefore be suitable in inspecting splice junctions. based on this fact, these unmapped reads were aligned to putative chimeric mrna. in this step, we required that the junction reads should overlap with at least  <dig> nt of the sequence on either side of the chimeric junction. furthermore, a fusion junction mapped by junction reads derived from at least three different start positions or at least three samples was considered a validated chimeric event. consequently, up to  <dig> fusion junctions were validated by this strategy . the  <dig> and  <dig> events were expressed in at least three and all samples, respectively .

estimation was further performed on the validity of junction reads that overlapped fusion points with a minimum of  <dig> nt. in the present study, reads were trimmed to  <dig> nt. therefore, the length of fusion junctions was  <dig> nt  by requiring a  <dig> nt overhang for read mapping fusion points. if the start position of a read located in the region from the 1st to the 67th nt of the fusion junction, the read was termed as a junction read. in this estimation, reads from  <dig> liver samples were pooled together. the  <dig> fusion junctions were matched by at least one read. among these junctions,  <dig> %  were overlapped by at least three reads and  <dig> %  were validated by reads starting from at least three different positions .

interestingly, we observed a non-uniform distribution of reads along some mrna sequences. for example, the read coverage showed multi-peaks along the mrna sequence of ak <dig> . given that chimeric mrnas share sequences with their precursor genes, determining which reads come from chimeras is necessary. reads mapped on the fusion junctions were derived only from chimeric mrnas. however, reads mapped on positions away from the fusion junctions would be derived from either chimeric mrnas or their participating parental transcripts. an apparent trough was detected in the region from  <dig> nt to  <dig> nt, corresponding to the trans-splicing site at  <dig> nt . the lower read coverage along this chimeric junction indicated the lower expression of this chimeric gene relative to its precursors. in addition, except for the trans-splicing site, other troughs were closed to the cis-splicing sites of ak <dig>  indicating the existence of spliced variants of ak <dig> among the samples.

variation of expression among individuals
we used a cut-off that required junction events to be present in all samples and unique without an overlap with other chimeras to access further the differential expression of unique chimeric mrnas without the confounding issues of tissues. this cut-off resulted in  <dig> unique chimeric events. the dispersion of the expression of each unique chimeric event across the samples was measured using the coefficient of variation , the percentage ratio of the sample standard deviation to the sample mean of the junction reads for each event. figure
2b represents the distribution of junction events along the cvs. the mean of the cvs was 57%, with a standard deviation of 14%, following a normal distribution . this result implies that most of these unique chimeric events were considered middle variances in the expression.

we compared the expression of these events between male and female samples to gain further insight. the mean cv of the females was lower than that of the males . unique events were ordered using a nonparametric two-sided rank sum  test, a statistical test that considers the difference in expression levels between male and female samples . the p-value of all events, except for three, was greater than  <dig> , indicating non-significant variance in the expression of these events between sexes.

variation of expression among pig breeds
more attention was given to the variation in the expression of chimeric events among the pig breeds. a set of  <dig> nt single-end reads from three rna-pooling samples of skeletal muscle was analysed in the same way as those from liver samples . these samples were obtained during embryo collection at slaughter. the first, second, and last samples were pooled using equivalent amounts of rna from three adult female wuzhishan, tongcheng, and landrace pigs, respectively. these samples may remove the difference among female individuals to some extent. the mean of the cvs was 35%, with a standard deviation of 19%, spanning 0% to 89% and following a normal distribution .

dna motif in the genomic region of chimeras
to exploit the putative mechanism responsible for the generation of chimeric mrnas, we attempted to retrieve dna motif sequences in two non-continuous genomic loci of chimeric mrnas using the meme software 
 <cit> . in this step, for  <dig> putative chimeric mrnas, similar dna sequences were found between the 5′ and 3′ partners . similar sequences were prevalent in the upstream, intronic, and downstream sequences, but deficient in exons . none of the similar sequences was found in the exonic pair of the 5′ and 3′ partners. the lack of similarity in the exonic pair may result from the elimination of chimeras with long overlapping sequences in the fusion junction, implying that although we cannot entirely exclude false positive results from homologous or paralogous genes, we minimised the effect of these events on the identification as much as possible. this result agrees with the suggestion that some regulatory elements, such as transcription factor binding sites or enhancers, are highly pronounced in non-coding regions.

the table indicates the count of potential dna motifs shared within the genomic regions of the 5′ and 3′ partners. the rows represent the genomic regions for the upstream, exon, intron, and downstream regions of the 5′ partner and the columns of the 3′ partner. numbers in parentheses indicate the count of shared sequences that significantly match the known dna motifs in the jaspar core . up: upstream; down: downstream.

subsequently, these shared sequences were submitted to the tomtom
 <cit>  software in the meme suite 
 <cit>  for comparison against the database of known motifs. this database is the jaspar core  that contains a curated, non-redundant set of profiles derived from published collections of experimentally defined transcription factor binding sites for multi-cellular eukaryotes
 <cit> . the  <dig> shared sequences significantly matched known dna motifs in the jaspar core database . among these matched sequences,  <dig> were shared in the upstream regions of both partners . this finding suggests that the same or similar transcription factors would bind these potential shared dna motifs to coordinate the transcription of parental genes, which may be necessary in generating chimeric mrnas.

the ccctc-binding factor  is a versatile trans-acting factor that binds distal regulatory elements such as enhancers, and ctcf binding sites are commonly distributed along the vertebrate genomes
 <cit> . thus, we placed efforts on computationally identifying potential ctct binding sites shared in two non-continuous genomic regions of chimeric mrnas. four dna motifs shared in parental genomic regions were significantly similar with known human ctcf binding sites . this result suggests that some trans-acting factors, such as the ctct-binding factor, might bind these shared motifs to facilitate the approximation of the distal genomic parts and make up the subcellular environment for the generation of chimeric mrnas. communication between distal chromosomal elements would be an origin for the nuclear processes of gene fusions.

discussion
following the hypothesis that a fusion transcription is derived by two non-continuously genomic loci, the present study revealed a list of pig chimeric mrnas validated by the rna-seq and est data . a set of unique chimeric mrnas showed a middle variance among both individuals and breeds. the results provided detailed information regarding pig chimeric mrnas and important implications for gene fusions.

several factors including strand-switching, deep sequencing errors, or reference genome errors would result in false positive results. therefore, we rigorously inspected each chimera using several criteria. first, all the mrnas used in the present study have prior biological information annotated in the ucsc and ncbi databases to avoid reference genome errors as much as possible. to remove false results from homologous, paralogous, or random spurious hits, strict filtering was performed on the highly qualitative alignments of mrnas to the s. scrofa chromosomes. trans-splicing sites were then inspected for each candidate to exclude strand-switching or the random connection of two cdnas. in addition,  <dig> independent samples were used to evaluate the expression of the fusion transcripts. we could not completely rule out the possibility of the creation of a false fusion in the process of cdna library construction. however, random breakage and rejoining of two cdnas are unlikely to happen at the exact exon boundaries of two genes and simultaneously in multiple samples. thus, although the present identification of chimeric rnas filters out some genuine fusion gene transcripts by stringent cut-offs, it is conservative and reliable.

interestingly, the transcriptional reading-through was infrequently involved in the intra-strand chimeric candidates identified in the present study. rna-polymerase generally ends at transcriptional terminators, preventing it from reading through the downstream gene. however, in unusual cases, long transcriptions span terminators and produce new, hybrid, multi-locus transcripts
 <cit> . we checked the coordinates of putative chimeras on the pig genome and found that the exons of most intra-strand chimeras were out of order compared with those found in the genome. for example, the 5′ partner of ak <dig> is located at the downstream of the 3′ partner on the plus strand in chromosome  <dig> . ak <dig> is another example that a 3′ partner lies in the body of the 5′ partner . among the  <dig> intra-strand chimeras,  <dig> follow the ak <dig> way, five take the ak <dig> way, and two occur in the third way that the 5′ partner lies in the body of the 3′ partner. the skewed representation of chimeras in the three ways was due to the elimination of chimeras with long overlapping sequences in the fusion junction. only one chimera follows the order that the 5′ partner is located in the upstream of the 3′ partner. however, the distance between partners is  <dig> , <dig> nt.

during transcription in vivo, different genes frequently share the same transcription factory where nascent rna production and rna polymerase ii seem to be localised
 <cit> . for example, the igh on chromosome  <dig> is preferentially recruited to the same transcription factory where the myc gene on chromosome  <dig> is highly transcribed
 <cit> . many active genes can dynamically co-localise to shared sites of ongoing transcription, which may be induced by the classical effectors of gene expression including trans-acting factors, enhancers, chromatin modifications, and chromosomal interaction
 <cit> . for example, ctcf can create the dynamic nature of nuclear spatial organisation of different genes by binding to the elements on distal genomic regions or different chromosomes
 <cit> . the recruitment of different genes into shared factories is expected to have a fundamental role in gene expression, which may efficiently share limited resources or perhaps coordinate the transcription of different genes.

the co-localisation of different genes into the same transcription factories provides insights into the origin of chimeric mrnas. we found similar sequences shared in the 5′ and 3′ partners of some chimeric mrnas. some shared dna motifs significantly matched the known dna-binding motifs. for example, four shared dna motifs have significant similarity with known human ctcf binding sites. the ctcf can recognise and bind to different dna motifs by its zinc-finger domains
 <cit> . induced by trans-acting factors, such as the ctcf, parental genes may dynamically co-localise to the shared transcription factory, and then the same or similar transcription factors coordinate the transcription of them to give birth to chimeric mrnas .to some extent, this result agrees with the suggestion that short homologous sequences at the junction sites may induce the formation of chimeric mrnas
 <cit> .

as earlier common computational methods for identifying precursor genes, a gene with the best alignments to a chimeric mrna was considered as the precursor gene
 <cit> . however, exons often overlap exons for some cases. for example, the 5′ partner of the chimeric mrna ak <dig> was precisely mapped on the exons of mrnas ak <dig>  ak <dig>  and ak <dig> in chromosome  <dig>  therefore, the precursor mrna would be discretionary if multiple transcriptional start sites were present. furthermore, the partners of chimeric mrnas may be transcribed independently at their own transcriptional start sites that are not associated with other genes. thus, the selection of which variant would serve as the precursor gene would need more molecular experimental identifications.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study provided detailed information on pig chimeric mrnas and further analysed the expression of unique chimeras among samples. interestingly, similar dna sequences widely shared in the two non-continuously genomic regions of chimeric mrnas. similar dna sequences that share in the upstream regions of both partners significantly matched the known transcription factor binding sites in the jaspar core database, suggesting the potential coordinated transcription of the parental genes. in addition, possible ctcf binding sites were also observed in the parental genomic regions. we supposed that trans-acting factors, such as ctcf, would induce the spatial organisation of parental genes to the same transcriptional factory so that parental genes would be coordinatively transcribed to give birth to chimeric mrnas. although this hypothesis needs further experimental evidence, it will provide useful information for the investigation of the mechanism for the generation of chimeric mrnas. overall, our results will aid in the further understanding of chimeric mrnas.

