BACKGROUND
the current stream of genome sequence data has lead to a bottleneck between dna sequencing and elucidation of protein function  <cit> . therefore, considerable effort has been expended to develop computational methods to suggest functions for putative genes  <cit> . in particular, many researchers have focused on attempting to predict the structure of unknown proteins using only their sequences  <cit> . the structure of a protein provides some of the richest information about its possible functions, as well as hints as to important residues and the location of functional sites  <cit> .

homology-based methods for structure prediction rely on the observation that proteins that share a common ancestor will usually have similar sequences, and that, in turn, similar protein sequences produce proteins with similar fold and  similar functions  <cit> . however, a given protein structure can be formed by a highly diverse array of possible sequences, and over long evolutionary time scales protein sequence divergence can be extensive  <cit> . proteins which have similar structures may display such a paucity of sequence similarity that detection via current sequence homology search methodologies is not possible  <cit> .

the profile-type methods address this problem by incorporating family-specific information inherent in multiple sequence alignments into sequence searches  <cit> , and they can be generated automatically based on alignments built in an iterative fashion  <cit> . hidden markov models  have been adapted for use as a particularly powerful profiling method  <cit> , and have therefore been termed "profile hidden markov models"  <cit> . as an alternative to iteration, profile hmms can also be built based on carefully constructed seed alignments  <cit> . profile hmms built using either method can also be used as a panel of models, against which unknown sequences may be tested for similarity to a known family or superfamily  <cit> .

because profile hmms model the information present in a sequence alignment, they are affected by quality of the input alignment  <cit> , but the accuracy of alignments based only on sequence can be limited in cases of distant homology  <cit> . however, sequences at this level of similarity are the most informative sequences with which to build a model, as they will clearly demonstrate which sections of the family are well conserved, and the exact nature of the conservation.

given the limitations inherent in sequence alignments as inputs for profile hmms, researchers have explored the use of sequence alignments derived directly from structural alignments of proteins, particularly in cases where superfamily-level assignments are desired  <cit> . structural alignments eliminate many of the problems with standard seed alignments. first, they can provide a highly diverse set of sequences from a variety of superfamily members, with more diversity than might be found even with an extensive iterative search. second, because the structures are known, structure alignments can be used to provide an accurate alignment of the sequences.

one limitation in using structure alignments for profile hmms is the weak level of structure representation in many superfamilies. in addition, coverage of a given superfamily is often strong in one area and weak in others. hence, models made from alignments of these sequences, even if supplemented with additional homologous sequence, may not optimally describe the entire superfamily in question. it has also been suggested that there is an optimal range of sequence similarity for training of profile hmms, and that using a very broad range of diverse sequence can lead to "profile dilution", reducing model quality  <cit> .

accordingly, the literature record for the use of structure alignments for profile hmms yields mixed results. several researchers, using a variety of experimental arrangements, have reported that hmms based on structure alignments do not provide a benefit over standard hmms. gough et al. and sillitoe et al. have suggested that pools of models, each built iteratively from a single structural representative  provide better performance at the superfamily level than models incorporating structure alignments of multiple masters  <cit> . sillitoe et al. also reported that combining the two types of models yielded essentially no benefit  <cit> . griffiths-jones and bateman compared hmms built from seed alignments based on structure against hmms built from seed alignments based only on sequence information, and concluded that there was no benefit to structure alignments for the production of profile hmms  <cit> . however, their analysis was done for family-level sequence targets, not the superfamily level targets that represent a more difficult challenge for homology search. in addition, they did not assess the value of structural alignments to the augmentation of iterative alignment procedures, as we do here.

other researchers have provided qualified support for the use of structure alignments in the construction of profiles . panchenko and bryant reported a small improvement in structure prediction accuracy when profile seed alignments were created using structure-based, rather than sequence-based, alignments  <cit> . however, though their method used psi-blast, their protocol did not include any iteration. kelley et al. used structure alignments to augment iterative profile construction, and reported improved results when attempting to predict very distant homologous relationships. however, some of the improvement reported was based on the combination of the structure alignments with additional structure-derived information   <cit> . other groups have tested structure alignments when applied to newer profile-to-profile approaches, as opposed to the usual profile-to-sequence approach. tang et al. explored the inclusion of structure alignments in the construction of profiles in a profile-to-profile approach based on psi-blast  <cit> . similar to the findings of kelly et al., they found that profiles utilizing structure alignments provided some improvement over standard models, and that this increase in performance could be furthered through the addition of other structural data into the models. casbon and saqi tested a profile-to-profile approach relying on a hybrid psi-blast/hmm protocol  <cit> . they found that the structure-alignment models had similar performance to the standard models at a low error rate, and weaker performance at a higher error rate. however, they noted that in some superfamilies the structure-alignment based models had a clear advantage over the standard models, and vice versa. this suggests that the two types of models might be complementary if used in combined searches.

we undertook a large-scale assessment of the utility of structure alignments for the generation of profile hmms, using the traditional sequence-to-profile method. first, we tested several iterative protocols to determine which method generated the most sensitive profile hmms with hmmer  <cit> , using only sequence information. the aim was the generation of models that represent the sequence space around a single structural domain representative . next, we developed a protocol for the production of merged sequence alignments, built by combining the sequence alignments from several domains together based on a multiple structure alignment. the method is designed such that the best aspects of iterative sequence search and structural seed alignments are combined. a maximum amount of sequence information is gathered for each superfamily through iterative search, but a structural seed alignment is used to combine the information accurately. finally, the combined superfamily alignments were used to train another profile hmm with hmmer. we term such models based on combined alignments "structure-linked alignment hidden markov models", or slahmms . we show that slahmms provide an improvement upon sequence-only models built though iteration, when they are used together in a combined search. our study supports the notion that structural information, in the form of structure-based alignments, provides a useful enhancement to standard profile hmm models.

RESULTS
iterative strategy has only a small effect on model performance
in order to determine the best iterative methodology for building both single-master hmms and slahmms with hmmer, performance was compared for four different parameter sets . in all cases, an alignment was built through repetitive hmm searches against a sequence database , but the parameter sets tested different cutoffs for sequence inclusion into the growing alignment, use of heuristics to improve the alignment, and the method for aligning sequences to the model to create the alignment. test sequences  were then searched against the resulting models and the correct or incorrect structure assignments recorded. the superfamily assignments provided in scop  <cit>  were used as a standard of truth for purposes of benchmarking the methods .

when single-master hmms were compared to each other for all four parameter sets , the difference in performance was extremely small . there was a slight advantage to a full heuristics methodology , which achieved more correct matches at a higher theoretical error per query  level. however, this result indicates that traditional hmms are surprisingly insensitive to the methods used to select and align sequences to the growing model.

creation of slahmms based on the same sequence alignments  also resulted in relatively similar performance between the various iterative parameters . however, in this case there was a larger variability in performance, suggesting that slahmms are more sensitive to the methodology used to create the sequence alignment inputs. the parameter sets that repetitively re-aligned all sequences to the model  performed better than those that did not . this result suggests that sequence alignment drift does not pose a severe threat to the quality of slahmms, and that re-aligning all sequences to the model may help to sharpen sequence patterns in a way that improves the resulting hmm.

however, the results also suggest that the use of the heuristics  applied in ps <dig> and ps <dig> had a beneficial effect on the quality of the models. both ps <dig> and ps <dig> outperformed counterparts that did not use the heuristics. in addition to the small performance improvement, the heuristics provided the practical benefit of smaller alignment sizes , and therefore lower computational overhead.

it was possible to use both sets of models together in a combined search, simply by placing both in a single database and searching the probes against this database. when performance of the combined models was compared for each parameter set, the difference again narrowed, much as it did for the single-master hmms . although the coverage vs. error curves were similar, ps <dig> was alone in identifying additional homologs at an epq of  <dig>  the practical benefits of the heuristics used in ps <dig> and ps <dig>  coupled with the slight performance benefits seen in the slahmm and combined tests, argued for the use of these heuristics in the generation of future models. because of these factors, we chose to use ps <dig> for the remainder of the analysis.

single-master hmms outperform slahmms upon direct comparison
when directly compared, single-master hmms clearly outperformed slahmms . this result is not surprising, as slahmms attempt to incorporate all information about the superfamily in one model. in some cases, this may force the model away from sequences that would be easily annotated by a standard single-master hmm .

assessment of the specific probe assignments made by slahmms vs. single-master hmms confirmed that slahmms made unique assignments. at a strict cutoff of  <dig> incorrect assignments , the two types of hmms shared  <dig> correct assignments of the same probes . however, while single-master hmms correctly assigned an additional set of  <dig> probes uniquely, slahmms also correctly assigned  <dig> probes uniquely . the unique assignments made by slahmms are summarized in table 1; they come from a variety of superfamilies from all four major scop structural classes, indicating that the results are not simply the result of a few atypical superfamilies.

the "incorrect assignments" column refers to the number of incorrect assignments made at the point where the probe was correctly assigned a structure by a slahmm. the final three columns highlight the probes  that were not assigned by single-master hmms even when they were allowed considerable advantages . nd <dig>  indicates the probes that could not be detected with a generous cutoff of up to  <dig> incorrect assignments . nd <dig> and nd <dig> present results where the single-master hmms were allowed to search the entire nr <dig> database for additional homologs during the training phase .

the unique assignments made by slahmms occur at high e-values, near the threshold at which errors start to be made. indeed, only  <dig> unique assignments  were made prior to the first incorrect assignment. the rest were made after errors had been recorded. in contrast, of the unique assignments made by the single-master hmms,  <dig>  were made prior to the first recorded error. this suggests that, as expected, slahmms are very generalized models that capture more difficult assignments made right at the edge of "the twilight zone", but can miss easier matches.

if the single master hmms are allowed a looser cutoff of up to  <dig> errors , they will correctly assign  <dig> of the  <dig> sequences that slahmms capture at a cutoff of  <dig> . thus, part of the benefit provided by slahmms is produced by simply improving the scores of probes that could be assigned, albeit with much lower confidence, using single-master hmms. however,  <dig> structures are still not correctly assigned by single-master hmms, even at this less-stringent cutoff . of course, if slahmms are also allowed a looser cutoff of  <dig> errors, they will correctly assign additional structures that single-master hmms miss at the same threshold. indeed, slahmms correctly assign  <dig> structures missed by single-master hmms if both are held to a threshold of an epq of  <dig> .

combined models outperform single-master hmms alone
the differing behaviors of the two types of models suggested that they would behave synergistically when combined, with single-master hmms capturing targets that were easier, and slahmms capturing targets that were more challenging. when the combined models were tested, the slahmms were able to provide increased assignment performance, improving upon the capability of single-master hmms . the combined models made  <dig> additional correct assignments at an epq of ~ <dig> , an improvement of ~ <dig> % . this pattern held throughout the sampled cutoffs, with  <dig> additional correct matches at an epq of  <dig> 

although the improvement provided by the addition of slahmms appears modest, the structure of the experiment was likely to make the degree of improvement appear substantially smaller than actually realized in cases of very distant sequence homology. our test set of probes was filtered such that all were non-trivial to recognize with blast  <cit>  , but this does not mean that all of the probe assignments will be challenging ones, given the power of profile methodology  <cit> . we did not attempt to remove these easier to assign domains, because this may reduce the overall coverage of sequence space by the resulting model pool  <cit> . therefore, it is expected that there will be a large "floor" of domains that are relatively easy to assign, which is consistent with the large degree of overlap between the results for single-master hmms and slahmms.

interestingly, the single-master hmms are able to make  <dig> assignments not made by the combined models at an epq of ~ <dig>  , reducing the net improvement to only  <dig> additional assignments . these assignments are missed because additional errors are also incurred by having both sets of models present, as a result of the added "noise". such noise would be reduced in real-world use of slahmms. the requirement for a set of test models with a sequence  removed meant that a slahmm had to be made for each probe, yielding  <dig>  models . these additional models doubled the size of the overall model pool, which presented a greater availability for random hits in a practical sense, especially at high e-values, where slahmms seemed to provide the most benefit. however, in real-world use, only one model would be required per superfamily , which would only produce a small relative increase in the number of models in the model pool.

slahmms require structural alignments
we sought to test the notion that structural alignments were truly essential for the production of slahmms. it was possible that slahmms simply benefited from a wider sampling of sequence based on structural information  but did not actually require the explicit incorporation of structural information in the form of a structure-based alignment. further, it has been suggested that highly accurate alignments are not essential to the production of useful profile hmms  <cit> .

to see if structural alignments were required, we aligned our test protein domain sequences with clustalw  <cit> . these sequence based-alignments were then used to build a unified superfamily alignment and slahmms, in an otherwise identical fashion to the standard method. the results demonstrate that the benefits of slahmms cannot be realized without the use of structural alignments . slahmms built using a clustalw alignment substantially underperform those built with a genuine structural alignment. similarly, the clustalw slahmms do not provide any net improvement when combined with standard sequence-only models. at least in the case of slahmms, or results indicate that highly accurate alignments are essential to the production of quality profile hmms.

slahmms provide both practical and theoretical benefits
to make the iterative hmm searches computationally tractable during initial model building, blast was used to pre-filter a large pool of possible homologs from the sequence database for each scop master domain . though it provides practical benefits, the blast pre-filter could also limit the possible sequence space available for training each single-master hmm. thus, it could be argued that the primary benefit of slahmms might be primarily practical rather than theoretical: they allow the hmm to sample a broader range of sequence space, without the computationally intensive requirement of iterating directly against the entire sequence database.

to help determine the practical vs. theoretical benefits of slahmms, the  <dig> probes that slahmms uniquely assigned at an epq ~ <dig>   were used as the basis for a smaller-scale test of single-master hmms vs. slahmms. the superfamilies to which these probes belong were separated, and the single-master hmms representing them rebuilt. the protocol used  was identical to that used in the initial experiments, except that in the last iteration, the model was searched against the entire, unfiltered, sequence database , allowing it to potentially discover new homologs previously excluded by the blast pre-filter. the new models were then added as a supplement to the model database.

the results of this test suggest that the majority of the benefit of slahmms is theoretical, though there is a substantial practical benefit as well. when given the advantage of a full nr <dig> search, the single-master hmms could correctly assign  <dig> of the probes, but still were unable to assign the remaining  <dig> . when given the dual advantages of a full nr <dig> search and accumulation of additional errors out to a theoretical epq of  <dig>  the single-master hmms could still not assign  <dig> probes correctly assigned by slahmms without these advantages .

slahmms provide superior performance for fold-level assignments
the behavior of slahmms suggested that they might show the strongest performance at the very edge of detectable sequence similarity. therefore, we assessed their performance in assignment of correct fold level scop similarity. these are cases where the scop authors have detected an overall similarity between structures, but there is no current basis to presume an evolutionary relationship  <cit> .

to determine fold assignment performance, correct superfamily-level assignments were ignored, and only cases where a probe was assigned to a different superfamily that was in the same fold grouping were tabulated. fold assignment based on sequence is very difficult, and therefore there is a very low success rate  <cit> . however, slahmms substantially outperformed single-master hmms in fold recognition: at an epq ~ <dig> , slahmms made  <dig> correct assignments, compared to  <dig> for single-master hmms, a ~27% increase . similarly, at an epq of  <dig> slahmms made  <dig> correct assignments, compared to  <dig> for single-master hmms, a 20% increase. this pattern is the reverse of the results for superfamily-level similarities; it indicates that the methodology used to produce slahmms was successful in generating highly generalized models that capture more distant similarities. however, in this case combining models did not produce any synergy, suggesting that the added noise outweighed any benefit provided to slahmms by the single-master models .

the benefits of slahmms appear relatively robust to database and software changes
before collection of the final results , we updated the version of hmmer used to build our models, and the version of the sequence database used to collect homologs to our test sequences in our iterative protocol . apart from providing final results based on the most current data, this allowed us to determine the robustness of our observations in the face of the inevitable growth of sequence databases . direct comparison of the results for ps <dig> prior to these changes  and after these changes  reveal that, while the performance of all methods improved markedly, the essential trends remained in place . these results suggest that the benefits provided by slahmms will continue to be realized, even as sequence databases further expand.

CONCLUSIONS
our study indicates that structural alignments can be used to improve the results of searches based on profile hmms. this improvement occurs for the prediction of both superfamily and fold-level relationships. in the case of superfamily-level assignments, slahmms underperformed standard iterated hmms, but provided a modest improvement in overall performance when used in a combined search, relative to standard hmms alone. in the case of fold-level assignments, slahmms substantially outperformed standard hmms. our experiments with modification of iterative parameters demonstrated that modest changes in the way hmms are constructed have almost no effect on the performance of the final models. this result suggests that simple adjustments in the construction of sequence-only hmms will be insufficient to replace the role of slahmms. further, our work indicates that accurate, structure based alignments are essential for the production of high-quality slahmms.

it has been suggested that the use of superfamily-level structure alignments will lead to "profile dilution", where the additional sequences in the alignment actually reduce the information content, and lead to weaker models  <cit> . however, the success of slahmms in improving the combined search results indicates that, in some superfamilies, there are underlying sequence patterns that are sufficient for the construction of effective models.

this notion is further supported by the strong results of slahmms when tested against fold-level targets from scop. sequences with similarities at the fold level usually do not share any functional motifs and are not presumed to have a homologous relationship, so the sequence match must be made solely based on residue patterns inherent in the production of similar structures. improvement in hmms for fold-level structure assignment has been reported through the inclusion of predicted local structure into multi-track hmms  <cit> . our work indicates that slahmms may provide another avenue for the improvement of hmms for fold recognition.

the computational overhead for the inclusion of slahmm-type models into sequence annotation studies is modest, though non-trivial. multiple structure alignments must be created for the structure representatives in each superfamily. in real-world conditions, only one slahmm per superfamily would be required , making the additional hmm training requirements minimal. since the alignments used to build slahmms are derived from sequence alignments already available from the generation of standard, single-master hmms, they can be conveniently created as an adjunct set of models to improve overall performance.

the primary limitation of slahmms is that they require at least two structural representatives per superfamily to be modeled, and some superfamilies still lack even a single structural representative. however, with the gradual growth in structural data likely to be generated from the various structural genomics projects  <cit> , multiple structure representatives should become available for many more superfamilies. this new structural data will allow slahmms to be used to help provide structural assignments for an increasing percentage of the growing body of genomic sequence.

