BACKGROUND
protein function is often modulated by binding with specific partners. protein-protein interactions can be regulated by post-translational modifications, such as phosphorylation  <cit> , or via binding with small ligands  <cit> . moreover many examples are known of protein-protein interactions that are regulated via as  <cit> . as can modulate interactions by: i) removing binding sites or domains; ii) inserting a stretch of sequence that disrupts binding; iii) modulating the inclusion of a specific binding motif. several studies have attempted to assess how widespread these forms of regulation are. the overall impact of alternative splicing on protein-protein interaction domains was investigated in a work published in  <dig>  <cit> , which indicates that the majority of the domains that are removed by alternative splicing at high frequencies are protein-protein interaction domains. the authors analyzed  <dig> protein isoforms of  <dig> genes and found that  <dig> protein domain types were significantly removed by alternative splicing at higher frequencies; this list of domain types was enriched in domains involved in protein-protein interactions. the effects of as on the inclusion or exclusion of short interacting modules have also been studied in a systematic way  <cit> . the analysis of  <dig> protein isoforms produced from  <dig> genes showed that regions that are alternatively spliced are enriched in short linear motifs that are typically involved in low-affinity interactions  <cit> . ellis and coworkers also found that linear motifs are enriched within tissue-specific alternative coding exons  <cit> . they employed a splicing variant-specific form of the co-immunoprecipitation assay to demonstrate the extensive and tissue-specific rewiring of protein interaction networks mediated by the inclusion of specific alternative exons. another way, though less commonly observed, through which protein-protein interactions can be modulated by alternative splicing is the selective  removal of the region that physically interacts with the partner—the binding site or interface, which may be part of a domain or not, and which often does not coincide exactly with a linear motif  <cit> .

in this work we investigated whether the regulation of protein-protein interactions through as-mediated removal/substitution of the binding site is limited to specific examples or conversely represents a widespread phenomenon. to this end we evaluated in a systematic way the extent of the overlap between alternatively spliced regions and binding residues in human proteins. in principle the overlap could be significantly higher , lower , or not significantly different from expectation.

similar studies have been conducted in the past, but we argue that a systematic statistical analysis is still lacking. a work published in  <dig>  <cit>  showed that protein-protein interface residues, extracted from complexes of known structure, are not preferentially spliced nor protected from as. however, this work was based on too small a number of cases to draw general conclusions . in  <dig> yura and coworkers analyzed  <dig> alternatively spliced regions covering less than  <dig> amino acids and found that in 57% of cases they partially or totally co-localize with functional sites of human proteins - defined as protein-protein, protein-ligand and protein-dna/rna binding sites  <cit> . however, the authors did not try to assess the statistical significance of this result.

here we perform a systematic study of the relationship between as and protein-protein interfaces in the human proteome. first we created two data sets, composed of proteins whose genes undergo alternative splicing and that are involved in heterodimeric  or homodimeric  interactions, as defined from complexes of known structure. we then demonstrated that, for both classes of interaction, the removal of a portion of the interacting site occurs less frequently than expected under a random model. this tendency is maintained even if we filter out isoforms that are extremely different from the canonical one and that are likely to produce drastic structural changes. we also found that hot spot residues, i.e. the ones that contribute most to the binding energy  <cit> , do not behave differently from the rest of the interface. finally, we found that the relationship between as and interface residues does not depend on the functional class of the protein.

RESULTS
data sets creation
we first created a dataset of human protein-protein interfaces, starting from complexes of known structure in the protein data bank   <cit> . using a simple distance criterion to identify interface residues, we obtained a set of  <dig> heterodimeric and  <dig> homodimeric interfaces in structures that have a good coverage of the corresponding protein sequences. we will use the term “semi-interface” to refer to a group of interface residues belonging to one of the interacting chains. we then selected all the proteins that could be mapped to a transcript with at least one alternative splicing isoform, thus retaining  <dig> heterodimeric semi-interfaces and  <dig> homodimeric interfaces. these data sets are redundant because of two main reasons: i) the same interaction can be represented multiple times, not only in different pdb structures but also within the same complex, e.g. in the case of a homomultimer having more than two chains; ii) similar  proteins can interact with the same partner by using homologous residues  <cit> . in the latter case, even though the pattern of alternative splicing rapidly diverges after gene duplication  <cit> , the way in which alternative splicing acts on related interfaces could remain similar, thus introducing some bias in the statistical analysis. to remove redundancy we selected a single representative for each group of interfaces  that are similar and belong to similar or identical proteins. we thus obtained a non-redundant data set composed of  <dig> heterodimeric semi-interfaces and  <dig> homodimeric interfaces. the heterodimeric semi-interfaces we found are mapped to  <dig> distinct uniprot  <cit>  entries, while the homodimeric interfaces to  <dig> uniprot entries. a total of  <dig> and  <dig> distinct alternative isoforms were found for the former and the latter class of proteins, respectively. the uniprot entries were used as reference isoforms, on which the as changes observed in the alternative isoforms were mapped. additional file  <dig> contains the list of proteins involved in heterodimeric interactions, together with the alternative splicing isoforms and the number of interface residues they remove, while the additional file  <dig> contains the information about the homodimeric interactions.

protein-protein interfaces are protected from alternative splicing
we sought to determine whether the removal of protein-protein interfaces via alternative splicing occurs at higher or lower frequencies compared to what happens under a random model of splicing. to do this, we followed two alternative approaches, evaluating the splicing of the binding site in each isoform separately  or in each group of isoforms from the same gene . due to the different nature of the interaction, these tests were performed on heterodimeric semi-interfaces and homodimeric interfaces separately. indeed, in the first case the alternative splicing of a gene can act only on a single semi-interface, while in the latter there are two semi-interfaces, which differ by varying degrees, that can be spliced away. in the single-isoform test we asked whether the presence or absence of the interface in a specific isoform can be attributed to chance, taking into account the splicing pattern. if this hypothesis is rejected, one can argue that the inclusion or removal of the interacting region might be the result of some evolutionary pressure. to perform this test, we considered every heterodimeric semi-interface/isoform pair and assessed whether the isoform contains the interface region or not. an heterodimeric semi-interface is regarded as removed if the isoform does not contain at least a certain fraction of its residues. since it is not easy to determine what is the minimum percentage of interface residues that must be spliced away in order to abolish the interaction, we repeated the test using different values for this interface-removal threshold. in order to derive a random background against which to evaluate the significance of the observed removal rate, we created  <dig> decoys for each isoform , using a procedure that takes into account the specific splicing pattern of the isoform . we then performed a cochran-mantel-haenszel  chi-square test  <cit>  to determine whether the frequency at which alternative splicing removes the interfaces is significantly different from that obtained using the decoys. the results of this test performed on heterodimeric semi-interfaces, using different interface-removal thresholds, are summarized in figure 1a. the percentage of interface/isoform pairs in which the interface is removed via alternative splicing is quite high , but it is still significantly lower than what is observed under a random model of splicing. this difference decreases as the threshold values increases, to become almost zero when the threshold value is equal to 100%. the differences observed using threshold values <= 80% are significant , and the significance is higher for lower thresholds. these results suggest that alternative splicing tends to avoid partial removals of heterodimeric interaction sites, while being quite indifferent to large excisions - possibly because they occur along with major rearrangements of the protein, in which cases there might be no pressure in maintaining the interaction. the single-isoform test for homodimeric interfaces was performed in a similar way, the only difference being that in this case an interface is considered removed if at least one of the two semi-interfaces lacks a certain percentage of its residues or more. as shown in figure 1b, also in this case partial removals of the interface are significantly prevented, though the significance is lost at a lower threshold compared to heterodimers. furthermore, really large interface excisions occur more frequently, but not in a significant way.

using the single-isoform test, we can analyse the selective pressure towards interface retention for each individual isoform. however we underestimate all the cases in which the abolishment of the interaction occurs only in one or few isoforms among all those produced by the same gene, while the others are still able to interact, or at least they maintain the interface residues; for example, if a gene has  <dig> isoforms, but only one lacks the binding site, the signal coming from that lone isoform is masked by the other four. moreover, different isoforms from the same gene can depend on the same splice junctions, hence the interacting proteins with the largest number of splicing isoforms contribute the most to the final result, not only because they are associated to a higher number of contingency tables in the cmh test , but also because the splicing patterns of their isoforms are somewhat dependent. for these reasons, we performed another test, called all-isoforms test, whose purpose was to determine how likely is for an interface to be selectively removed in at least one isoform. in this case, for each interacting protein we created  <dig> random controls, each consisting of a group of decoy isoforms all derived from the real isoforms of its gene. a cmh test was employed to determine whether the frequency at which a binding site is removed in at least one isoform is significantly different from that obtained under this random model of as. the test showed a significant protection form partial removals both for heterodimeric  and homodimeric  interfaces, even if homodimeric interfaces appear to tolerate larger removals compared to heterodimeric ones . ultimately, the possibility of regulating protein-protein interactions through the production of an isoform which specifically lacks part of the interface region is realized less than expected; the excision of an interface is not so uncommon per se, since, for example, about 42% of the heterodimeric semi-interfaces undergo a removal of 30% or more of their residues in at least one isoform, but there is a general tendency towards the protection of the binding sites from as.

interface protection is maintained in similar isoforms
the set of isoforms we used includes a number of transcripts that are markedly different from the canonical isoform, i.e. the isoform that corresponds to the pdb chain. these conspicuous changes are likely to result in the disruption of the 3d structure or in the production of a new structural conformation  <cit> . therefore, even if the interface region is not removed, it is reasonable to assume that these isoforms would hardly maintain a conformation that allows the interaction. hence, we repeated the previously described statistical analyses including only isoforms that maintain most of the sequence of the canonical protein. we used a variable threshold for this coverage value . both for heterodimeric and homodimeric interfaces, the results of the two tests showed again a significant protection from partial removals, and this was true irrespective of the threshold values . the tendency for alternative splicing to avoid interfaces is thus confirmed in those isoforms that are more likely to be involved in a fine regulation of the interaction.

hot spots are not protected more than other interface residues
since some interface residues are more important than others for the interaction to be established, we sought to determine the behaviour of alternative splicing towards these protein-protein interaction hot spots. again, we employed the single-isoform and the all-isoforms tests, this time considering only those heterodimeric interface residues that were predicted to be hot spots . the results are very similar to those obtained using all the interface residues . however, it was necessary to establish whether hot spots are more protected than other interface residues or not. to do so, we tested the null hypothesis that, given a heterodimeric semi-interface/isoform pair, the splicing of an interface residue is independent of whether it is a hot spot or not—again, this was done by using a cmh test. hence, although it has been shown that hot spots are often spatially arranged in clusters called “hot regions”  <cit> , and a manual control of the distribution of the hot spots on the sequence revealed that they tend to form clusters also in the primary structure, the protection from partial removals of the interacting region is not selective towards these most important residues. possibly this occurs because any rearrangement of the interacting site is likely to have some influence on the interaction or, more in general, on the functionality of the protein.

functional significance of interface protection/removal selectivity
using the number of random controls that removes an interface, it is possible to quantify how selectively targeted is the removal or the protection of the interface residues . we selected proteins in which removal/protection of the binding site is more specific, and determined whether these two classes of proteins differ by properties that can be described using gene ontology   <cit>  terms. to this end we evaluated the enrichment of go terms in all the three main ontologies  for both classes of proteins. no significant enrichments were observed both for the heterodimeric and the homodimeric interactions, suggesting that the protection of the interface is a widespread phenomenon among proteins with different characteristics and that the selective removal of the interface is not preferentially restricted to a specific group of proteins sharing the same function or localization.

though the results of this work suggest that interfaces are protected from as, there are some cases in which the alternative splicing of the pre-mrna is focused on the interacting region, as reported in additional file  <dig>  and  <dig> . we searched literature to investigate some of these cases, but we did not find any example in which the involved isoform has been characterized as non-interacting. however, we discovered a potential example of this regulation, involving the interaction between cullin 4a  and dna damage-binding protein  <dig> . together with roc <dig>  which interacts with cul4a, these proteins form a complex , which acts as an e <dig> ubiquitin ligase that, among other things, participates in the degradation of dna damage-response proteins  <cit> . the n-terminal region of cul4a is bound to a beta-propeller domain of ddb <dig>  the cul4a pre-mrna undergoes alternative splicing: the protein observed in the crystal can be mapped to the ensembl  <cit>  enst <dig> , while three other full-length coding transcripts exist, which share the same coding sequence. the only difference between the coding sequence of the alternative transcripts and that of the canonical one is that the former lacks the first  <dig> residues of the latter. figure  <dig> shows the interaction between cul4a and ddb <dig> and highlights the region of cul4a that is missing in the alternative isoforms. to our knowledge, the functionality of the alternative isoforms has not been well characterized. however it is quite likely that, since they lack  <dig> of the  <dig> semi-interface residues, they are not capable of binding ddb <dig>  indeed it has been reported that the deletion of the first  <dig> amino acids of the canonical protein completely abolishes ddb <dig> binding  <cit> . despite the general trend towards protection of interfaces from as, in this case we observe a selective partial removal of the interface, and this is likely to result in the production of protein isoforms that cannot bind to a specific partner. we also investigated the tissue-specific expression patterns of the transcripts encoding cul4a. as shown in figure  <dig>  the canonical isoform is expressed only in some tissues, while the expression of the alternative transcripts taken together covers all the tissues and is higher than that of the canonical transcript in the tissues where it is present. hence, in addition to other regulatory processes that might influence the interaction, alternative splicing seems to provide a mechanism through which the association of cul4a with ddb <dig> is only possible in a specific subset of human tissues.

CONCLUSIONS
the present study demonstrates that the removal of protein-protein interfaces by as is generally avoided in the human proteome, and this holds true for both heterodimeric and homodimeric interactions. these results are not in disagreement with previous works demonstrating that protein-protein interaction domains and protein interaction-associated linear motifs are significantly found in alternatively spliced regions  <cit> . indeed, in the analysed dataset, only ~37% of the heterodimeric semi-interfaces and only ~45% of the homodimeric interfaces we analysed are fully included in a pfam  <cit>  domain. moreover, putative slims  interacting with domains are present in very low amounts in our data set. we used the ielm web server  <cit>  to analyse our lists of heterodimeric and homodimeric interacting protein pairs and predict slim-mediated interactions, and we found that only  <dig> out of  <dig> heterodimeric semi-interfaces and  <dig> out of  <dig> homodimeric interfaces contain at least one residue belonging to a putative domain-binding slim. we additionally verified whether the protein interaction interfaces in our datasets overlap with protein disordered regions, since it is known that as events are preferentially located in such locations  <cit> : these regions are enriched in functional motifs  <cit>  and are more tolerant to the structural changes introduced by as. since they are derived from the three-dimensional structures of crystallized proteins, our binding sites are almost totally localized outside disordered regions: only  <dig> heterodimeric semi-interfaces and  <dig> homodimeric interfaces have 30% or more of their residues in a putative disordered conformation . this is due to the fact that these sites are derived from the three-dimensional structures of crystallized proteins; furthermore, we filtered out those crystallized dimers in which the two interacting chains cover less than 30% of the complete protein sequence, thereby eliminating the interactions mediated by small peptides, which are often embedded into disordered regions. given all these results, it is clear that the feasibility of an as-mediated removal of the binding site depends on the structural characteristics of the interaction, since, for instance, it is easier to modulate the inclusion of slims, which are often localized in disordered regions, than it is to remove or substitute binding sites that reside in structurally defined regions. in any case, these considerations do not concern those cases in which the regulation of the interaction does not consist in a direct removal/substitution of the region involved in the interaction , e.g. when a sequence is inserted within a binding domain.

our findings are confirmed even when we consider only those alternative transcripts whose coding sequence is only slightly different from that of the canonical isoforms. moreover, the protection from alternative splicing is not limited to the interface residues that significantly contribute to the binding free energy, thus emphasizing the importance of maintaining the global architecture of the binding site. this requirement seems to be common to proteins with different properties: the proteins in which alternative splicing selectively avoids the binding site were not found to be prevalently associated to any specific function, biological process or localization. this was also observed for those proteins in which the binding site is selectively removed in one or more isoforms. we studied one of these cases, represented by the partial removal of the region through which cullin 4a interacts with ddb <dig>  and found that the isoforms lacking the binding site show an expression pattern that greatly differs from that of the interacting protein. recent works show how the tissue-specific as of protein-protein binding sites, especially when disordered, has an important role in rewiring protein-protein interaction networks in a tissue-specific fashion  <cit> . as a further extension of our study, we are currently analysing splicing isoform-specific expression patterns in combination with our dataset of binding sites, which reside mostly outside disordered regions, in order to understand how isoforms containing a different portion of a structured binding site  are used in different tissues and/or conditions.

