BACKGROUND
peroxisomes are single-membrane-bound organelles that lack a genome and, therefore, must import their entire complement of constituent proteins. all proteins that are targeted to the peroxisome are synthesized on free polyribosomes in the cytosol and are imported post-translationally. several distinct import pathways exist for membrane and matrix proteins . for example, peroxisomal membrane proteins can be targeted either directly to the peroxisome from their sites of synthesis in the cytosol, or indirectly to peroxisomes via the endoplasmic reticulum . on the other hand, peroxisomal matrix proteins can be imported from the cytosol in their fully-folded conformation and as oligomeric protein complexes. two types of peroxisomal matrix protein import pathways have been identified and well characterized  <cit> . most matrix-destined proteins possess a type  <dig> peroxisomal targeting sequence  that consists of an uncleaved carboxyl-terminal tripeptide sequence . the cognate receptor for pts1-bearing proteins, peroxin  <dig> , is proposed to carry its protein cargo into the peroxisome matrix as it cycles between the cytosol and the matrix. alternatively, it may release its cargo after docking with the import machinery located on the peroxisomal surface  <cit> . in contrast to the pts <dig>  the type  <dig> pts  is located near the amino terminus of a smaller set of peroxisomal matrix-destined proteins. in plants and mammals the pts <dig> is proteolytically cleaved following import. the receptor protein for pts <dig> targeted proteins, pex7p, is probably best characterized in yeast cells where it is proposed to cycle in and out of peroxisomes, similar to its pex5p counterpart  <cit> . pex7p also relies on pex5p for the import of pts2-containing proteins, indicating that the two matrix protein pathways are coupled  <cit> .

in all organisms examined to date, peroxisomes are remarkably dynamic in terms of their shapes and intracellular movements  <cit> . peroxisome morphology ranges from spherical and dumbbell-shaped, to extensively elongated and reticulated. peroxisome movement and distribution is also highly variable and is mediated by either mts or actin filaments, depending on the species. for instance, mammalian peroxisomes utilize a mt-based system for movement that is directed by dynein/dynactin and possibly kinesin motors  <cit> . in plant and yeast cells, actin filaments serve as the tracks for peroxisome movement, and myosin motors have been reported to be responsible for this movement  <cit> . examples of actin-based plant peroxisome movements include rapid oscillations at fixed locations, stop-and-go movements in forward and reverse directions, and rapid longer distance movements that achieve velocities of up to  <dig> μm per second .

while mt involvement has not been reported for the directed motility of peroxisomes in plant cells, recent evidence indicates that mts play a role in peroxisome protein import. specifically, the peroxisomal multifunctional protein  has been shown to possess mt-binding activity in vitro  <cit> . mfp is a pts1-containing peroxisomal matrix protein that possesses up to four enzymatic activities involved in catalyzing different reactions of the fatty acid β-oxidation pathway  <cit> . we proposed that the mt-binding activity of mfp serves to concentrate mfp in order to improve the efficiency of its import into peroxisomes  <cit> . this would necessitate that peroxisomes frequently be in close proximity to mts in order for mt-bound mfp to interact with the import machinery located on the peroxisomal surface. indirect evidence supporting a general role for mts in peroxisomal protein import has come from a recent large scale proteomic study demonstrating the in vitro tubulin binding activity of five additional plant peroxisomal matrix proteins  <cit> . although there is increasing biochemical evidence for mt-binding activities associated with plant peroxisomal matrix proteins, there have been no reports for this interaction in vivo.

here we demonstrate that the peroxisomal mfp is an authentic mt-binding protein that associates specifically with interphase cortical mts, but not with the mt arrays that form during cell division. we also present deletion analysis data indicating that multiple mt-binding domains are present on the mfp polypeptide. additionally, live-cell imaging of a gfp-mfp chimera that localized to both peroxisomes and mts revealed that peroxisomes are frequently in close association with mts in the cell. this suggests that peroxisomes interact with cortical mts as they move along actin filaments or oscillate at fixed locations. overall, the localization of mfp to cortical mts in situ and the apparent cortical mt-peroxisome interactions support the hypothesis that mts have an important role in the targeting of mfp to peroxisomes.

RESULTS
mfp localizes to both peroxisomes and cortical mts in onion epidermal cells
to begin to examine the putative interaction between mfp and mts in plant cells, an expression construct encoding gfp fused to the amino terminus of mfp  was introduced into onion epidermal cells by particle bombardment. cells expressing the fusion protein displayed a fluorescence pattern that included numerous, small punctate structures  that were presumed to be peroxisomes. these were similar in appearance to the punctate structures observed in cells expressing a peroxisomal marker protein consisting of gfp appended to a carboxyl-terminal pts <dig> . in addition, gfp-mfp transformed cells often displayed less intense, uniformly labeled filamentous structures that were concentrated in the cell cortex and were presumed to correspond to mts . in contrast, cells expressing gfp alone displayed only diffuse nuclear and cytosolic fluorescence, as expected .

indirect immunofluorescence and cytoskeleton-depolymerizing drug treatment experiments were conducted to determine if the punctate and filamentous structures identified in cells expressing gfp-mfp  did indeed correspond to peroxisomes and mts, respectively. antibodies raised against the peroxisome matrix marker enzyme catalase were used to label peroxisomes in chemically fixed onion epidermal peels bombarded with the gfp-mfp fusion construct. figure  <dig> shows that the punctate structures in gfp-mfp-expressing cells clearly co-localized with endogenous anti-catalase antibody labeling in the same cells, confirming that at least a portion of gfp-mfp was localized to peroxisomes. to confirm also that the filamentous structures labeled by gfp-mfp were mts, gfp-mfp-transformed cells that displayed strongly fluorescing filaments were treated with reagents that cause cytoskeleton depolymerization. figure 3a and 3b show that a  <dig> min treatment with the mt depolymerizing drug oryzalin specifically disrupted the filamentous structures in gfp-mfp expressing cells. as expected, mts in cells expressing the mt-binding protein gfp-map <dig>  <cit>  were also disrupted by oryzalin . conversely, treatments with latrunculin b, a potent inhibitor of actin filament assembly, had no effect on the stability of the filamentous structures in gfp-mfp  expressing cells . however, latrunculin b treatment did effectively disrupt actin filaments in cells expressing a gfp-talin fusion protein  <cit>  . these results indicated that the labeled filaments observed in gfp-mfp transformed onion epidermal cells were mts.

to determine if endogenous onion mfp also interacts with mts and that the interaction of gfp-mfp to mts described above was not a consequence of its transient over expression, we performed co-immunolocalization experiments using rabbit anti-mfp and mouse anti-tubulin antibodies. in addition to labeling peroxisomes, anti-mfp antibodies also labeled faint filamentous structures that corresponded to cortical mts . we also performed immunolocalization experiments using arabidopsis suspension culture cells in order to determine if mfp binds to the mt arrays that form during plant mitosis. these mitotic mt arrays include the pre-prophase band of mts, the mitotic spindle, and the cytokinetic phragmoplast. suspension culture cells are useful for observing these arrays since they divide rapidly during their logarithmic growth phase. anti-mfp antibody labeling of cortical mts was evident in non-dividing cells, similar to that observed in onion cells . however, we did not observe any fluorescence attributable to mfp binding to the mitotic mt arrays, as only peroxisome-specific fluorescence was visible in dividing cells .

multiple mt-binding regions are present on the mfp polypeptide
in an effort to identify the region of mfp that is responsible for binding to mts we generated four truncated versions of recombinant mfp  and determined their affinity for mts using mt co-sedimentation assays. two of the truncated polypeptides, c <dig> and n <dig>  contained deletions that terminated within an internal region of mfp that is similar in sequence to a mt-binding domain found in several well-characterized mt-associated proteins including map <dig>  map <dig>  tau and togp  <cit> . the consensus sequence of this domain consists of the amino acid residues, -lx5ki/vgse/dnk-, and is defined by a characteristic serine phosphorylation tetrapeptide motif  known to regulate the mt-binding activity of this domain  <cit> . the amino acid sequence of the potential mt-binding site in mfp  begins at amino acid position  <dig>  we were unable to obtain a more detailed deletion analysis of the carboxyl-terminus of the protein , as repeated efforts to express truncated versions of the protein in this region were not successful.

we performed next a series of transient expression experiments with the same truncated versions of mfp by expressing them in onion epidermal cells as fusions to the carboxyl-terminus of gfp . the objective of these experiments was to determine whether their relative mt-binding affinities as determined by mt co-sedimentation assays  corresponded to their in vivo mt-binding characteristics. for those fusion constructs that lacked portions of the carboxyl-terminus of mfp , the endogenous mfp pts <dig> sequence  was restored so that these deleted polypeptides would retain their targeting to peroxisomes. all fusion constructs, along with wild-type gfp-mfp, were bombarded individually into onion epidermal cells and observed throughout a  <dig> to  <dig> hour period. while cells expressing full-length gfp-mfp often displayed mt labeling, the only truncated mfp fusion protein to label mts was the amino-terminal deletion construct c <dig> . the number of gfp-c1-transformed cells displaying mt labeling, however, was low, as was the fluorescence intensity of the mts in these cells. nevertheless, that gfp-c <dig> localized to mts was consistent with the observation that this polypeptide possessed the highest mt-binding affinity of the truncated recombinant proteins . while cells expressing the n <dig>  n <dig> and c <dig> fusion proteins did not display mt fluorescence, it is possible that these proteins bound to mts in vivo at levels too low to be detected using our imaging system.

we hypothesized earlier  <cit>  that the mt-binding activity of mfp may serve to concentrate mfp on mts prior to its import into peroxisomes. since the carboxyl-terminal pts <dig> tripeptide  of mfp is both necessary and sufficient for import into peroxisomes , we anticipated that deletion of this sequence from mfp in the context of the gfp-mfp chimera would cause an accumulation of the protein in the cytosol and a resulting increase in binding to mts. surprisingly, expression of this modified chimera  in onion epidermal cells resulted in only a diffuse cytosolic fluorescence with no detectable filamentous structures . this apparent necessity of the mfp pts <dig> for high affinity mt-binding in vivo further demonstrates the complex nature of the mt-binding activity of mfp and the requirement for multiple regions of the protein to achieve efficient binding.

confocal microscopy and real-time imaging indicate that peroxisomes and mts interact frequently
previous live-cell microscopy studies revealed that plant peroxisomes exhibit high velocity unidirectional movements, bi-directional and stop-and-go movements, as well as rapid oscillations at fixed locations within the cell, and that these movements occurred on actin filaments with no apparent role for mts . using confocal microscopy of gfp-mfp-expressing onion epidermal cells we observed that peroxisomes and cortical mts were regularly located in the same optical section . this indicated that peroxisomes are frequently in close association with mts as they move through the cell cortex on actin filaments. in addition, we noted in real-time movies that the characteristic stop-and-go  of peroxisomes frequently occurred at sites occupied by mts , also suggesting that these two structures interact. we determined the frequency of these peroxisome pausing events on mts in cells that had a relatively sparse cortical mt network such as those observed in additional data files movie  <dig> and movie  <dig>  the stop-and-go movements of peroxisomes  from  <dig> gfp-mfp-expressing cells were observed in movies of  <dig> to  <dig> seconds duration. we determined that  <dig> ± 13% of the pausing events occurred at sites that were coincident with mts. there were also numerous peroxisomes that exhibited oscillatory movements at fixed locations. these were observed to be in frequent contact with cortical mts during their movements  <dig> ± 19% of the time. notably, while treatment of gfp-mfp-expressing cells with latrunculin b for one hour caused peroxisomes to oscillate at fixed locations within the cell  <cit> , treatment with oryzalin for one hour did not have an observable effect on the frequency of peroxisome pausing events associated with motile peroxisomes . this suggests that mts are not directly involved in a majority of the peroxisomal pausing events, but that another mechanism is responsible for these pausing events.

interestingly, we observed also that when epidermal peels were treated with oryzalin or latrunculin b immediately following bombardment of the gfp-mfp fusion construct and throughout the incubation period , there was a subtle effect on the rate of gfp-mfp labeling of peroxisomes compared to cells from untreated peels. the average frequency of cells showing peroxisome fluorescence  <dig> to  <dig> hours after bombardment in untreated peel segments  was higher than in segments treated with oryzalin  or latrunculin b . these data indicate that the there is a reduction in the rate of synthesis and/or import of gfp-mfp as a result of cytoskeleton disruption.

discussion
the processes involved in the import of proteins into the peroxisome matrix are distinct from those described for protein import into other membrane-bound organelles. one major difference is that peroxisomal matrix proteins can be imported fully folded and/or in an oligomerized conformation  <cit> . this characteristic implies that these proteins have the potential to possess functional activities in the cytosol prior to their import. we reported previously that the plant peroxisomal mfp binds to mts and rna in vitro, in addition to possessing enzymatic activities related to fatty acid β-oxidation. we suggested that the mt-binding activity may function to facilitate the import of mfp into peroxisomes  <cit> . in this paper, we used indirect immunofluorescence microscopy and the expression of a gfp-mfp chimera to show that mfp interacts uniformly with interphase cortical mts in vivo , thereby demonstrating that mfp is a bona fide mt-binding protein. the specific binding of mfp to the cortical mts implies that the mfp-mt interaction is limited to interphase cells. array-specific binding by other mt-binding proteins has been observed previously  <cit> . these specific interactions may be regulated by post-translational modifications such as phosphorylation/dephosphorylation of the mt-binding protein or modifications to the acidic carboxyl-terminal tail of tubulin  <cit> .

although the techniques used here showed that mfp binds to mts in vivo, the level of detection of this interaction varied. indirect immunofluorescence microscopy using an affinity-purified anti-mfp antibody labeled peroxisomes intensely, whereas mts possessed only weak immunofluorescence and were often not visible at all. similarly, many transformed cells expressing gfp-mfp lacked observable mt labeling, or mts in these cells were visible only after computer software enhancement of digitized images. however, in numerous other bombardment experiments mts were readily observable in up to one-third of the transformed cells. we were unable to determine whether this variation in mt labeling by gfp-mfp was due to differences in the level of expression of the fusion protein, the metabolic state of the cell, or the quality of the leaf material used in individual bombardment experiments.

mt co-sedimentation experiments of truncated versions of mfp indicated that there are multiple mt-binding domains within the mfp polypeptide . each of the truncations resulted in a significant decrease in mt-binding affinity of the remaining polypeptide, indicating that maximal binding of the full-length mfp likely depends on several points of contact to mts, as has been suggested for other mt-binding proteins  <cit> . mt-binding domains have been identified for numerous proteins, some of which contain well characterized domains such as those found in the animal maps tau, map <dig>  map <dig>  and togp  <cit> , whereas others possess less well known mt-binding domains that are not as well studied  <cit> . we identified by sequence analysis a putative mt-binding domain in mfp that showed sequence similarity to a domain centered around a kxgs motif present singly or in repeats in some animal maps  <cit> . however, this region does not contribute significantly to the mt-binding activity of mfp in vitro . we have demonstrated that the arabidopsis homolog of the rice mfp also possesses mt-binding activity . despite sharing 82% amino acid similarity to the rice sequence, the arabidopsis protein does not possess the putative kxgs motif region that is present in the rice mfp. this is consistent with the observed minimal influence of this motif on mt binding affinity in vitro .

interestingly, transient expression of a modified version of gfp-mfp that lacked the mfp carboxyl-terminal pts <dig> resulted in this fusion protein  being localized exclusively to the cytosol, with no apparent labeling of mts . this indicates that the carboxyl terminus of mfp is also required for its efficient binding to mts in vivo. the lack of mt binding by this fusion protein appears to be an effect of expression in vivo since recombinant mfp△srm binds to mts in vitro with an affinity that is similar to the full-length mfp protein . the pts <dig> normally interacts with the peroxisomal import receptor, pex5p, to facilitate the targeting of pts1-bearing proteins from the cytosol to the peroxisome surface and possibly across the peroxisome membrane  <cit> . pex5p is then recycled and is available to interact with other pts1-containing proteins. the necessity of the pts <dig> for efficient binding of mfp to mts in vivo may, therefore, highlight a novel role for pex5p at an early stage of peroxisome protein sorting.

the immunofluorescence and live-cell imaging data presented here support our previous hypothesis that was based on in vitro mt-binding assays  <cit>  and stated that the interaction between mfp and mts assists in the efficient and regulated sorting of mfp to peroxisomes  <cit> . that is, mfp-mt interactions serve to concentrate mfp in the cell cortex, a region of the cell where peroxisomes are abundant and are frequently moving along actin filaments. using confocal microscopy, we observed here that peroxisomes and cortical mts regularly occupied the same three-dimensional space in the cell cortex . this arrangement would provide frequent opportunities for motile peroxisomes to interact with mts as peroxisomes move in the cell cortex, a premise that is supported by previous evidence for a direct association between cortical mts and actin filaments  <cit> . in addition, real-time fluorescence imaging revealed apparent mt interactions with peroxisomes in the form of pausing events by motile peroxisomes as well as peroxisomes that oscillated at fixed locations . these types of peroxisome-mt interactions would readily allow for the transfer of mt-bound mfp to the import machinery located on the peroxisomal surface.

additional support for a mt role in peroxisomal protein import comes from the discovery that six other plant peroxisomal matrix proteins also possess tubulin-binding activities  <cit> . most of these proteins have activities involved in catalyzing the reactions of fatty acid β-oxidation in the peroxisome, however, one of them  is involved in the glyoxylate cycle. β-oxidation enzymes presumably do not have a metabolic role in the cytosol, since their associated metabolic pathways have not been shown to exist in that compartment. it is more likely, therefore, that the binding of these peroxisomal matrix proteins to mts functions in a general sorting pathway to the peroxisome, as discussed above for mfp.

if the cytoskeleton is required for the efficient delivery of mfp to the peroxisome surface as described above, then treatment of cells with cytoskeleton destabilizing agents should affect the import of mfp into peroxisomes. we determined that long-term treatments of epidermal peels with oryzalin and latrunculin b immediately after bombardment of gfp-mfp resulted in a small reduction in the rate of fluorescence accumulation by peroxisomes, indicating that at least subtle roles exist for the cytoskeleton in mfp import. however, since our transient expression system involved an over-expression of gfp-mfp, this may have overridden any requirement for mts without significantly affecting protein import. we are currently conducting detailed experiments that are beyond the scope of the present study which utilize alternative approaches to determine a potential role of the cytoskeleton on mfp sorting to the peroxisome.

CONCLUSIONS
these data provide conclusive evidence for an interaction between peroxisomal mfp and mts in plant cells, and revealed that this association is specific to the cortical mt array. confocal and live cell imaging indicated also that interactions between peroxisomes and mts occur frequently in the cell cortex. these observations reinforce our hypothesis for a mt role in the sorting of mfp to the peroxisome.

