BACKGROUND
metabotropic glutamate receptors  are implicated in learning and synaptic plasticity  <cit> . mglurs have been classified into three groups: group i, including mglur <dig> and mglur5; group ii, including mglur <dig> and mglur3; and group iii, including mglur  <dig> and mglur 6– <dig>  group i stimulates phospholipase c  and phosphoinositide hydrolysis, whereas group ii and group iii inhibit cyclic adenosine monophosphate  formation most likely through a gi-type protein  <cit> . both camp and plc are widely implicated in synaptic plasticity  <cit> . through their activity on g-proteins and other second messengers, mglurs modulate ion channel conductances, transmission through ligand-gated channels, as well as the activation of immediate early genes. therefore, mglurs are well suited to provide a means through which glutamate can induce synaptic changes at the same synapses where it elicits fast responses. the role of group i mglurs in learning and plasticity has been characterized extensively. group ii mglurs have received less attention  <cit> .

there is evidence suggesting a role for group ii in synaptic plasticity in learning. group ii is involved in corticostriatal long term depression  in the nucleus accumbens   <cit> . behavioral work implicates group ii receptors in olfactory and fear learning  <cit>  and in lever pressing for food  <cit> . the reported group ii mglur modulation of reward-related learning is consistent with the role of these receptors in downregulating the camp/pka cascade <cit> . camp-dependent protein kinase  activation mediates the acquisition of learning  <cit>  and of reward-related learning in particular  <cit> .

both reward-related learning and addiction to psychostimulants critically involve nac dopamine  and share many of the same intracellular signals  <cit> . glutamate release is necessary for amphetamine- and cocaine-produced conditioned place preference   <cit>  and systemic mglur antagonists impair cocaine self-administration in rats  <cit> . the role of group ii mglurs in the acquisition of psychostimulant reward has not been addressed in pharmacological studies.

group ii mglurs modulate da transmission. locally administered agonists reduce, whereas locally administered antagonists increase nac da levels  <cit> . group ii mglur agonists also modulate amphetamine-produced da release, enhancing it in drug-naïve baboons  <cit>  and impairing it in amphetamine-sensitized rats  <cit> . in a recent study mglur <dig> receptor knockout mice showed enhanced cocaine-produced cpp  <cit> . results showing that group ii blockade enhanced basal da release  <cit>  suggest that mglur2-/- mutants may exhibit behaviors related to psychostimulant sensitization  <cit> , explaining the hyperlocomotion in a novel environment and enhanced cocaine cpp observed in these mice. the acute role of group ii mglurs in the acquisition of nac psychostimulant-produced cpp has not been investigated.

in the present studies, we used cpp  <cit>  to test the hypothesis that nac da-mediated learning depends on group ii mglurs. a group ii mglur antagonist was administered directly into nac and the acquisition of cpp based on nac amphetamine was assessed. we found that cpp was antagonized by the group ii antagonist. part of this research has been presented in abstract form  <cit> .

RESULTS
histology
a total of  <dig> rats completed testing. three rats failed to complete the study due to illness or technical problems. there was no relationship between the type and dose of drug and illness observed in these animals. cannula placements were assessed for the remaining rats. a total of  <dig> rats was excluded leaving  <dig> rats for subsequent analyses. figure  <dig> shows the location of cannula tips for all rats included in the analyses. animals were classified as hits if the tips of both cannulae were located in the core or shell region of nac.

time spent on each side during pre-exposure
the interpretation of cpp results is not straightforward if animals have a natural avoidance of the to-be-drug-paired side. in such a case, an apparent increase in time spent on that side after conditioning may be the result of decreased avoidance of the drug-paired side or simply habituation  <cit> . to check for bias, we averaged time spent on the side that would be paired with drug across the  <dig> habituation days and compared it to time spent on the side that would be paired with vehicle for each group. paired samples t-tests revealed non-significant differences for all groups . thus, rats did not avoid the to-be-drug-paired side during habituation and the cpp paradigm was unbiased.

tunnel time
a change in the time spent in the drug-paired side from habituation to test cannot be interpreted unambiguously as a change in place preference if time spent in the tunnel also changes. thus, additional analyses were performed to compare tunnel time before and after conditioning . no significant differences were found.

place conditioning
to induce cpp nac amphetamine was paired with one side of the apparatus over four conditioning days. eglu was injected into nac approximately ten minutes before amphetamine. vehicle alone was paired with the other side of the apparatus on alternate days. cpp was analyzed using a dose  × phase  mixed anova with phase as the repeated factor and time spent on the drug-paired side as the dependent variable. the anova yielded a main effect of phase  and a dose × phase interaction . a one-way simple effects between-subjects anova testing the effect of dose during the habituation session was not significant. however, a one-way simple effects anova testing the effect of dose during the test session produced a main effect of dose . pairwise comparisons revealed that on the test day rats conditioned with amphetamine alone spent more time on the drug-paired side than rats conditioned with amphetamine plus  <dig>  μg of eglu. rats conditioned with amphetamine plus the lowest eglu dose  spent more time on the drug-paired side compared to all other groups except the group conditioned with amphetamine alone . this confirmed the hypothesis that eglu impairs cpp acquisition. rats receiving  <dig>  μg of eglu but no amphetamine showed no significant preference or avoidance .

locomotor activity
locomotor activity during conditioning sessions was analyzed for eglu doses on the four amphetamine and four saline conditioning days yielding a dose  × phase  × day  3-way mixed anova with phase and day as the within-subjects factors and total number of beam breaks per session as the dependent variable. the analysis revealed main effects of phase  and dose  and dose × phase  and dose × phase × day  interactions. in the drug phase, there was only a main effect of eglu dose . animals receiving amphetamine or amphetamine plus eglu  showed higher locomotor activity than animals conditioned with  <dig>  μg of eglu alone . in the saline phase, there was a main effect of eglu dose . the amphetamine group showed higher activity than the  <dig> ,  <dig>  alone and  <dig>  groups. the  <dig>  μg group showed higher activity than the higher eglu doses . thus amphetamine increased locomotor activity both in groups that showed a cpp  and in groups that did not . although activity was significantly lower in all groups on vehicle days, the two groups that showed a place preference had higher locomotion in the drug-free phase .

discussion
in the present studies nac amphetamine injections produced cpp. this effect was impaired by a group ii mglur antagonist. the cpp paradigm was unbiased; rats did not show a systematic preference for one side of the apparatus over the other before conditioning. also, the time rats spent in the tunnel before and after conditioning did not change significantly showing that increases in time spent on the drug-paired side were in fact due to changes in preference. if eglu produced conditioned place avoidance on its own then simple additivity of this putative effect and the positive effect of amphetamine might explain the observed pattern of results. to test this, we injected one group of rats with eglu alone on what would normally have been an amphetamine plus eglu day using an eglu dose that was found to affect amphetamine cpp . on test day these rats did not show a preference or avoidance for the chamber normally paired with amphetamine. thus putative place conditioning properties of eglu do not appear to account for the observed results. amphetamine stimulated locomotor activity. activity among groups differed in drug-free vehicle sessions, with the groups that had received amphetamine alone or amphetamine plus  <dig>  μg eglu into nac during conditioning being more active.

groups that showed the cpp effect also showed higher activity in the vehicle phase. it is difficult to explain this observation. we know of no reports of a relationship between activity on vehicle conditioning days and the presence of a cpp effect. in our work we have repeatedly observed locomotor stimulation on drug conditioning days in groups that subsequently showed a cpp and groups that did not. further studies are needed to assess the reliability of this finding and of activity differences among groups on vehicle conditioning days.

eglu administration did not affect the acute increases in locomotor activity produced by amphetamine in the drug phase. eglu has been reported to impair nac amphetamine-produced locomotion using an amphetamine dose of  <dig>  μg/ <dig>  μl/side  <cit> . we have previously reported that nac amphetamine doses ranging from  <dig> – <dig>  μg produced similar levels of locomotor stimulation but a dose-dependent cpp effect . for the present study we chose a dose of amphetamine  that produced a significant cpp effect; this dose was eight times higher than the dose needed to produce motor stimulation in the study of kim et al. . the doses of eglu  that they used to reduce the locomotor stimulatory effect of amphetamine were comparable to the higher doses used here. our failure to replicate their findings probably relates to our use of a substantially higher dose of amphetamine.

the nac can be subdivided into core and shell subregions  <cit>  and a number of studies suggest that these subregions may be differentially involved in reward-related learning and locomotion  <cit> . our data did not permit a direct investigation of the relative contribution of the two subregions. an attempt was made to assess the possible role of the core and shell by separating the groups into core and shell placements and performing post hoc analyses. however only a few rats had both cannulae located within the core subregion. these rats were distributed unevenly among the groups making it impossible to statistically analyze the effect of region. it should be noted however that we have previously reported significant amphetamine cpp using the same vehicle volume and injection parameters with placements in both the core and shell  <cit> . in other work, lower injection volumes have been used to study the differential role of each subregion  <cit> . a more thorough investigation of the role of nac subregions in cpp produced by local injections of amphetamine is awaited.

dopaminergic innervation of the nac, among other structures, has been widely implicated in natural appetitive behaviors and addiction  <cit> . nac plays a critical role in the acquisition of amphetamine-produced cpp  <cit> . da modulation of corticostriatal glutamatergic projections is believed to underlie reward-related learning  <cit> . mglurs may be involved in this modulation. group i blockade impaired corticostriatal synaptic plasticity  <cit> . group i mglurs have been implicated in the acquisition of drug reward  <cit>  and in mediating da agonist-produced changes in intracellular cascades widely implicated in memory and plasticity  <cit> . while group ii mglurs have not been investigated as thoroughly in this context, several behavioral studies have demonstrated a role for group ii mglurs in learning. group ii mglur activation rescued a nonselective mglur antagonist-produced impairment of the spontaneous improvement in lever-pressing for food in mice  <cit> . group ii activation also impaired lever-pressing for food in rats although this effect was schedule-dependent  <cit> . in a mouse study, systemic cocaine-produced cpp was enhanced in group ii mutants  <cit> . in contrast, we found that acute administrations of the group ii mglur antagonist eglu impairs the acquisition of nac amphetamine cpp. our results are not in disagreement with this study. the mutants showed a behavioral spectrum consistent with psychostimulant sensitization, including enhanced cocaine behavioral sensitization, hyperlocomotion in a novel environment and enhanced da release after a systemic cocaine injection. this observation is supported by work showing that a locally administered mglur ii antagonist increased basal da levels  <cit> . the observed phenotype may therefore reflect long term adaptations produced by changes in striatal da rather than acute effects of group ii mglur blockade.

little is known about the mechanism though which group ii mglurs modulate the acquisition of reward-related learning. group ii mglur antagonist-produced impairments in the acquisition of amphetamine cpp may be mediated by effects on pka. the acquisition of reward-related learning involves da receptor-mediated pka activation  <cit> . both the inhibition and direct activation of pka impair reward-related learning and learning in other tasks  <cit> . in an in vitro study, a group ii antagonist enhanced the stimulation of camp formation by forskolin  <cit> . both a group ii agonist and antagonist impaired learning in a step-down avoidance task  <cit> . the agonist-produced impairment was rescued by coinfusion of forskolin, suggesting that mglur ii may act in synchrony with other receptors including mglur i and da1-like receptors to produce an optimal level of pka activation. in fact, work from our lab  <cit>  has shown that activation of the camp/pka cascade impairs nac amphetamine-produced cpp – a finding that may parallel the effects of a mglur antagonist on a tonically active group ii mglur signal.

group ii mglurs may modulate plasticity by altering nmda-da receptor interactions in nac. nmda receptors are necessary for da-mediated reward-related learning  <cit> . group ii activation alters nmda-produced intracellular signaling in striatal neurons  <cit> . group ii inhibition impairs nmda-dependent hippocampal ltd  <cit>  and corticostriatal nac ltd  <cit> . nac ltd may mediate nac-dependent learning and psychostimulant-produced plasticity  <cit> . reward-related learning is thought to be mediated by the selective strengthening of behaviorally relevant corticostriatal inputs to striatum  <cit> . perhaps group ii mglurs are involved in the selective depression of synapses not related to current input in effect adjusting the gain of behaviorally relevant glutamatergic efferents to the nac  <cit> . further work will have to test this intriguing possibility.

CONCLUSIONS
we investigated the role of group ii mglurs in reward-related learning using the cpp paradigm. this report is the first to test the effects of a group ii mglur antagonist applied locally in the brain on the acquisition of cpp produced by nac injections of amphetamine. we showed that the antagonist impaired nac amphetamine-produced cpp. the results are consistent with previous research showing a role for mglurs in memory and plasticity and da-mediated reward-related learning. group ii mglur modulation of da effects in the nac may involve changes in pka activation, changes in nmda signaling or both.

