BACKGROUND
proper control of gene expression is critical for the complex function of a living cell. although gene expression can be regulated at multiple levels, one of the most important regulatory mechanisms is at the transcriptional level. the transcriptional program is regulated by binding of transcription factors  to the specific dna sequences in regulatory regions of the genes. tfs are thus fundamental to the regulation of gene expression. however, several studies on specific tfs have observed that only a small fraction of genes that were bound by a tf were differentially expressed after that factor was knocked out or knocked down  <cit> . recently, a genome-wide study has carried out knockout experiments to determine knockout target genes  for  <dig> budding yeast tfs under normal growth condition  <cit> . further analysis showed that there is only a low overlap  between the knockout targets and the binding targets identified by chromatin immunoprecipitation -chip  <cit> .

there are several possible explanations for the small overlap between knockout and binding targets. first, the large-scale chip-chip data set could be more likely to be affected by experimental noise  <cit> . the overlap between rap <dig> knockout and binding targets from a different high-quality chip-chip data set  <cit>  is as twice as that for the large-scale chip-chip data set  <cit> . second, binding and knockout experiments could capture distinct features of the transcriptional regulatory program  <cit> . binding experiments show a preference to uncover long-range interactions between telomeres and transcription factors, while knockout experiments tend to reveal downstream effects of interference with ribosome biogenesis. third, mere tf binding is not sufficient to guarantee its regulation. the effect of bound tfs on target genes' expression might depend on the presence of other proteins. the location, orientation and spacing of transcription factor binding sites  also affect the regulatory function of tfs on their target genes  <cit> . finally, the knockout targets could include both direct and indirect targets. the overlap between the knockout and the binding targets indeed significantly improved after the elimination of the indirect targets  <cit> .

the small overlap between knockout and binding targets might be indicative of redundant tfs which mask the tf knockout effect. most eukaryotic genes are regulated by a combination of tfs  <cit> . some tfs might work in a redundant fashion  <cit> , and they could compensate for each other's loss  <cit> . the compensation among tfs should lead to the insensitivity of binding targets to the knockout of single tf. we referred to this insensitivity to the knockout of single tf as the robustness of transcriptional regulatory program. an interesting question arises concerning how the tfs involved in robust transcriptional regulatory program work in a redundant fashion. in addition, it is intuitive that this robustness should influence gene expression, but evidence for the effects remains to be elucidated.

in this study, we first distinguished between robust and fragile  transcriptional regulatory programs according to their degrees of sensitivity to the knockout of tfs under normal growth condition. we referred to tfs involved in robust or fragile transcriptional regulatory program as robust or fragile tfs, and referred to genes having robust or fragile transcriptional regulatory program as robust or fragile genes. we found that robust cooperative tfs show significantly higher co-activity than fragile cooperative tfs. this result indicates that robust tfs regulate their common target genes in an activity-redundant fashion. we further revealed that fragile genes have high capacity to modulate gene expression upon changing conditions and have high evolutionary rates of genes expression. paralogs provide backup mechanisms for expression variability of fragile genes. we compared the fragility of transcriptional regulatory program with other determinants of expression variability, and showed that the fragility is an important source of expression variability.

RESULTS
identification of robust and fragile tfs
we first identified robust and fragile tfs by using genome-wide tf binding data  <cit> , tf knockout data  <cit>  and gene expression data  <cit> . for the gene expression data sets  <cit> , we refined the data measured under normal growth condition, the condition at which the tf binding and knockout data were generated. if a given tf is involved in the robust transcriptional regulatory program, the expression of its binding target genes  should not be affected by any tf knockouts. however, some tfs might merely bind promoters without any regulatory function, and their single knockout should not affect the expression of their cohort genes regardless of robust or fragile transcriptional regulatory program. we should identify these tfs and exclude them for analysis. if the tf regulates expression of its cohort genes, the pair-wise pearson correlation coefficients among expression profiles of its cohort genes should be significantly higher than genome-wide level. accordingly, we focused our analysis on tfs whose cohort genes have significantly higher pair-wise pearson correlation coefficients in expression profiles. if a given tf is involved in the fragile transcriptional regulatory program, the expression of its cohort genes should be significantly affected by its knockout. we used the kolmogorov-smirnov  statistical test to measure the discrepancy in the distribution of tf-knockout gene expression values between a given tf cohort and the rest of the genes. our test generated  <dig> robust tfs whose cohort genes are not differentially expressed upon any tf knockouts , and  <dig> fragile tfs whose cohort genes are differentially expressed upon their knockouts  . the big difference in the numbers of robust and fragile tfs is consistent with the small overlap between knockout and binding targets  <cit> . in addition, the robust cohort genes are also less sensitive to the changes in expression of their associated tfs: robust tfs are significantly less co-expressed with their cohort genes than fragile tfs . together, these results show that our identified robust cohort genes are relatively insensitive to the perturbation of their associated tfs.

as transcription regulation in most eukaryotic genes is not controlled by a single tf but by multiple tfs, we next identified cooperative tfs for each robust or fragile tf. given a tf a, if another tf b works together with a, the a cohort should be significantly enriched with the b binding target genes. we used the mann-whitney u-test to evaluate the difference in the medians of experimentally measured b binding affinities between the a cohort and the rest of the genes.  <dig> out of  <dig> robust tfs, and  <dig> out of  <dig> fragile tfs have at least one cooperative tf , that is, the binding affinities of the tf cohort genes are significantly higher than those of the other genes for at least one other tf . in addition, there is no significant difference in the number of cooperative tfs between robust and fragile tfs .

robust cooperative tfs show high co-activity
we next asked how cooperative tfs contribute to the robustness of transcriptional regulatory program. cooperative tfs work in concert to regulate a set of genes. in the robust transcriptional regulatory program, cooperative tfs could compensate for each other's loss. we speculated that there might be redundancy in tf activity level in the robust transcriptional regulatory program. like the method in a previous study  <cit> , we used gene expression profile as a close approximation to activity level. using gene expression profiles under normal growth condition  <cit> , we found that cooperative tfs in the robust transcriptional regulatory program are significantly more co-expressed than those in the fragile program . conversely, we examined whether tfs that are more co-expressed with the other tfs tend to be involved in the robust transcriptional regulatory program. we found that tfs that are significantly more co-expressed with the other tfs show a fourfold decrease in the overlap between their knockout and binding targets compared with tfs that are significantly less co-expressed with the other tfs . a low overlap between knockout and binding targets for a given tf reflects the high insensitivity of tf binding targets to the tf knockout . while this manuscript was in preparation, a study has revealed that tfs with more similar tf paralogs had lower overlap between their binding and knockout targets  <cit> . our identified tfs that are significantly more co-expressed with the other tfs show a low overlap with the tfs having the most similar tf paralogs identified in that study . this result suggests that tf paralogs and tf co-activity  are different mechanisms underlying the robust transcriptional regulatory program.

fragile genes have high transcriptional plasticity
we have analyzed robust and fragile transcriptional regulatory programs in terms of their tfs, and next would turn our analysis to robust or fragile genes . using the refined transcriptional regulatory network without indirect regulatory interactions constructed from the tf knockout data  <cit> , we denoted the transcriptional regulatory program as 'k fragility ' to a specific gene according to the number k of tf knockouts which it is affected by. as most genes  are 0-fragile genes, we focused our analysis on the genes that are affected by the knockout of a large number of tfs. on average, genes were affected by the knockout of two tfs. we determined genes as fragile genes if they are 5-fragile or higher. we identified a total of  <dig> fragile genes . a recent study has measured genome-wide gene expression levels on overexpression of  <dig> tfs  <cit> . fragile genes are sensitive not only to tf knockout but also to tf overexpression: their expression levels are significantly more changed upon tf overexpression than the rest of the genes .

we next examined how fragile genes modulate gene expression upon changing environmental conditions. as fragile genes have transcriptional regulatory programs that are sensitive to tf perturbation under normal growth condition, an open question is whether this property makes their expression more readily be reprogrammed in response to changing conditions. to test this possibility, we used gene expression data from the stanford microarray database  <cit>  to calculate for each gene the average magnitude of expression changes upon various conditions , termed as transcriptional plasticity. the transcriptional plasticity quantifies the dynamic range of expression level in various conditions. fragile genes have significantly higher transcriptional plasticity than the rest of the genes . this result also persisted when transcriptional plasticity was calculated separately for up-regulation or down-regulation . these results indicate that fragile genes show more expression changes under a variety of conditions regardless of the direction of the expression changes. furthermore, transcriptional plasticity globally increases with the degree of fragility .

we further investigated into the relationship between fragile transcriptional regulatory program under normal growth condition and gene expression responses to different stress conditions. it is well established that yeast cells regulate expression levels of ~ <dig> genes in a stereotypical manner in most of the environmental stress conditions, commonly referred to as the environmental stress response   <cit> . tfs bind some specific genes to regulate their expression in response to changing conditions. using the genome-wide tf binding data measured in various conditions  <cit> , we identified genes  that are bound by multiple  tfs in the stress conditions that were included in esr  <cit> . these multiple-tf-binding genes were expected to be regulated in response to environmental stress conditions. however, only a small fraction  of these genes participate in esr. we found that these minority genes are affected by more tf knockouts under normal growth condition than the rest of multiple-tf-binding genes . this result indicates that these minority genes have relatively fragile transcription regulatory program under normal growth condition. moreover, these two gene classes show no significant difference in tf binding number in stress conditions , ruling out the possibility that their difference in environmental response is attributable to their difference in tf binding number. together, these results suggest that fragile transcriptional regulatory program under normal growth condition tend to be reprogrammed in response to changing conditions.

we next examined whether there are other mechanisms that ensure normal expression of fragile genes in various conditions. a previous study has identified  <dig>  paralogs in yeast  <cit> . fragile genes are enriched with paralogs , which indicates backup mechanisms might be used for fragile genes. indeed, the paralogous gene pairs involving fragile genes are more pair-wise co-expressed than the other paralogous gene pairs under both normal growth and stress conditions . these results suggest that paralogs provide backup mechanisms and robustness for expression of fragile genes in various conditions. fragile genes have high evolutionary rates of genes expressionwe next asked whether fragile transcriptional regulatory program is linked to high evolutionary rate of gene expression. fragile genes have higher evolutionary rates of gene expression between yeast species  <cit>  than the rest of the genes . evolution of gene expression can be caused by changes in cis and/or trans regulations. previous studies have experimentally quantified the relative contribution of cis and trans effects to expression divergence between species, and have revealed that most of interspecies divergence can be generally explained by cis effects  <cit> . however, trans and cis effects  <cit>  of fragile genes show comparable contribution to expression divergence between species . fragile genes have higher trans effects than the rest of the genes , and have comparable cis effects with the other genes . hence, fragile transcriptional regulatory program might facilitate the contribution of trans effects on expression divergence.

sensory trans effects are suggested to play a dominant role in trans effects  <cit> . accordingly, esr genes show higher trans effects. we sought to understand the contribution of sensory trans effects and fragile transcriptional regulatory program to trans effects. to this end, we compared trans effects between fragile and esr genes. we excluded genes shared by these two gene classes for analysis. these two gene classes show comparable trans effects and evolutionary rates of gene expression .

fragile transcriptional regulatory program is a major source of expression variability
we next sought to quantify the contribution of fragile transcriptional regulatory program to expression variability. expression variability is primarily regulated at the chromatin level  <cit> . nucleosome occupancy at the  <dig> bp upstream of the transcription start site  shows high positive correlation with transcriptional plasticity  <cit> .  <dig> occupied proximal-nucleosome  genes with high nucleosome occupancy close to the tss were identified  <cit> . fragile genes have significantly lower nucleosome occupancy  <cit>  close to the tss  <cit>  than opn genes , indicating that fragile transcriptional regulatory program has an impact on expression variability irrespective of the presence of nucleosomes close to the tss. we found that fragile genes have higher transcriptional plasticity than opn genes . when excluding the genes shared by fragile and opn genes, the difference became more significant  and opn genes have transcriptional plasticity comparable to genome-wide level . although transcriptional plasticity is also linked to the presence of a tata box  <cit> , we found that fragile genes have still higher transcriptional plasticity than tata-containing genes  <cit>  . to further investigate into the contribution of fragile transcriptional regulatory program and chromatin structure to expression variability, we used seven measures for expression variability as in a previous study  <cit> , including stochastic noise  <cit> , responsiveness  <cit> , stress response  <cit> , trans variability  <cit> , mutational variance  <cit> , interstrain variation  <cit>  and expression divergence  <cit> . we used multiple linear regression to analyze the correlations of the seven variability measures with the fragility of transcriptional regulatory program and the average nucleosome occupancy within the  <dig> bp upstream of the tss . we found that the fragility of transcriptional regulatory program is more positively correlated with six out of seven variability measures than nucleosome occupancy. the two factors show comparable correlation with the other variability measure . we conclude that fragile transcriptional regulatory program plays a more fundamental role in expression variability compared with the presence of nucleosomes close to the tss.

discussion
we have shown that tf redundancy in activity plays an important role in the robustness of transcriptional regulatory program. in addition, tf redundancy in sequence  also enhances the robustness of transcriptional regulatory program  <cit> . as the two types of tf redundancy have a low overlap, it seems more likely that they work separately. for activity-redundant tfs that share a set of binding target genes, their activity could compensate for each other when one tf is perturbed. on the other hand, tf paralogs tend to have similar binding domains  <cit> . when robust tfs without activity-redundant tfs are knocked out, their paralogous tfs might be recruited to bind their original target genes to compensate for their loss. as their paralogous tfs have different activity levels from them, the paralogous tfs should be reprogrammed to acquire activity that is similar to theirs. these two types of redundancy guarantee the robustness of transcriptional regulatory program.

we have demonstrated that genes with fragile transcriptional regulatory programs under normal growth condition tend to participate in esr, though the number of tfs that bind them in stress conditions is comparable with that of robust genes. this implies that the fragility of transcriptional regulatory program under normal growth condition plays an essential role in esr. moreover, paralogs also provide backup mechanisms for participation of fragile genes into esr. as the fragile gene is sensitive to single tf perturbation, the stress-related tfs could readily reprogramme this gene by bypassing only one originally bound tf. in contrast, even though stress-related tfs bind the robust gene, its transcriptional programs might not be altered unless multiple originally bound tfs are bypassed. this makes it difficult for genes with robust transcriptional regulatory programs under normal growth condition to respond to stress conditions. a similar explanation is also applicable to the previous observation that the evolutionary rate of expression or sequence of tfs is not correlated with the trans divergence of their target genes  <cit> . the degree of sensitivity to tf perturbation also affects the contribution of the divergence of tfs on trans divergence. hence, fragile target genes with high divergence of tfs should show high trans divergence, whereas robust target genes with high divergence of tfs unnecessarily show high trans divergence.

a key finding of this study is that fragile transcriptional regulatory program plays a major role in expression variability. expression variability also depends on promoter chromatin structure: the presence of nucleosomes close to the tss is associated with high expression variability  <cit> . we suggest that the fragility of transcriptional regulatory program is coupled with chromatin structure to determine expression variability. first, the fragile transcriptional regulatory program makes fragile genes sensitive to trans variation that could cause expression variability. second, once the transcriptional regulatory program permits the trans variation to act on a gene, the transient removal of nucleosomes that cover tss and tata elements is required for gene activation. the fragile transcriptional regulatory program provides a framework that allows for expression variability, and the subsequent eviction of nucleosomes close to the tss is required for promoter activation.

CONCLUSIONS
we have investigated into the cause and effect of robust and fragile transcriptional regulatory programs . in the robust transcriptional regulatory program, cooperative tfs work in concert to regulate their common binding genes in an activity-redundant fashion, and they are able to compensate for each other's loss. accordingly, their binding genes are insensitive to their changes in activity level and even their single knockout. while in the fragile transcriptional regulatory program, cooperative tfs work together in a relatively activity-independent way, their single perturbation thus significantly affects their binding genes' expression. this high sensitivity to single tf perturbation corresponds to high transcriptional perturbation, which leads to the high expression variability of fragile genes.

