BACKGROUND
the rapid progress in the understanding of protein networks underlying biological functions, as well as of the specific roles played by particular polypeptides in human pathologies such as cancer, has fuelled the search for means to deliver peptides or proteins into cells within a therapeutic perspective. exciting developments originated from previous studies on the viral transactivator tat, as well as the antennapedia transcription factor  <cit> . characterization of the capacity of these proteins to enter cells led to the mapping of peptidic domains of limited size responsible for this property which turned out to be transferable by linkage to various peptides or proteins  <cit> ; for a recent review see  <cit> ). these so-called protein transduction domains  or cell-penetrating peptides raised the possibility of delivering an exogenous protein component into cells. this has been established for many different proteins or peptides ex vivo and has also been shown to work in the whole animal  <cit> . however, several recent studies have raised doubts concerning the veritable capacity of such hybrid proteins to enter cells  <cit> . for immunofluorescence studies in particular, the fixation step has been shown to cause possible artefacts. in some cases reported cellular entry is therefore questionable, but in others the observed biological effects are difficult to explain without authentic cellular delivery  <cit> . the exact molecular mechanism that allows penetration within cells is also confusing. this property has been shown in some instances to be independent of energy consumption but in others to involve various forms of endocytosis  <cit> . a detailed study with a hybrid tat-cre construct has shown that cellular entry was achieved through macropinocytosis  <cit> . from the published data it appears that the exact mechanism involved depends on the precise nature of the protein and of the ptd. the cell type is also probably important.

a potential problem with peptides or proteins to be delivered into cells is their instability. association with a folded stable domain can increase this stability. ubiquitin or members of this protein family can be interesting in this perspective. several expression systems in bacteria or eukaryotes have benefited from this property favouring the production of otherwise poorly-expressed proteins  <cit> . indeed, fusion of ubiquitin to their n-terminus can allow the production of such proteins. this is also the case with sumo- <dig>  in addition, association with ubiquitin or sumo- <dig> allows easy cleavage after the diglycine motif which terminates the protein. this possibility has been used in particular for the experimental system which allowed characterization of the n-end rule which states that the stability of a protein depends on the nature of its amino-terminal residue  <cit> .

considering these notions, we designed a system to deliver proteins into cells without any addition by creating fusions with ptd-ubiquitin or ptd-sumo- <dig> hybrids. although the system allows efficient expression in bacteria and easy purification, it appeared that these hybrid proteins do not allow efficient delivery into cells. by contrast, mutation of the diglycine motif and association with a peptide motif linked to the tat or poly arginine ptd permits efficient entry and the mechanism sustaining this entry is energy-independent.

RESULTS
design of fusion proteins with the capability of delivering a given protein
association of various motifs with a peptide or protein has been shown to trigger cell entry from the extracellular milieu. well-characterized examples of such motifs are the tat basic domain, stretches of arginine, and part of the antennapedia transcription factor  <cit> . however, these protein motifs are generally covalently linked to the peptide or protein to be delivered, and hence remain associated with it permanently, thereby potentially altering their properties. in particular the tat basic domain or polyarginine motif confers intranuclear localisation or association with nucleic acids, a feature which might not be wanted. to avoid this, we tested a system which associates the protein with a module composed of the flag epitope, a ptd and either ubiquitin or sumo- <dig> . the diglycine motif of these small proteins is directly linked to the first amino acid of the protein to be delivered, which in our constructions was gfp, taken as a model polypeptide. it was anticipated that within cells ubiquitin or sumo- <dig> proteases would cleave the fusion protein after the diglycine motif, thereby releasing gfp starting at the first amino acid. this is known to occur in particular for the ubiquitin ribosomal protein fusions encoded by several cellular genes  <cit> . the constructs were designed to allow easy insertion of various ptds after the flag epitope . these two elements were separated by a cleavage site for the prescission protease, thereby allowing removal of the flag epitope if necessary. the efficiency of nine different ptds was tested using these constructs . ptd  <dig> corresponds to the hiv- <dig> tat basic domain. ptd  <dig> was defined by ho et al.  as an efficient derivative of the former. these authors proposed that strengthening of the α-helical structure of the motif reinforces its transduction properties  <cit> . with the idea of introducing these modifications in ubiquitin itself at a later stage, ptd  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> were designed from the α-helix present in the ubiquitin fold with the aim of increasing its α-helical nature, as well as its content in basic residues to confer transduction properties. ptd  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> are stretches of  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> arginines, respectively. finally, ptd  <dig> corresponds to a stretch of  <dig> lysines.

to examine the efficiency of these various ptds, the ubiquitin-gfp fusions were expressed in bacteria and affinity-purified using anti-flag beads. all these proteins were produced in large amounts and easily purified . these proteins were then incubated with jurkat cells which were lysed in sds buffer and analyzed by immunoblot using an antibody to gfp. as controls, aliquots of purified protein and cell supernatant were also analyzed. with purified proteins a certain amount of cleavage occurred between ub and gfp and bands were seen both at the position of the complete fusion protein and of gfp . depending on the various ptds, proteins were observed or not in the cell extracts. this was clearly the case for ptd  <dig> and  <dig>  and less efficiently for ptds  <dig> and  <dig> . ptds  <dig> and  <dig> were inactive in this assay . the protein was also absent in the cell extract when it did not include a ptd . unexpectedly, with active ptds only the complete fusion protein was observed and no signal was detected at the position of gfp alone .

we next tested the efficiency of these ptds in primary lymphocytes. this was done with the ubiquitin and sumo- <dig> gfp fusion proteins bearing the tat and polyr ptds. these proteins were detected in lymphocytes lysed in sds and this association was clearly reinforced when lymphocytes were activated . the efficiency of the various ptds was also tested without the presence of ubiquitin or sumo- <dig>  in the fpg constructs the ptd is directly upstream of the gfp protein. similarly to what was observed with the ubiquitin fusion proteins, ptds  <dig> and  <dig> mediated association of gfp with cells . ptd  <dig> was weakly active compared to the tat and polyr motifs . interestingly, ptd  <dig> which corresponds to a stretch of seven arginines was as active as ptd  <dig> which has nine arginines , but by contrast ptd  <dig> with eleven arginines showed no activity . a weak cell association was also detected with ptd  <dig> which corresponds to nine lysines .

taken together these results show that the tat and polyr <dig> or polyr <dig> were the most efficient motifs under these conditions. in agreement with previous observations, the polyr motif efficiency requires an optimum size of seven to nine residues and increasing this length leads to loss of the effect  <cit> .

ubiquitin and sumo- <dig> fusion proteins do not enter cells
previous observations were carried out lysing cells directly in sds. unexpectedly, when lysis was performed in ripa buffer, these fusion proteins were not detected. indeed, comparative analysis of both types of extracts clearly showed that fusion proteins with the tat or polyr ptds were detected in sds extracts but not in ripa lysates . by contrast, equal amounts of β-actin were detected in both extracts . this was true for both ubiquitin and sumo- <dig> fusion proteins. this suggests that these proteins are likely to remain with the cellular debris removed by centrifugation during ripa lysate preparation. another intriguing point was that complete fusion proteins were detected but no free gfp. to examine whether this was a problem inherent to our constructs or to absence of authentic cell penetration, the sequences coding for the ubiquitin and sumo- <dig> gfp fusions associated with the tat and polyr <dig> ptds were cloned into a mammalian expression vector. cells were transfected with these vectors and then lysed in ripa buffer. with the ubiquitin fusion a single band was seen at the position of gfp . with the sumo- <dig> gfp fusion, a band was detected at the position of gfp but another of higher molecular weight was also seen . this indicates that processing of these proteins when expressed intracellularly was efficient: completely for ubiquitin and partially for sumo- <dig>  it also indicates that the resulting gfp is stable. this observation supports the notion that when added from the extracellular milieu these fusions do not veritably enter cells. to analyse this further, we performed immunofluorescence studies. cells were incubated with the constructs including the tat ptd directly upstream of gfp or upstream of the ubiquitin or sumo- <dig> gfp fusion proteins. for these three proteins only a few discontinuous areas showed gfp staining and comparison with the transmission images showed that they corresponded to debris from dead cells . collectively these observations were not in favour of a authentic entry of these fusion proteins into cells. it is more likely that the ptds allow stable association with the cellular membrane but not veritable delivery of the fusion protein to the cytosol.

we then examined if this failure could be due to the size and nature of gfp by replacing this part of the fusion proteins with a small peptide. this was done by placing the ha epitope downstream of sumo- <dig> linked either to the tat or polyr <dig> ptds . cells lysed in ripa buffer were analysed by ha and sumo- <dig> immunoblot but this did not reveal the presence of the fusion proteins within cells . as we have previously shown that fusion proteins corresponding to sumo- <dig> associated with a peptide motif together with the tat ptd efficiently enter cells  <cit> , we compared these proteins with the sumo- <dig> ha fusion. as previously reported, shpr <dig> and  <dig> were clearly detected in the ripa extracts, but this was not the case with the sumo- <dig> ha construct . as a clear difference between both types of constructs was that the diglycine motif was mutated in the shp proteins, thereby impairing their processing, a further study was made to determine whether this mutation could explain the difference. it was found that restoration of the wild type end of sumo- <dig> in the shpr <dig> construct indeed leads to loss of intracellular entry .

veritable cell penetration by the shpr proteins
to strengthen the notion that the shpr proteins indeed enter cells, immunofluorescence analyses were performed using living cells. the proteins were fluorescently labelled with alexa  <dig> and incubated with cells which were washed and maintained in hbs buffer for examination by confocal microscopy. fluorescence was seen in many cells and comparison with the light transmission image showed that the fluorescent cells had a normal aspect and did not correspond to debris of dead cells . fluorescence was mainly seen in the nucleus. these observations are in favour of a veritable entry of shpr within cells. different studies have reported controversial results about the mechanism of cell entry mediated by ptds  <cit> . this process has been reported to involve endocytosis or not. a precise analysis conducted with a cre-tat ptd fusion and a reporter gene the expression of which depends on cre expression, showed that macropinocytosis was involved  <cit> . it is likely that the intervening mechanism depends on the precise nature of the protein or peptide associated with the ptd  <cit> . it is possible that for small polypeptides, direct passage through the membrane occurs, whereas for larger proteins endocytosis takes place. to better characterize the process intervening in the case of shpr, we first tested whether cell entry occurs at 4°c. although reduced as compared to 37°c, a clear band was seen in ripa extracts of cells incubated at 4°c with shpr <dig> . we then investigated if macropinocytosis could participate in the process. to this end we tested the effect of rotenone and amiloride. both treatments were without effect on the cell entry of shpr <dig> . for unclear reasons the β-actin signal was decreased by amiloride treatment but equal total amounts of protein were loaded in the various lanes . for the experiment with amiloride and rotenone, cells were incubated with the protein in hbs, not in normal medium. under these conditions a higher amount of protein was seen in the cell extract as equal protein amounts were analyzed . in agreement with previous observations  <cit>  this is likely due to an inhibitory effect by the serum. we then investigated in which cell compartment the protein was present. cells incubated either with fp1ug or shpr <dig> were separated into cytoplasmic, nuclear and membrane fractions. when the experiment was performed with the ubiquitin fusion protein associated with the tat ptd, the protein was seen only in the membrane fraction and no signal was seen in the cytoplasmic and nuclear fractions . analysis of the cytoplasmic rrm <dig> protein indicated that the fractionation process was correct . by contrast, when the experiment was done with shpr <dig>  the protein was mainly seen in the nuclear fraction , in agreement with the immunofluorescence observations, and a signal was also seen in the membrane fraction. we then tested how reduced temperature or amiloride treatment affects compartmentalization of the protein. incubation of the cells at 4°c reduced the presence of the protein in the nuclear fraction but it was then detected in the cytoplasm, probably as a result of reduced nuclear import . amiloride treatment did not impair the presence of the protein in the nucleus and even stimulated it . interestingly, no more protein was seen in the membrane fraction and a low amount was then seen in the cytoplasmic fraction. considering this effect it is possible that amiloride treatment leads, for unclear reasons, to the release of the protein fraction associated with membranes, thereby increasing its concentration in cytoplasm and nucleus. these data indicate that cell entry of the shpr protein is energy-independent and does not involve macropinocytosis, a process which requires functional na+/h+ exchange that is inhibited by amiloride  <cit> .

taken together these observations firmly establish that shpr proteins are able to penetrate within cells via a mechanism that is energy-independent. hence this is likely to occur by direct passage through the cellular membrane. the intracellular sumo-1-peptide fusion is mostly nuclear, probably as consequence of the nucleic acid binding properties of the tat ptd but also possibly due to the sumo- <dig> domain. indeed, it has been reported for several proteins that sumo- <dig> addition triggers nuclear entry. this indicates that our system is probably appropriate for targeting nuclear proteins but not cytoplasmic factors. in the nucleus the shps show a diffuse localization. these observations are in agreement with the biological effect of shpr <dig> and shpr <dig> which are able to block replication of hiv- <dig> in primary lymphocytes or macrophages when added to the culture medium  <cit> . the results of the fractionation experiments also support the previous conclusion that the ubiquitin gfp proteins are unable to penetrate within the intracellular milieu. this is in agreement with a previously published report that similar ubiquitin-peptide and ubiquitin-protein constructs are not able to enter the cytosol  <cit> . however, these authors interestingly showed that dendritic cells were able to uptake and process such hybrid proteins, at least to some extent. hence, in future studies it will be interesting to test if our ubiquitin or sumo- <dig> hybrids can be processed in such cells. an intriguing aspect of our observations is the role of the diglycine motif. indeed, its presence seems to have a strong negative effect on detection of the sumo-1-peptide hybrid in cells. as the presence of ubiquitin proteases in the cellular membrane has been reported, it is possible that cleavage after the c-terminal diglycine motif occur simultaneously to crossing of the membrane. however, we did not observe cleavage products of our hybrid proteins, even under conditions of proteasome activity blockage  <cit> . it remains possible that after cleavage both parts are routed towards endosomes and further degraded in lysosomes. structural studies have established the importance of the diglycine motif in the interaction of sumo- <dig> or ubiquitin with c-terminal hydrolases or isopeptidase  <cit> . hence, an expected effect of the mutation of this sequence to alanine-arginine is loss of interaction with these enzymes. it is possible that this event explains the efficient capacity of the shp proteins to enter cells.

CONCLUSIONS
the results presented in this report clarify the mechanism of the cellular entry of sumo-1-peptide-ptd constructs and confirm that these constructs can efficiently deliver a peptide into cells. unexpectedly, they show that it is important to block the cleavage that normally occurs at the junction of sumo- <dig> and the peptide by mutating the diglycine motif. these constructs which can be easily produced in bacteria potentially offer an interesting means of delivering a peptide able to act as an agonist or antagonist with respect to a pivotal cellular protein.

