BACKGROUND
organisms are composed of elements that, although coordinated, show obvious signs of heterogeneity with respect to certain kinds of processes  <cit> . these elements, called modules, are internally integrated but relatively independent of one another  <cit> . thus, modularity is considered a key feature of biological organization that allows the modification of certain parts of organisms with minor effects on other parts, thereby contributing to evolvability  <cit> . modularity occurs at every single level of biological organization, from molecular interactions to networks of ecological connections  <cit> . variational modularity  has long been recognized in morphological traits  <cit>  since it provides the evolutionary flexibility required to induce adaptive changes in certain regions of complex phenotypic structures. at the cell level, the structural and functional modularity of molecular networks have been studied in detail  <cit> , but to our knowledge, the variational modularity of cell morphology has not been examined to date. the relations between different kinds of modularity in biological organization are still not well understood, and their comparative study may provide insights into evolutionary processes  <cit> . the male gametes of certain mammals may represent an ideal model for testing the connections between different kinds of modularity, as they are highly polarized cells with structurally and functionally differentiated regions that are morphologically recognizable  <cit> .

the sperm of the western house mouse, mus musculus domesticus, has a complex, flattened, hook-shaped head containing the cell nucleus  <cit> . overlying the nucleus is the acrosome, which has two functional components: the anterior acrosome and the equatorial segment   <cit> . division at the organelle level also affects the organization of the plasma membrane and the cytoskeleton. the plasmalemma of the sperm head is structurally and functionally differentiated into two major domains, the acrosomal and the post-acrosomal plasma membranes, separated by the sub-acrosomal ring  <cit> . beneath the plasma membrane there is a dense cytoskeletal mesh that forms the perinuclear theca , which is also differentiated into two main domains: the outer periacrosomal layer and the post-acrosomal sheath  <cit> . in the latter domain, an area mainly composed by perforatorial proteins is distinguished: the ventral spur region  <cit> . in view of this noticeable compartmentation in the sperm head, the main goal of this study is to assess, for the first time, whether the structural and functional regionalization of the cellular components generates the variational modularity of cell shape. we used geometric morphometrics to test three hypotheses that divide the sperm head into different modules : i) acrosome and post-acrosome ; ii) anterior acrosome, equatorial segment and post-acrosome ; and iii) acrosome, post-acrosome and ventral spur .

previous studies in mice from the robertsonian system found in barcelona  revealed that chromosomal rearrangements affect the size and the shape of the sperm head  <cit> . this rb system represents a unique contact zone between standard  and rb mice since there is no evidence of a rb race in which a group of individuals from the same geographical area share a set of metacentrics in homozygous condition  <cit> . diploid numbers range from  <dig> to  <dig> chromosomes, and seven different metacentrics  have been described up to now  <cit> . the relative stability of its metacentric staggered structure  <cit>  as well as the phenotypic differences associated with karyotype detected in animals from this area  <cit>  suggest the presence of partial barriers to gene flow. in this scenario, the study of the factors involved in the establishment of reproductive barriers between individuals may take on special relevance. thus, assuming that rb fusions could induce variations in the genotype-phenotype map of the sperm head  <cit> , and that changes in the variational modularity patterns may play an important role in the evolvability of the sperm features, a second aim of this study is to evaluate the effect, if any, of the rb translocations on the pattern of variational modularity of the western house mouse sperm head.

RESULTS
the procrustes anova performed on the replicated subsample showed highly significant differences between sperm heads . the mean squares for sperm head variation exceeded the mean squares for replicates by 388-fold, indicating low measurement error and consequently strong repeatability of the landmark location in the sperm head.

fine morphological analysis of mouse sperm heads combining scanning electron microscopy and geometric morphometrics revealed significant allometry of cell shape  with  <dig> % and  <dig> % of shape variation explained by changes in cell size in the st and rb groups, respectively. allometric shape changes affected all the landmarks to a similar degree and mainly involved a narrowing of the sperm head and a stretching of the hook. the existence of significant size-dependent shape changes is interesting because evidence of shape allometry at the cell level is very scarce. the precise mechanisms that underlie this association are unknown. however, recent studies have indicated a correlation between cell shape and growth  <cit> , and between cell size and the behaviour of the cytoskeletal machinery  <cit> . given that the cytoskeleton is mainly responsible for shaping the cell during growth, it is reasonable to suppose that these behavioural changes in the cytoskeletal machinery may be partly responsible for the association between size and shape of the cell. because allometry represents a global integration factor, the residuals of the multivariate regression of the procrustes coordinates onto log cs were used for further analyses.

the pca indicated that the first five pcs explained around 75% of the shape variation in both st and rb mice . the shape changes associated with pc <dig> were mainly concentrated in the hook and the convex side of the sperm head, while the changes associated with pc <dig> affected the ventral spur and post-acrosome . the rv and multiset rv coefficients indicated that there was a low to moderate degree of covariation between the different regions of the sperm head . however, the only significant hypothesis when comparing the multiset rv value with permutational distributions was h <dig>  which divides the sperm head in accordance with the structural division of the pt . the pt is a cytoskeletal structure with a central role in the morphogenesis and maintenance of sperm head shape  <cit> . while its heterogeneous composition is associated with the functional organization of the cell and the subdivision of the plasmalemma  <cit> , our results indicate that the modularity of the sperm head shape is directly influenced by structural changes in the cytoskeleton. the functional division of the sperm head into three main regions  seems not to play a direct role in the variational modularity of overall shape. moreover, according to our results, the acrosome behaves as an integrated unit, while in the post-acrosomal region the ventral spur shows a high degree of autonomy. this modularity pattern was detected in data corrected and not corrected  for allometry. this result indicates that size-dependent shape changes do not play a major role in the patterns of integration of the sperm head. the rv values obtained in the 2b-pls analyses indicated a low strength of association between subsets of landmarks in h <dig> for all comparisons . however, the percentages of covariation explained by the first pls axis in the comparisons of the ventral spurs with the acrosomal and post-acrosomal domains were high, especially in the st group . this result is congruent since the ventral spurs are considered to be specialized features integrated in the post-acrosomal sheath  <cit> . the high percentages of covariance explained by the first pls axis in the st sperm head indicated that most of the covariation is concentrated in precise features of shape that change in a coordinated manner between modules. this is especially relevant in the comparison between the ventral spur and the acrosomal and post-acrosomal modules, where the first pls explains around 85% of the covariation. these results suggest that the amount of covariation between certain pairs of modules may depend on the subdivision of the sperm plasma membrane, since the acrosomal domain overlies the whole acrosome and the upper ventral spur and the post-acrosomal domain involves the post-acrosome and the lower region of the ventral spur module  <cit> . in fact, the hypothesis testing the division of the sperm head into acrosomal and post-acrosomal modules , although not significant, yielded an rv value lower than most of the alternative partitions, indicating a certain influence of the membrane domains. conversely, the 2b-pls revealed a different covariation pattern in rb sperm heads. several studies have evidenced that chromosomal rearrangements may induce changes in morphological covariation patterns through the rupture of genetic linkage groups and/or the occurrence of epistatic interactions between genes involved in the development of certain modules  <cit> . under these circumstances, the variation in the genotype-phenotype map could explain the lower percentages of covariation among pairs of modules detected in rb mice. however, the extent to which these differences affect the potential for evolutionary change remains to be elucidated.

abbreviations: pc, principal components; st, standard sperm heads; rb, robertsonian sperm heads.

for each two-block comparison we display the rv coefficient; the percentage of total covariation explained by the first pls axis; the correlation between the 2b-pls <dig> scores; and the associated p-values .

CONCLUSIONS
our results reveal for first time the existence of variational modularity in a cellular structure such as the house mouse sperm head and highlight the important role of the cytoskeleton in maintaining the shape of the cell. the presence of rb translocations did not affect the variational modularity pattern. however, the lower percentages of shape covariation between pairs of modules in rb sperms heads suggest a certain influence of the rb rearrangements. understanding the mechanisms that alter covariation between phenotypic traits in the sperm head is an aspect of great importance given its possible effect on the evolvability of these specialized cells. however, the extent to which these changes affect sperm fertilization success is a subject for further studies.

