BACKGROUND
application of genomic and systems-biology studies towards environmental engineering  generally requires understanding of microbial response and metabolic capabilities at the genome and metabolic levels. this includes understanding of relationships between phenotypes and the various cellular subsystems. in biological systems, phenotype-related genes encode for a number of functionally associated proteins that may be found across a number of different metabolic, regulatory, and signaling pathways  <cit> . together these pathways form a biologically important network of proteins  that are responsible for the expression of a particular phenotype. through analysis of biologically conserved network models, insights into the functional role of phenotype-related genes and functional associations between these genes in these networks can be obtained. this knowledge can then be used by metabolic engineers to identify which genes are potential candidates for modification studies and to determine how modification of selected genes could impact the desired outcome . proteins encoded by these phenotype-related genes can be present in a number of biochemical reactions, pathways, or motifs; understanding of the role and interactions of these proteins within various networks is necessary to identify which cellular subsystems are important for enhancing or suppressing expression of phenotypic traits. typically, clustering can be used to partition an organism's biological network into interacting protein subgraphs that can further be analyzed for phenotype-relatedness. however, traditional, "hard" clustering results in a partitioning of the data into non-overlapping clusters. and since proteins may belong to multiple cellular subsystems, an approach that allows for overlapping clusters is more appropriate than the one that partitions the data. retrieving all overlapping clusters from the data not only increases the complexity of the problem, but most of the resulting clusters maybe irrelevant to the phenotype's expression. the complexity and the quality of the results can be improved if a biologist's "prior knowledge" about the phenotype can be directly incorporated into the search. for example, a biologist might wish to search an organismal protein functional association network for those modules associated with motility using some of the known flagella proteins as "prior knowledge" or a biologists may use the enzymes in the tca cycle pathway to identify subsystems related to aerobic respiration. those proteins with unknown functions in the resulting subnetworks would likely have a function related to motility  and may be appropriate for experiments and further inquiry. in this paper, we describe a theoretically sound and fast method called the dense enriched subgraph enumeration  algorithm that capitalizes on the availability of any "prior knowledge" about the proteins involved in a particular process and identifies overlapping sets of functionally associated proteins from an organismal network that are enriched with the given knowledge. when applied to a network of functionally associated proteins in the dark fermentative, hydrogen producing and acid-tolerant bacterium, clostridium acetobutylicum, the algorithm is able to predict known and novel relationships, including those that contain regulatory, signaling, and uncharacterized proteins.

RESULTS
description of the clostridium acetobutylicum atcc  <dig> network
the gene functional association network for clostridium acetobutylicum atcc  <dig> was obtained from the string database  <cit> . the nodes in the networks are genes that encode enzymes, regulatory proteins, signaling proteins, and others. an edge is placed between a pair of genes if there is some evidence that they are functionally associated. string builds these networks based on various lines of evidence, including gene fusion, co-occurrence across species, and co-expression under similar experimental conditions.

biological relevance
to discover clusters related to phenotypes and sub-phenotypes associated with hydrogen production from waste materials, the dense algorithm was applied to the hydrogen producing bacterium, clostridium acetobutylicum atcc  <dig>  c. acetobutylicum is a widely studied and well-characterized organism for hydrogen production in nutrient-rich systems  <cit> . in addition to dark fermentative hydrogen production, c. acetobutylicum exhibits a number of phenotypes important for bacterial growth and for production of hydrogen. such phenotypes include dark fermentative hydrogen production and acid-tolerance down to ph of  <dig> - <dig>   <cit> . while clostridium species are often associated with dark fermentative acidogenesis, they are also known for production of solvents  <cit> . during solventogenesis, hydrogen produced is consumed and butanol, ethanol, and acetone are generated  <cit> . the following sections present a description of biological networks identified and predicted interactions between proteins  that play a role in uptake and production of hydrogen through regulation, signaling, or synthesis of key enzymes. specifically, emphasis is placed on key proteins and networks identified in the previous methodologies . to identify dense, enriched protein-protein interaction networks, three experiments were conducted. in the first experiment, proteins directly related to the -hydrogenase  were identified. in the last two experiments, hydrogen-related and acid-tolerant knowledge priors identified using the statistical student's t-test and our method for discovery of phenotype-related metabolic pathways  <cit>  method were incorporated into the algorithm and clusters were analyzed.

dark fermentative hydrogen production
in fermentative hydrogen-producing organisms, such as c. acetobutylicum, hydrogen yields are dependent on the presence and activation of hydrogen producing enzymes, called hydrogenases  <cit> . studies evaluating the role of hydrogenase in hydrogen production have shown that organisms can contain more than one type of hydrogenases that can each require sets of accessory proteins for activation. as such, the presence or absence of specific accessory proteins plays an important role in regulating the activity of hydrogenase and hydrogen production or uptake in microorganisms. in addition, many hydrogenases are thought to either directly or indirectly regulate other metabolic processes, such as nitrogen metabolism  <cit> . therefore, understanding of phenotype-related proteins required for activation and maturation of hydrogenases is important for metabolic engineering of organisms.

hydrogenase
when applied to hyda, a hydrogen producing hydrogenase enzyme, the dense algorithm was able to identify three maturation proteins that are essential for expression of a - hydrogenase  <cit> . they are hyde , hydf , and hydg  . when these proteins are present and interact with hyda <dig>  activation of the hydrogen producing -hydrogenase occurs. according to studies on hydrogenases, deletion of one of the proteins will result in inactivation of the -hydrogenase  <cit> . in addition to identifying key protein clusters, the algorithm predicted an association between an uncharacterized protein  and the three maturation proteins. according to the string database, cac <dig> is an uncharacterized protein. since cac <dig> is highly interconnected with the maturation proteins, it can be predicted that the protein is involved in development of the -hydrogenase . utilizing this information, the role of cac <dig> in relation to the three maturation proteins could be characterized through genetic studies and then applied to bioengineering hydrogen producers. application of the algorithm using hydrogen-related enzymes identified with schmidt et al  <cit>  resulted in prediction of over  <dig>  clusters  of phenotype-related protein-protein functional associations. of these clusters, a number of protein functional association networks containing proteins associated with expression of key enzymes related to either hydrogen uptake were identified. examples of enzymes include those involved in maturation of hydrogenase  and nitrogenase , and key fermentation pathways for hydrogen production in anaerobic organisms. within these clusters, both known and new associations between proteins involved in regulation, synthesis, and signalling of hydrogen producing pathways are identified. review of our predicted protein-protein association clusters for the hydrogen production phenotype revealed the presence of only one cluster containing known hydrogenase proteins . within this cluster are two -maturation hydrogenase proteins  and phosphoheptose isomerase . hypd  and hype  proteins are depicted as associated, further strengthening the importance of -maturation proteins in impacting the overall hydrogen yields in hydrogen-producing organisms. since hyp proteins are involved in activation and synthesis of uptake hydrogenase enzymes  <cit> , down-regulation of hypd and hype in clostridium species are potential targets for enhancing biological hydrogen production. the hypabc proteins, hypd and hype are together functionally important for expression of the -hydrogenase and deletion of one of the proteins may lead to inactivation  <cit> . while the interaction between the two hyp proteins is clearly defined by previous studies  <cit> , their interaction with phosphoheptose isomerase is not well understood. phosphoheptose isomerase or gmha  is an enzyme involved in biosynthesis of glycerol-manno-heptose  <cit> . in escherichia coli, phosphoheptose isomerase is involved in biosynthesis of adp-l-glycero-β-d manno-heptose, a compound required in development of lipopolysaccharide   <cit> . specifically, adp-l-glycero-β-d manno-heptose utilized in biosynthetic pathways resulting in production of s-layer glycoproteins and production of the inner-core of lps  <cit> . while development of lipolysaccharides is typically found in gram negative bacteria, the presence of lps in clostridium has been reported  <cit> . according to the results, all three proteins are shown to be functionally associated with one another . however, from figure  <dig>  it is unclear why and how the two hydrogenase proteins  interact with gmha.

pyruvate: ferredoxin oxidoreductase and associated proteins
another important enzyme for hydrogen production in c. acetobutylicum is pyruvate: ferredoxin oxidoreductase . in anaerobic, hydrogen-producing organisms, pyruvate: ferredoxin oxidoreductase or pfor is responsible for the conversion of pyruvate to acetyl-coa  <cit> . acetyl-coa is then utilized by a number of pathways, including acetate and butyrate fermentation routes. during production of acetate and butyrate, hydrogen is also produced as a by-product. in this regard, the dense algorithm was able to predict the association of this important enzyme when pyruvate lyase was given as a hydrogen-related knowledge prior enzyme. while pyruvate formate lyase  is utilized to generate formate and acetyl coenzyme a  in facultative anaerobic bacteria  <cit> , it is not uncommon to find genes encoding pfl in anaerobic organisms, such as clostridium  <cit> . in this study, many clusters containing pfl were identified, but only one that contained pfor. figure  <dig> andtable  <dig> demonstrate an example of one cluster containing pfl  identified by the dense algorithm. in this cluster, the algorithm identified interactions between the two acetyl-coa forming enzymes, pfl and pfor  and a third enzyme involved in the acetyl-coa pathway--phosphotransacetylase . phosphotransacetylase  is involved in the conversion of acetyl-coa to acetyl-phosphate  <cit> . interactions between phosphotransacetylase and pfor are consistent with known biochemical data. although the presence of pfor and pfl has been described in clostridium, the direct interaction between the two enzymes is not well known. in c. acetobutylicum, pfor is involved in the pathway for acetyl-coa and acetogenesis  <cit> . however, pfl, if utilized, may be involved in production of other products, such as solvents, through alternative pathways.

butyrate kinase and associated proteins
during dark fermentative hydrogen reactions, such as those that occur in anaerobic wastewater reactors, acetic acid and butyric acid are the two metabolites, sought after by scientists and engineers. one reason for this is that through production of these two metabolites hydrogen gas is also co-evolved as a by-product. therefore, through production or absence of acetate or butyrate by microorganisms, scientists could verify if metabolic fluxes are directed towards hydrogen production rather than hydrogen consumption. as such, understanding the mechanisms involved in production of acetic acid  or butyric acid  is important for enhancing hydrogen production yields.

in this study, application of the dense algorithm resulted in identification of a number of clusters including proteins involved in acetate and butyrate formation. from the results, one cluster that contained butyrate kinase, a key enzyme in butyrate formation was identified. within this cluster, two butyrate kinase proteins  and one phosphate butyryltransferase  protein are predicted as associated with one another . such associations between these two proteins are consistent with known biochemical data regarding butyrate formation  <cit> . in these studies, both butyrate kinase and phosphate butyryltransferase  are described as essential for production of butyric acid  <cit> . while associations between the proteins do not appear to be trivial, it is important to note the involvement of ptb in regulation of metabolic shifts between butyrate and butanol formation. in c. acetobutylicum, the switch between acidogenesis and solventogenesis has been shown to occur after formation of butyanol-coa. in studies evaluating activities of the two enzymes, potentially important feedback mechanisms between the activity of ptb and butyrate formation, and between ptb and atp formation were detected  <cit> . one example of a feedback mechanism is the inhibition of ptb by atp during butyrate formation  <cit> . based on these flux studies, researchers suggested that ptb may serve a regulatory role as a signaling protein. when additional interactions between ptb and other proteins are evaluated, results predicted that ptb also interacts with two aldehyde dehydrogenases  and acetyl-coa dehydrogenase. during solvent production, adhe proteins are responsible for butanol production. since c. acetobutylicum is capable of both solventogenesis and acidogenesis, and ptb is interacting with proteins involved in both butyrate and butanol formation, it can be hypothesized that ptb is responsible for metabolic shifts involving butyrate fermentation.

acid-tolerance
incorporation of acid-tolerant knowledge priors identified by the student's t-test and schmidt et al  <cit>  for the dark fermentative, acid-tolerant, hydrogen producing bacterium, clostridium acetobutylicum resulted in identification of  <dig> dense, enriched protein-protein clusters . due to limitations in identifying a diverse set of completely sequenced organisms, the acid-tolerant proteins incorporated are representative of a small subset of acid-tolerant organisms from the phylum firmicutes  and proteobacteria . as such, the clusters identified are based on organisms representative of three classes of bacteria--bacilli, clostridia, and α-proteobacteria. of these clusters, the dense algorithm identified  <dig> as containing proteins involved in a sugar phosphotransferase system . pts is a system consisting of a number of proteins involved in uptake of sugar   <cit> . each of these proteins are divided into one of two components--e <dig> and e <dig>  the e <dig> component consists of two proteins, e <dig> enzyme and histidine , is responsible for phosphorylation of substrates within the system  <cit> . the e <dig> component contains the cytoplasmic proteins, eiia, eiib, and eiic. in figure  <dig> andtable  <dig> a densely enriched cluster of pts proteins identified by dense is presented. proteins involved in this cluster include e <dig> proteins , eii enzymes , a transcriptional regulator involved in sugar metabolism , and fructose 1-phosphate kinase . the eii proteins and fructose 1-phosphate kinase are shown to interact with each protein in the cluster. whereas the transcriptional regulator and ei protein are the only two proteins that are not directly associated. this suggests that the transcriptional regulator is likely involved in controlling the interactions between the cytoplasmic proteins in pts and fructose 1-phosphate kinase. fructose 1-phosphate kinase is responsible for conversion of d fructose 1-phsophate to fructose  <dig>  biphosphate  <cit> . thus, the regulator may play a role in regulating sugar metabolism in c. acetobutylicum. while pts and sugar metabolism are thought of as involved in acid tolerance, literature reports for acid response mechanisms in escherichia coli and streptococcus sobrinus suggested that proteins associated with pts were upregulated during growth at low ph   <cit> . in a study by nasciemento et al.  <cit> , pts activity was shown to be upregulated in s. sobrinus when cells were exposed to a ph of  <dig> . however, they found the opposite to be true for streptococcus mutans, with pts activity decreasing by half when exposed to a ph of  <dig> . for e. coli, blankenhorn et al.  <cit>  showed the phosphocarrier protein ptsh and the protein n phosphohistidine--sugar phosphotransferase  were induced by e.coli during acid stress. while there is no consistent reaction to acid stress by organisms regarding sugar metabolism and pts, it does appear that pts in c. acetobutylicum is regulated by a transcriptional factor. since hydrogen production studies often rely on utilization of glucose  as their carbon source, understanding the metabolic response to acid is important. as such, studies evaluating the role of the transcription regulator  on pts and sugar metabolism in c. acetobutylicum under varying ph conditions are necessary.

effectiveness of dense at efficiently detecting μ, γ-quasi-cliques
in this section, we present several empirical results to demonstrate the effectiveness of our algorithm at efficiently detecting dense and enriched subgraphs in large, sparse graphs. for these experiments, we ran our algorithm three times in order to detect different types of μ, γ-quasi-cliques. the three types of quasi-cliques we detect are: high density, low enrichment  subgraphs where q contains every vertex of the graph; high enrichment, low density  subgraphs with a small query set ); and moderate enrichment and density  subgraphs with a medium-sized query set ). these settings were chosen to test the algorithm  under a wide variety of conditions. the parameter settings for these three types of subgraphs appear in table  <dig>  for these experiments, we used the r-mat random graph generator  <cit>  to generate sparse graphs of increasing size. the graphs were generated to have vertices equal to a power of two, with an average vertex degree of  <dig> | = 7|v |). the graphs were then processed to remove isolated vertices, which do not contribute to our search for dense, enriched subgraphs. all graphs were generated using the default r-mat parameters of a =  <dig> , b =  <dig> , c =  <dig> , and d =  <dig> . more details on the generated graphs can be found in table  <dig>  for our implementation, we select the candidate vertex to add to the subgraph using a trivial heuristic: the candidate that appears first in the array is chosen. we tested our algorithm on the r-mat graphs described in table  <dig> using all three of the parameter settings in table  <dig> and we calculated the rate at which the μ, γ-quasi-cliques were produced. the results appear in figure  <dig>  from figure  <dig>  we can see that the "clique" subgraphs were generated much more quickly than the "dense" or "enriched" quasi-cliques, likely due to the extremity of the density requirement for the "clique" subgraphs, which ensures that the resulting quasi-cliques are fully connected. also notable is that the time required per quasi-clique appears to increase linearly on the log plot, implying that the time per quasi-clique increases polynomially with the size of the graph. using a best fit curve, we see that the time per "clique" quasi-clique increases at a rate of approximately o, where n is the number of vertices in the graph, and the time per "dense" and "enriched" quasi-clique increases at a rate of approximately o. thus, we can estimate the time complexity as approximately o for the "clique" subgraphs and o for the "dense" and "enriched" subgraphs, where k is the number of subgraphs produced. while this scaling is obviously dependent on the graphs being analyzed, this result does suggest that our algorithm would be able to efficiently calculate dense and enriched subgraphs on large, sparse graphs with a power-law degree distribution. as a second experiment, we wished to evaluate the effectiveness of using the hierarchical bitmap index described in the methods section. for the purposes of this test, we implemented a second version of the algorithm that used only a flat  bitmap index, and we compared the time per quasi-clique for both implementations. the results appear in figure  <dig> 

from figure  <dig>  we can see that as the size of the graph increases, the hierarchical bitmap index provides a significant speedup in the rate of identifying "clique" subgraphs. when calculating "dense" and "enriched" subgraphs, the flat index offers a moderate improvement over the hierarchical index , though this advantage disappears on graphs larger than  <dig>  vertices. these results are likely due to the fact that the graphs in question have significantly more "clique" subgraphs than "dense" or "enriched" subgraphs--as the size of the index grows, so does the potential advantage in using a hierarchical index. as such, we conclude that the hierarchical index is successful at improving the algorithmic runtime as the size of the index grows.

CONCLUSIONS
in this paper we describe an algorithm to identify subgraphs from organismal networks with density greater than a given threshold and enriched with proteins from a given query set. the algorithm is fast and is based on several theoretical results. we show the application of our algorithm to identify phenotype-related functional modules. we have performed experiments for two phenotypes  and have shown via literature search that the identified modules are phenotype-related.

