BACKGROUND
major histocompatibility complex  class i antigens are responsible for the recognition of pathogenic peptides and form a complex gene family, which can vary in gene number and organization between different species. although the function of class i genes varies, the structure of the functional molecule nearly always consists of an alpha chain divided into three extracellular domains , a transmembrane and cytoplasmic region and an associated β <dig> microglobulin  <cit> .

class i genes are classified according to function as classical  or non-classical . class ia genes are responsible for pathogen recognition, and perform this function by binding endogenous foreign peptides and presenting them to cytotoxic t-cells on the surface of the cell. class ia molecules are ubiquitously expressed and the genes are highly polymorphic within the α <dig> and α <dig> domains, where peptide interaction occurs  <cit> , consistent with their role in pathogen recognition. although the number of class i genes found in different species can vary significantly, the number of expressed class ia genes in eutherian mammals is reasonably consistent, varying between two to three  <cit>  . some non-mammals have only one highly expressed and polymorphic class ia gene  <cit> , while others have multiple class ia genes  <cit> .

class ib genes are related in sequence identity and molecular structure to the class ia genes, but have lower expression levels, tissue specific expression, low levels of polymorphism and often lack consensus residues important for peptide binding found in class ia molecules  <cit> . human class ib genes  do not play a prominent role in presenting antigens to t-cells, but have a variety of roles both related and unrelated to immune function. they interact with natural killer  cells as part of the innate immune response  <cit>  and are involved in regulation and suppression of the immune system  <cit> . the number of class ib genes can vary significantly between species, even between eutherian mammals. humans have three class ib genes, while mice have over  <dig>  <cit> . little is known about class ib genes outside eutherian mammals, however, several class ib sequences have been described in avians  <cit> , amphibians  <cit>  and one class ib sequence has been described from a marsupial, the grey short-tailed opossum    <cit> .

class i genes evolve rapidly through gene duplication and divergence  <cit> . due to their rapid evolution, class i genes have undergone species specific expansions and, unless the evolutionary relationship between species is very close , orthologous relationships between the class i genes of different species are difficult to detect  <cit> . human and mouse last shared a common ancestor ~ <dig> million years ago and orthologous relationships between their class i genes are not obvious, even where the function of the genes is homologous.

mhc class ia genes are found within the mhc region of all species studied to date, however, their organization within the mhc can vary between different species. in non-mammalian species, the mhc class i and class ii genes are interspersed with the antigen processing genes   <cit> , which are responsible for transporting peptides from the cytoplasm into the endoplasmic reticulum, where they can be bound by class i molecules. it has been suggested that this ancestral organization of the mhc facilitated the co-evolution of advantageous class ia and tap haplotypes that conferred resistance to specific pathogens  <cit> . this organization may have provided a selective advantage to non-mammals with only one class ia gene as duplication of class ia would disrupt the co-evolution of tap and class ia alleles  <cit> . a single class ia gene has been identified in the chicken mhc   <cit>  and the mhc of xenopus  <cit> . however, multiple class ia genes have been described in detail within the quail mhc  <cit> . it has been suggested that there are multiple class ia genes in other non-mammalian species, including the axolotl, but number and organization of genes has been estimated without genome sequencing  <cit> .

in the majority of eutherian species the class ia genes are separated from the tap genes by the class iii region and are interspersed with the framework genes. the rat is an exception and has similarities with non-mammals, as the class ia genes are linked to antigen processing genes  <cit> . the framework genes are found within the mhc of all mammals and are highly conserved in gene function and order. it is thought that the repositioning of class ia genes away from the antigen processing genes and transportation genes prevented the tight co-evolution of class ia and tap alleles, but also released constraints on the number of class ia genes, allowing duplication of class ia in eutherian mammals  <cit> .

while the class ia genes are found within the mhc region, class ib genes have been found outside the mhc in a number of mammalian and non-mammalian species. in xenopus and chicken, class ib genes have been identified that are not linked to the mhc  <cit> . a more extreme case is that of the class i-like genes cd <dig>  which are encoded outside the mhc in mammals and are very divergent in sequence and function to the class ia and class ib  <cit> . the relocation of class ib genes away from the mhc in these examples is believed to have loosened the constraints on their evolution allowing the genes to evolve independently, without influence of gene conversion events  <cit>  and co-evolution of closely linked genes  <cit> .

studies have shown that the organization of the marsupial class i genes in the opossum  has similarity to both mammalian and non-mammalian patterns  <cit> . the class i are interspersed with the antigen processing rather than the framework genes, an organization similar to non-mammals. the opossum has three closely related class i genes that are polymorphic and highly expressed, however, only one class i gene, modo-ua, has been classified as class ia as the two closely related class i  are located outside the mhc and are not expressed at the same level as modo-ua. the opossum also has six additional putative class ib genes with unknown functions that are located within the mhc  <cit> . class i genes do not localize to a single complex in two marsupials   <cit> . two expressed class i genes  are located distal to the mhc at the end of the chromosome in the opossum, while in the tammar wallaby class i genes are mhc un-linked across six different chromosomes.

the tammar wallaby is an australian marsupial used as a model for studying the unique mode of marsupial reproduction, where young are born after a short gestation period with no immune protection and undergo their development in a pouch. marsupials are particularly useful for studying the evolution of immune genes in mammals as they last shared a common ancestor with eutherian mammals ~ <dig> million years ago and fill an evolutionary gap in the vertebrate phylogeny between non-mammals and eutherian mammals  <cit> . a greater understanding of the immune genes of this species will allow comparisons to be made with the opossum, which last shared a common ancestor with the wallaby ~ <dig> million years ago  <cit>  and is the only marsupial for which the mhc has been fully annotated.

here we report the sequencing of  <dig> tammar wallaby bacs containing  <dig> class i genes. four bacs are located within the mhc proper on chromosome 2q while nine bacs localize to different chromosomes. we show that the class ib genes remain linked to the mhc on chromosome 2q and are interspersed with the class ii and antigen processing genes, while the class ia genes have mhc un-linked across the genome.

RESULTS
summary of sequenced bacs
fourteen bacs containing class i genes were sequenced and  <dig> class i genes with open reading frames have been annotated . the  <dig> class i genes described in this manuscript are named maeu-ua through to maeu-up based on the nomenclature for class i genes proposed by klein and colleagues  <cit> . the naming scheme does not indicate orthology to other known marsupial class i genes, with the exception of maeu-um and maeu-uk . the class i genes have  <dig> –  <dig> % amino acid identity to each other across the α <dig>  α <dig> and α <dig> domains. the open reading frames of the class i genes vary from  <dig> to  <dig> codons.

previously, we reported the isolation  of nine tammar wallaby bacs containing class i genes that mapped to every autosome with the exception of chromosome  <dig>  where the mhc class ii and class iii genes are located  <cit> . in this study four additional bacs containing class i genes were isolated and localized to the mhc region on chromosome  <dig>  six class i genes were discovered on the bacs that map to chromosome  <dig>  these genes intersperse with antigen processing genes  and the class ii gene . nine class i genes with complete open reading frames were found on the bacs, which map outside the mhc to  <dig> chromosomal locations.

the bacs which map outside the mhc also contain class i pseudogenes, identified due to frame shift mutations, absence of a start codon, or gene fragmentation, but not other genes that are usually encoded within the mhc. one possible exception is the presence two olfactory receptor genes found on mekba_282l <dig>  along with maeu-ub. a cluster of olfactory receptor genes is also found adjacent to the framework genes in eutherian mammals and the opossum  <cit> , however, further analyses of these genes is required to determine the relationship of these olfactory receptors to the mhc-linked olfactory receptor genes in other species.

there are two distinct groups of class i genes in the tammar wallaby
the wallaby class i genes form two distinct groups, mhc-linked class i genes  and mhc un-linked class i genes . the mhc un-linked class i genes have greater amino acid identity to each other than to the six class i genes linked to the mhc, sharing on average 85% nucleotide identity with each other and 63% identity to the mhc-linked class i genes. there is one exception: maeu-up, located on chromosome  <dig>  shares 72–75% nucleotide identity with the mhc un-linked class i genes and 61–67% identity to the mhc-linked class i genes. the mhc-linked class i genes share features of their amino acid sequence, including a deletion of varying size in the α <dig> domain between residues  <dig> and  <dig>  and a short intron between the α <dig> and α <dig> domains , compared to the mhc un-linked class i genes.

the mhc un-linked class i genes group together , in a phylogenetic analysis, while mhc-linked class i genes on chromosome 2q form a separate and distinct clade  . again, maeu-up is an exception, occupying the basal position in clade  <dig>  although the position of maeu-up is not well supported using neighbour joining  or bayesian analysis  both methods produced trees with the same topology. clade  <dig> also contains previously identified expressed class i transcripts from the australian marsupials including the red-necked wallaby , brushtail possum , tasmanian devil  and tammar wallaby. opossum class i sequences, including the modo-ua  and modo-ug  form a sister clade  to the mhc un-linked tammar wallaby class i genes. interestingly, clade  <dig> contains the tammar wallaby mhc-linked class i genes , two class i sequences isolated from the brushtail possum and the majority of the opossum class ib sequences. this clade is basal to the opossum class ia sequences and mhc un-linked tammar wallaby class i sequences.

the mhc-linked class i genes have characteristics of non-classical class i genes
six mhc-linked class i genes were identified, maeu-uk, maeu-um, maeu-ue, maeu-ul, maeu-up and maeu-uo. four of these genes are expressed and have characteristics of class ib genes, maeu-uk, maeu-um, maeu-ue and maeu-uo. gene specific primers were used to amplify each of these genes from the wallaby thymus and no more than two alleles was amplified for each primer set, suggesting the primers are gene specific. no expression was detected for maeu-up or maeu-ul. three of the mhc-linked class i genes were found to have tissue specific expression, maeu-um, maeu-ue and maeu-ul. expression of maeu-um was found in wallaby lung, spleen and thymus, and transcripts of maeu-ue and maeu-uo were only detected in the thymus . maeu-uk was widely expressed, found in all tissues examined, with the exception of skin .

maeu-uk, maeu-um, maeu-ue and maeu-uo sequences were amplified from four wallabies of kangaroo island origin . the amplified alleles of maeu-uk, maeu-um, maeu-ue and maeu-uo lacked variation at the peptide binding region with only a maximum of one non-synonymous substitution between the identified alleles of each gene. comparison of the level of polymorphism in these genes with the only other characterized marsupial class ib, modo-ug, revealed a similar level of polymorphism .

mhc-linked class i genes in the tammar wallaby appear marsupial specific
the topology of the phylogenetic tree clearly separates the opossum and australian marsupial class i sequences of clades  <dig> and  <dig> from the class i sequences in clade  <dig>  rather than forming species specific clades, as is the norm of class i genes, the class i genes in clade  <dig> include class ib genes of the tammar wallaby, brushtail possum and the opossum. within this clade, two wallaby class i genes maeu-um and maeu-uk are clearly orthologous to the opossum class ib genes, modo-um  and modo-uk . no orthologs for modo-ue and modo-ul were discovered in the wallaby, however, three closely related class ib genes, maeu-ue,ul and uo were identified and cluster with modo-ue and modo-ul in clade  <dig>  one of these genes, maeu-uo, does have an orthologue in the brushtail possum.

the mhc un-linked class i genes have characteristics of classical class i
nine mhc un-linked class i genes were found throughout the genome, three of these genes have characteristics of class ia genes. evidence of expression was found for seven of these genes, while two are either pseudogenes or have such low levels of expression that transcripts were not detected. a number of lines of evidence indicate that seven of these genes are expressed and that three are highly expressed and have a classical function. first, class i transcripts sequenced from blood and thymus samples identified from a number of individuals are most similar to mhc un-linked class i genes maeu-ua , maeu-ub , maeu-uc , maeu-ud , maeu-uf , maeu-uh  and maeu-un  in a phylogenetic tree . between  <dig> and  <dig> sequences were isolated from every individual, indicating that at least seven class i genes are amplified, although assignment of sequences to loci was difficult due to high levels of sequence similarity and a level of polymorphism observed in the peptide binding region. the majority of transcripts sequenced from the blood and thymus samples were most similar to maeu-ua, maeu-ub and maeu-uc. class ia genes have high levels of expression compared to class ib genes and are more easily isolated from the transcriptome, thus the class i transcripts most readily isolated are most likely to be the class ia genes. no transcripts showing high similarity to maeu-ui and maeu-uj were identified suggesting that these loci may not be expressed. however, it cannot be ruled out that these genes are expressed at very low levels and not detected here. transcripts similar to the class ib genes on chromosome  <dig> are not amplified with these primers. second, previously identified expressed class i genes isolated from australian marsupials, including the red-necked wallaby, possum and tasmanian devil, have a close relationship to the mhc un-linked wallaby class i genes. the majority of these class i genes are thought to be class ia genes, in particular saha-i* <dig>  <cit> . finally, the promoter elements of the mhc un-linked class i genes are identifiable and highly similar in sequence identity to the promoter regions of class ia genes in the opossum  and eutherian mammals, while the promoters of the putative class ib genes are more divergent .

promoter elements of class i genes
putative class i promoter elements were identified within  <dig> base pairs of the start codon for the class i genes and included tata and caat sites, the s, x and y regulatory motif, an interferon stimulated response element  and an enhancer a site . the promoter elements of the mhc un-linked class i genes are highly similar to each other, sharing between 66–95% nucleotide identity in the  <dig> base pairs upstream of the gene start site. the promoter elements of the mhc un-linked class i are also similar to the regulatory elements of modo-ua, sharing 57–70% nucleotide identity. however, maeu-uj is missing a tata site and appears to have a truncated enhancer a element and maeu-uh and maeu-ui have no enhancer a element. these variations may account for the lack of evidence of transcription of maeu-uj and maeu-ui. the upstream sequence of the class ib, mhc-linked class i genes shared between 32–50% nucleotide identity with the mhc un-linked class i, 35–79% with one another and only 39–51% with the promoter sequence of modo-ua, consistent with the more divergent nature of the coding sequence of these genes. however, it was still possible to identify the tata, caat and sxy motifs in these genes, with the exception of maeu-uk and maeu-up. putative enhancer a and isre elements of the class ib genes were identified with less confidence due to the lower sequence identity in the upstream sequence observed for these genes.

identification of kangaroo endogenous retroviral  elements
sequences with high similarity to kangaroo endogenous retroviral  elements were identified on six of the bacs. one full length kerv sequence was identified on chromosome 5p, adjacent to maeu-un. this kerv sequence had  <dig> % nucleotide similarity to a previously described full length kerv   <cit> . numerous partial kerv sequences were identified at 1p, 3q, 4p, 5q and 6p and 7p . the partial kerv sequences varied in length from  <dig> base pairs to  <dig> base pairs and shared between 67% and 99% nucleotide identity to the full length kerv on chromosome 5p. no significant matches to kerv were found within the bacs on chromosome  <dig> 

molecular dating of class i gene relocation
molecular dating was used to determine approximate timing of the repositioning of class i genes away from the mhc in the tammar wallaby. the molecular dating performed in this study is treated as an estimate only as it does not take into account that mhc class i and class ii genes evolve at a faster rate than neutral evolution would predict, due to balancing selection  <cit> . maeu-up is located within the mhc on chromosome  <dig> and is the most similar mhc-linked class i in sequence identity to the mhc un-linked class i genes. it is found at the base of clade  <dig>  which contains putative classical class i sequences. using a bayesian approach for molecular dating , the mhc un-linked class i genes and maeu-up last shared a common ancestor ~86– <dig> mya. maeu-un on chromosome 5q <dig>  the most basal mhc un-linked class i gene was the first class i gene to move away from chromosome  <dig>  ~65– <dig> mya. the subsequent duplication of class i genes and their repositioning to different chromosomal positions most likely occurred from this location with the most recent duplications and relocation occurring 15– <dig> mya.

discussion
the organization of the major histocompatibility complex of the wallaby is unique among mammals and provides a model for understanding how genomic location affects gene function, co-expression and co-evolution. the wallaby has  <dig> class i genes,  <dig> of which are transcribed. this figure is similar to the opossum, which has  <dig> class i genes,  <dig> of which are transcribed  <cit> . of the  <dig> class i genes with open reading frames, three are putative class ia genes , maeu-ub  and maeu-uc ), four are putative class ib genes , four show no evidence of expression and the remaining genes appear to be expressed only at low levels and are not classified as class ia or class ib . the number of class ia genes in the tammar wallaby is similar to eutherian species .

it is likely that the tammar wallaby class ia genes were originally located within the mhc on chromosome  <dig>  interspersed with antigen processing genes. the first repositioning of wallaby class i genes away from chromosome  <dig> led to the class i gene, maeu-un, at the telomeric end of chromosome 5q, given its basal position on the phylogenetic tree . molecular dating indicates that this repositioning occurred over  <dig> mya and that all the class ia and class ia-like genes trace back to this common ancestor. maeu-up, located on chromosome  <dig>  most likely gave rise to maeu-un as it is the class i gene most closely related to the mhc un-linked class i genes. we previously proposed that the kangaroo endogenous retroviral elements , found at the centromeres of all tammar wallaby chromosomes and near the telomere of chromosome  <dig>  may have played a role in the repositioning of class i genes by creating instability in the mhc region   <cit> . the results of this study confirm the presence of partial kerv sequences located adjacent to a number of the mhc un-linked class i genes  and provides support for the hypothesis that kervs may have contributed to the duplication and movement of class i genes in the wallaby. all mhc un-linked class i genes described here are located at subtelomeric or pericentric regions, which are known hotspots not only for segmental duplication  <cit> , but also the insertion and retention of repeat sequences, illegitimate recombination and frequent rearrangements  <cit> . in the wallaby there is evidence of subtelomeric and pericentric rearrangement of genes. three genes, arhgap <dig>  gpr <dig> and hnrpm, located adjacent to mhc un-linked class i genes in the wallaby are in unexpected positions when compared to their homologues in the opossum genome and based on karyotype evolution of marsupials or gene mapping data   <cit> . these movements suggest these regions have been subject to rearrangement in the wallaby.

retrotransposons can act as recombination hotspots in the genome via homologous recombination between retrotransposon sequences mhc un-linked on different chromosomes  <cit> . phylogenetic analysis shows that wallaby class i genes on different chromosomes may be more closely related to one another than to an adjacent class i . a similar pattern emerges when the kerv fragments on different chromosomes are compared and may indicate that the class i genes and kervs are causing recombination hotspots within the genome, fueling class i gene diversification and polymorphism, and providing an advantage for the wallaby mhc. the presence of numerous partial kervs suggests these elements have not been recently active and that the original movement of a class i gene to chromosome  <dig>  occurred early in the evolution of the australian marsupial lineage, which is supported by the predicted date of movement, approximately  <dig> mya.

the repositioning of class ia genes out of the mhc in wallaby ancestors over  <dig> million years ago indicates that class i genes are located outside the mhc in many other australian species, including other macropods and the brushtail possum, as these species diverged less than  <dig> million years ago  <cit> . previously we suggested that modo-ub and modo-uc were evolving towards class ib genes due to their location outside the mhc  <cit> . given that wallabies have non mhc-linked class ia genes, it is feasible that modo-ub and uc are also classical given their close relationship to modo-ua. the presence of class ia genes, responsible for antigen presentation, outside the mhc of marsupials for an extended period of evolutionary time suggests an advantage is gained in having class ia genes organized in this way.

it has been suggested that the repositioning of class ia genes away from the antigen processing genes in mammals allowed the class ia genes to duplicate  <cit> . we propose that marsupials gained a similar advantage from moving class ia genes outside the mhc. some non-mammals have only one class ia gene, which in species such as xenopus  <cit> , chicken  <cit>  and nurse shark  <cit>  is linked to the antigen processing genes within the mhc. this ancestral mhc organization has the advantage that tap and class ia alleles co-evolve  <cit> . for instance, the chicken tap genes are polymorphic, with specific tap alleles transporting peptides for specific class ia alleles, providing an efficient response to certain pathogens  <cit> . duplication and subsequent diversification of such class ia genes would therefore disrupt the advantageous linkage and resulting co-evolution between class ia and tap alleles  <cit> . co-evolution of class i and tap is not confined to non-mammals, but has been observed within the rat mhc as well  <cit> . however, in the majority of eutherian mammals the class ia genes have moved away from the tap genes to become interspersed with the framework genes of the mhc. the tap genes are no longer polymorphic, but have become promiscuous and can present a broader array of pathogenic peptides  <cit> . marsupials and eutherian species, independently, found it advantageous to separate class ia genes from antigen processing genes, resulting in differing class i organization between these lineages of mammals, but effectively the same outcome, multiple class ia genes. however, it should be noted that some non-mammalian species have multiple class ia genes adjacent to tap genes and may have diversified class i genes, while maintaining linkage with antigen processing genes  <cit> .

the extensive duplication and dispersal of class i genes in the wallaby may have been assisted by their complete removal from the mhc and the constraints this region imposes. in eutherian mammals the class i genes are interspersed with the framework genes, which are highly conserved. the duplication and repositioning of class i genes in this region is believed to be restricted by these framework genes, as class i movement that disrupts these genes would be deleterious  <cit> . in the wallaby the class i genes have moved away from the mhc altogether and their duplication and repositioning is not restricted. of the nine mhc un-linked class i genes, not all are expressed at the same level and three appear highly expressed and have evidence of polymorphism. thus, there is still a restraint on the maximum number of class ia genes due to the need to maintain a wide spectrum of t cells after thymic selection.

the mhc-linked class i genes in the tammar wallaby are non-classical class i genes, based on promoter elements, expression patterns and levels of polymorphism. the changes in promoter sequence of the class ib genes in the tammar wallaby perhaps explains the variation in expression patterns for these genes. maeu-um, ue, and uo have tissue-specific expression and are not polymorphic, with few substitutions in the pbr of different alleles. maeu-uk has low levels of polymorphism and is expressed in all tissues. maeu-um and maeu-uk are clear orthologs of the opossum class ib genes, modo-um and modo-uk, despite these species being separated by  <dig> million years of evolution and belonging to different orders. an expressed transcript has been isolated from the brushtail possum  that is closely related to maeu-uk and modo-uk  <cit> . this transcript may represent a processed pseudogene as it has a frameshift mutation at the 5' end of the α <dig> domain  <cit> . however, expressed transcripts from the tammar wallaby show no evidence of this mutation and also include the leader peptide. further, the frameshift mutation described in the possum sequence is very close to the forward primer site used to amplify this sequence. it is possible that the described mutation is a sequencing artifact, as conservation of a processed pseudogene in the possum is unlikely. as there is evidence that an ortholog of uk exists in the brushtail possum we predict all australian marsupials would share the uk class i gene. orthology between class i genes of distantly related species is highly unusual for class i genes, which typically form species specific clades due to their rapid evolution  <cit> . it has been proposed that mhc polymorphism can be passed to species as they evolve from a common ancestor  <cit> , however, no examples of class i orthology have been demonstrated between species belonging to different phylogenetic orders  <cit> . the class i genes of human and mouse, separated by a similar evolutionary distance as the tammar wallaby and opossum, do not show clear orthology, despite some genes, such as hla-e and h2-qa <dig>  sharing similar functions. it is believed their orthologous relationship is obscured by gene conversion  <cit> . the conservation of orthologs, modo-um/maeu-um and modo-uk/maeu-uk, over such an extended period of time leads us to speculate that these genes may have a critical, marsupial-specific function. the marsupial mode of reproduction and development poses immunological challenges to the pouch young, which are born after a short gestation and are immuno-naïve at birth. we propose that conserved marsupial class ib molecules may play a role in the immunological protection of marsupial young. maeu-um is expressed in the lung as well as the spleen and thymus, and it is possible this molecule plays a role in the protection of exposed surfaces. ongoing studies in our laboratories will look into the function of these molecules in a range of marsupials.

CONCLUSIONS
the tammar wallaby has a novel mhc class i organization, which has successfully maintained functional, diverse class i genes. the class i genes do not follow conventional models of class i evolution as class ib genes have remained linked to the mhc whereas the class ia genes are not linked to the mhc but have maintained polymorphism and high expression levels. this unique organization provides a model for studying the importance of mhc gene clustering on gene function. furthermore, our analysis has shown that some marsupial class ib genes are remarkably conserved within this highly adapted mammalian lineage. the important biological differences between marsupial and eutherian mammals in their mode of reproduction and the pathogenic pressures on their immune system can be used to provide insights into how class ib function is adapted to the biology of a species.

