BACKGROUND
color polymorphisms, or the occurrence of two or more genetically determined color morphs within an interbreeding population  <cit> , occur in animals and plants alike. they potentially have a great impact on various intra- and interspecific processes such as communication, mating systems, and vulnerability to predation , and, consequently, may accelerate speciation  <cit> . ultimately, color polymorphisms can be maintained in the population, they can disappear from the population, and under particular circumstances may facilitate sympatric diversification.

given the prevalence of color polymorphisms throughout the tree of life, it is surprising that their significance in promoting ecological and evolutionary diversification has been rarely demonstrated empirically  <cit> . the understanding of color polymorphism still remains incomplete because of the complexities associated with its development in many systems. for example in complex animal systems, color polymorphisms tend to have unknown inheritance mechanisms, exhibit continuous or intermediate variation, result from assortative mating under natural conditions, and/or be sex-linked  <cit>  as seen in the african cichlid fishes  <cit> .

theory predicts that sympatric divergence can occur rapidly when ecological traits under divergent natural selection are genetically correlated and affect mate choice , hereinafter referred to as “genetic correlation”. genetic correlation does not imply that the genetic architecture of the trait is fully resolved. it may include single-locus “magic traits” but also cases where there is tight physical genetic linkage of the mate choice genes and the genes that affect ecology, which effectively imitate a true “magic trait”  <cit> . however, empirical evidence for genetic correlation is exceedingly rare. some classic examples in animals include assortative mating by body size in stickleback species pairs  <cit>  and by body shape in gambusia mosquitofish  <cit> . even fewer studies suggest such genetic correlations between mate choice relevant traits and those under divergent selection in color polymorphic systems, as has been found in african cichlid fish  <cit> .

an ideal study system to address the ecological and evolutionary consequences of color polymorphisms would incorporate multiple replicates, sex-independence, and a simple genetic basis of the color polymorphism associated with assortative mating. for the first time, we assessed the ecological divergence in a color polymorphic system that meets all these advantageous criteria: the adaptive radiation of midas cichlid fishes  from the great lakes and crater lakes of nicaragua . midas cichlids have become a model system for studying parallel adaptive radiation and ecological speciation. in western nicaragua, several crater lakes have been formed by accumulation of rain and ground water in isolated volcanic calderas. in rare and likely independent events, midas cichlid generalist ancestors from the great nicaraguan lakes colonized these newly formed crater lakes . midas cichlids have diversified sympatrically and allopatrically within and among the crater lakes and great lakes, sometimes on extremely short time scales .fig.  <dig> geographic distribution of color morph pairs in the young adaptive radiation of midas cichlids. in nicaragua, a number of small crater lakes have been colonized by midas cichlids from the great lakes managua and nicaragua. the midas cichlids within each crater lake are genetically more similar to each other than to any other population  <cit> . gold morphs are found in both great lake and most crater lake populations, usually at low frequencies  <cit> 



midas cichlids exhibit a conspicuous, sex-independent gold-dark color polymorphism and are named for the greek mythology of king midas, who turned everything he touched into gold. the gold morphs are found within many, but not all, populations and species in the midas cichlid complex and their frequency is relatively low and variable   <cit> . all fishes start life phenotypically dark, but some time before sexual maturity the genetically gold individuals lose their dark pigmentation and become completely yellowish to orange in body and fin color  <cit> . however, most individuals remain melanic, being dark-gray with vertical bars and dark fins  . this is a mendelian trait determined by a two-allele locus with gold dominant over dark and almost complete penetrance  <cit> . the gold phenotype is also correlated with social and competitive behavior . for example, a recent analysis of two sympatric sister species in crater lake xiloá found that, despite breeding in sympatry at the same depths and season, within both species the fishes paired highly color assortatively   <cit> . a striking implication of this color-based sexual isolation was significant genetic differentiation between sympatric conspecific color morphs, on a level comparable to that found between recognized species  <cit> .

the midas cichlid color polymorphism is a genetically determined trait that is the basis of assortative mating  <cit> , so theory predicts that incipient divergence by color may be possible if the color polymorphism has consequences for natural  <cit>  or sexual selection  <cit> . we tested the natural selection hypothesis through multivariate analyses of color-associated ecological  and morphological divergence  across replicate populations, coupled with a common garden experiment. instances of parallel evolution, where similar phenotypes arise independently across different environments from a recent common ancestral form, provide strong evidence for natural selection in driving diversification  <cit> . we focused on ten wild caught sympatric and allopatric color polymorphic populations . because the crater lakes were colonized from the ancestral great lake environment during only the last  <dig> to  <dig>  years, and each crater lake population is genetically distinct from other populations  <cit> , the crater lake populations can be considered “natural evolutionary experiments” with each being an independent replicate common garden experiment under natural conditions. the nicaraguan great lakes and crater lakes xiloá and masaya each contain two sympatric color polymorphic midas cichlid species, whereas only one color polymorphic species is currently known from crater lakes apoyeque and asososca managua. the extent of genetic differentiation between species ranges from low and non-significant to high and significant  <cit> .

across freshwater fishes in general  <cit> , including midas cichlids  <cit> , differentiation in body shape reflects differentiation in ecology, where deeper-bodied fishes are associated with a more benthic niche. lower pharyngeal jaw  robustness, shape and size is strongly associated with diet in cichlids: thicker, broader and heavier jaws with wider teeth have stronger crushing force and are associated with a benthic, durophagous, mollusk-rich diet , while more gracile lpj with finer teeth and less dense bone are found in fishes that eat a more piscivorous or planktivorous diet  and are associated with a more limnetic niche, e.g., . isotopic ratios of carbon  and nitrogen  reveal these long-term integrated signatures of diet. in aquatic systems, δ13c generally reflects the macro-habitat source , whereas δ15n corresponds to the trophic level and is indicative of consumer prey relationships  <cit>  including extent of durophagy  <cit> . studies on farmed fish have demonstrated that different diet compositions induce characteristic δ13c and δ15n signatures  <cit> .

in the present study we assessed how color morphs differed in body shape and defining characteristics of lpj morphology, such as shape and weight, from ten replicate populations. to infer whether the eco-morphological differentiation found between midas cichlid color morphs corresponded to a systematic divergence in diet, we analyzed color-associated differences in δ13c and δ15n across the species complex. to synthesize the consistency of color morph divergence across populations, we conducted an evolutionary trajectory analysis  <cit>  of multiple traits combined . we also quantified the relative amount of shared and unique features of divergence for each trait using multivariate analysis of covariance   <cit> .

according to theory a key criterion to facilitate sympatric divergence would be a genetic correlation of the color polymorphism that is the basis of assortative mating  <cit>  and ecologically relevant traits  <cit> . to test for such a genetic relationship, we conducted a common garden experiment under controlled laboratory conditions and assessed the eco-morphological variation between color morphs.

based on these multiple lines of assessment, we present the first evidence for repeated ecologically relevant morphological divergences in sympatry based on a binary, sex-independent, and genetically determined color polymorphism.

RESULTS
ecological and morphological differentiation between color morphs
color morphs differed significantly from each other in body shape; the gold morph was generally deeper bodied and had a larger head compared to the dark morph. this was shown by a geometric morphometric analysis across the ten populations pooled  . this pattern was generally consistent across populations examined individually; in most cases a discriminant function analysis clearly separated body shapes by color, although variable in extent and significance given the small sample sizes in some groups . while accounting for population-specific effects, gold morphs clearly had higher body depth indexes  than dark morphs .fig.  <dig> ecological differentiation between midas cichlid color morphs. a body shape differs between gold and dark morphs  when assessing the entire species complex . gold morphs were deeper-bodied, had a larger head and a longer pectoral fin base, compared to dark morphs. b lower pharyngeal jaw shape differs between gold morph and dark morph  . gold morphs tend to have a more robust lower pharyngeal jaw shape. c there is a systematic difference in stable isotope signatures of δ15n between color morphs across the ten populations  suggesting long-term diet differentiation between morphs. fitted regression lines of the linear mixed effects model are indicated by solid lines  for both color morph groups. gold morphs fed at a relatively lower trophic level  than dark morphs, independent of the population and while accounting for δ13c. symbols indicate the groups as follows: plus sign as. managua, a. tolteca; filled square l. masaya, a. cf. citrinellus; o l. masaya, a. cf. labiatus; filled circle l. nicaragua, a. citrinellus; asterisk l. nicaragua, a. labiatus; filled triangle l. managua, a. citrinellus; empty square l. managua, a. labiatus; s l. xiloá, a. sagittae; x l. xiloá, a. xiloaensis; a l. apoyeque, a. cf. citrinellus). d phenotypic trajectory analysis of combined trophic and eco-morphological traits  demonstrates parallel evolution of many gold-dark pairs across replicate populations. most vectors of phenotypic difference  between the centroids of gold and dark morphs are parallel in orientation while being substantially different in length



color morphs differed in lpj shape , with gold morphs having more robust lpjs compared to dark morphs . as with body shape, the differences in lpj shape between color morphs in each population separately was variable in extent and significance . to accommodate the population effects, we conducted a binary logistic regression with size-corrected lpj weight as a proxy of lpj morphology  <cit> . this showed that gold morphs had consistently heavier, i.e., more robust and molariform  <cit> , lpjs than dark morphs , while accounting for population effects. as lpjs are well established indicators of diet in these and other cichlids  <cit> , this significant weight difference suggests that gold morphs consume a more hard-shelled diet relative to dark morphs.

to test the link between ecologically relevant morphology and trophic level, we examined the difference in δ15n between color morphs while accounting for δ13c variability across the populations  <cit> . we found that gold morphs were consistently lower than dark morphs in δ15n  . this stable isotope differences suggest that sympatric gold and dark color morphs consistently exploit a slightly different trophic position  <cit>  throughout the species complex. this is additionally supported by the consistent pattern of ecologically relevant divergence in body shape and lpj size and shape.

parallel and non-parallel patterns of divergence
to synthesize across all traits and test the consistency of ecologically relevant divergence in a multivariate framework, we conducted a phenotypic trajectories analysis of all traits combined   <cit> . trajectory path lengths, which describe the amount of phenotypic evolution across all traits between sympatric color morph pairs, differed overall between gold and dark across the ten morph pairs . this suggests different magnitudes of divergence across replicate color morph pairs , which would be expected given the considerable variation in population age and demography across replicates  <cit> . the trajectory path orientations, which describe trait co-variation through phenotypic space, appeared substantially parallel for most morph pairs  and the hypothesis of parallelism was never rejected statistically in any pairwise comparison . however the null hypothesis of parallel orientation across all replicates was rejected , likely due to three color morph pairs with the shortest vector lengths  that deviated in vector direction from the others . nonetheless, with the exception of those three populations, there is a consistent co-variation in phenotypic space between color morph pairs  across population replicates .

we further assessed the shared and unique aspects of color morph divergence in each trait using mancova  <cit>  for each trait separately. predictably, because each color polymorphic population differs in age and demographic history  <cit> , the largest amount of trait variance in lpj size, δ15n and bdi was due to differences in evolutionary history of the morph pairs . however, we found that in all cases the effect of color  exceeded any unique population-specific variation between color morphs . together, the mancova and the evolutionary trajectory analysis evidence a relatively consistent parallelism of ecological divergence across most replicates of sympatric gold-dark morph pairs.table  <dig> shared and unique aspects of divergence in ecologically relevant traits

mancova results and partial η2-values for the relationship between lower pharyngeal jaw  weight, δ15n, and body depth index  across all ten color polymorphic populations. in all ecological traits a substantial amount of the variance is due to differences in evolutionary history . however, across all traits a larger portion of the variance is explained by color  rather than population-specific effects . this corroborates our previous findings of a relatively parallel ecological divergence based on color across the species complex



common garden experiment
to test whether these consistent differences in eco-morphology had a genetic basis, we raised gold and dark sibs  under identical conditions in the laboratory from hatching to adult-sized. we found that body shape differed significantly between these laboratory-raised gold and dark sibling fishes . further, we found that lpj shape also differed significantly between sibs of different colors , despite being raised on identical foods. the eco-morphological differentiation was of the same pattern and direction, though to a lesser extent, as we found in the wild populations; laboratory-reared gold individuals had a larger head and sturdier pharyngeal jaws than their dark morph sibs . our data lend support to the hypothesis that the eco-morphological variation we identified between sympatric conspecific color morphs in the ten wild populations is genetically correlated with color.fig.  <dig> genetically determined eco-morphological differentiation between color morphs. there is significant body shape and lower pharyngeal jaw  shape differentiation between sibling color morphs raised in the same environment . the direction of body shape and lpj shape differentiation was similar to that observed in nature ; gold siblings had larger heads and rather robust lpj morphologies compared to dark siblings. scale factor = 10



discussion
parallel and non-parallel divergence based on color
across replicate populations of midas cichlids, including populations from completely isolated crater lakes derived from independent colonizations  <cit> , we identified considerable and in most cases repeated ecological differentiation between sympatric gold and dark color morphs. further, this differentiation follows an ecological and evolutionary pattern that is consistent across the species complex overall. this is evident in ecological and morphological traits such as body shape , lpj shape , and stable isotope signatures of δ15n , including those statistical models that take the binary nature of the trait and the population effects into account . combining the eco-morphological traits into a single trajectory analysis demonstrated the consistency of the divergence pattern, with color morph pairs in most populations separating along the primary and secondary axis of variation . this intraspecific differentiation is largely parallel across most populations. this suggests a prominent role of natural selection in bringing about the observed differences  <cit> . as far as we are aware, this is the most replicated and consistent ecological and genetic differentiation that has been found to associate with a sex-independent binary color polymorphism  <cit> .

the observed color morph divergence occurs along a benthic-limnetic ecological axis associated with durophagy. the pattern of this eco-morphological divergence is comparable to the divergence along the benthic-limnetic axis that is ubiquitous in freshwater fishes  <cit> . the varying extent and in some cases deviating directions of color morph divergence are likely to reflect different stages of ecological divergence across the species complex, due not only to evolutionary histories but also to unique environmental differences across lakes in regard to size, depth and ecological opportunity  <cit> . for example, deep, clear-watered, and young crater lake environments strongly differ from the turbid and shallow waters of the nicaraguan great lakes  and, therefore, crater lake midas cichlids inhabit substantially different environments than the ancestral populations. further, it is conceivable that environmental differences, e.g., in turbidity, cause different strengths of color assortative mating across morph pair replicates from different lakes  <cit> , though this remains to be tested. such factors may explain why eco-morphological differentiation between color morphs tends to be more pronounced in the crater lake populations than in the great lake populations for body shape  and for lpj shape . this pattern is in agreement with population genetic analyses that found significant differentiation between sympatric color morphs in a crater lake species  <cit>  yet little or no differentiation in the great lakes species  <cit> . similarly, genetic differentiation is higher between midas species in the crater lakes than between species in the great lakes  <cit> . it may well be that selection pressures and differences in habitat use between the two color morphs, possibly caused by differential predation by aquatic and/or aerial predators  <cit> , are stronger in the clear-watered crater lake than in the murky great lake environment  <cit> . however, despite the dramatic differences in the physical and ecological environments of the different lakes, ecological and morphological divergence across color morph pairs is highly consistent.

a mechanism to facilitate divergence based on color?
the persistent eco-morphological differentiation in body shape and lpj morphology of the ten investigated natural populations and the gold and dark common garden siblings suggests that the color polymorphism has potentially direct, genetically determined, ecological consequences  <cit> . further experiments are needed, either to confirm the genetic effects under controlled laboratory conditions or through tracking the specific genetic basis of color in wild populations. if our hypothesis of a genetic correlation of the mating cue “color” and ecology is confirmed, the genetic correlation is likely to play a major role in the maintenance of the color polymorphism, and possibly facilitates sympatric incipient diversification  <cit>  by reducing ecological competition. the common garden experiment suggested a sizable genetic component of those color-associated eco-morphological differences, which provides a genetic mechanism to facilitate sympatric ecological divergence based on the color polymorphism  <cit> . the coexistence of color morphs may even suggest that the morphs occupy different fitness peaks in an adaptive landscape  <cit>  maintained by assortative mating  <cit> . however, although we suggest there is a genetic correlation of color and ecology in midas cichlids, it so far remains unclear whether the color polymorphism constitutes pleiotropy, a single-locus “magic trait”  <cit>  or tight physical linkage of the color gene and the genes that bring about eco-morphological differentiation  <cit> . furthermore, it still remains to be determined whether the color polymorphism originated de novo within each evolutionary replicate or whether it was brought into the crater lakes with their founding population. the prevalence of the color polymorphism in this species complex  strongly suggests that this is an ancestral trait, but its genetic architecture and evolutionary history remain to be determined.

despite the divergence in ecological phenotypes between sympatric conspecific color morphs we have no evidence that the color polymorphism is a mechanism for speciation in this young system. in no case has full speciation occurred in midas cichlids based on color, despite assortative mating according to color  <cit> . ecological diversification in midas cichlids is, however, abundantly associated with phenotypic traits other than color as demonstrated by the benthic-limnetic flock in crater lake apoyo, with its six described species that all lack the color polymorphism  <cit> , or the thin-lipped/thick-lipped morphs found in some lakes  <cit> . in fact, it is fascinating that this color polymorphism is repeatedly found within species that have diversified in sympatry along the benthic-limnetic axis , yet is never itself the focus of speciation – that is, there is no species in the complex that is strictly gold. thus, it remains unclear whether divergence based on the color polymorphism is simply slower than divergence based on traits other than color, or if the color polymorphism does not result in speciation because of genetic constraints or due to ecological reasons. the highly replicated color polymorphism across at least ten pairs, and their consistent eco-morphological differentiation in sympatry, strongly suggests this is an ancestral polymorphism maintained in the populations through selection and assortative mating.

CONCLUSIONS
here we have documented a robust example of a sex-independent color polymorphism being associated with ecological divergence in a replicate manner, as well as suggesting a genetic correlation of that color polymorphism with eco-morphology. this suggests a potential, but yet untested, role of color polymorphisms in promoting evolutionary diversification  <cit> . our results demonstrate the relevance of a color polymorphism in maintaining sympatric ecological divergence within and across populations and species.

