BACKGROUND
psycholinguistic models of speech production distinguish between four major processing stages to transfer an idea into a meaningful utterance  <cit> , involving conceptual, syntactic, phonological encoding and articulation.

evidence for these different levels has been obtained from speech errors and picture naming studies . in addition to the question as to what stages can be distinguished during language production, it has also been of interest when these different types of information become available. electrophysiological measures have been particularly helpful in addressing this question  <cit> .

existing psycholinguistic theories are mainly based on single word production. hence, many aspects are discussed related to conceptual representation and selection of single words and as a consequence, little empirical evidence is available for the conceptual planning in complex utterances  <cit> . the present study aims to investigate the neural aspects of conceptualization during speech planning, i.e. the streamlining of ideas into meaningful utterances.

from a psycholinguistic perspective, conceptualization involves two steps, usually referred to as macro – and micro-planning  <cit> . during macro-planning, an intention or goal is chosen, divided into sub-goals that are planned, ordered and specified for intended mood and content. its output is an ordered sequence of speech-act intentions . these speech acts are further specified during the micro-planning phase, where they are assigned particular informational structures  and perspective. note that these two processes do not necessarily have to be as separated and serial as is described here. it is very well possible that micro-planning already starts before macro-planning processes are completed.

the goal of the present study was to gain more insight in macro-planning processing and, to be more specific, in the processes underlying the ordering of events .

the speaker's decision to verbally order events in a particular way is influenced by the speech context in many ways. one such ordering principle is chronological order. usually, speakers prefer a chronological order of event sequence, for example, 'i woke up this morning and ate breakfast'. but there are situations in which a speaker might choose against a chronological order, for example when the event is the most salient one and is therefore mentioned first , a process referred to as 'topicalization'  <cit> .

the speaker can order the events by using temporal connectives available in the language, such as 'before' and 'after'. these are linguistics signals informing the comprehender about the order of the upcoming events. 'after'  indicates that events will be described in the actual order of occurrence, whereas 'before' signals a reversal .

evidence that a chronological order is preferred to non-chronological order comes from language acquisition and language disorder studies. when asked to act out 'before/after' instructions, children usually have more difficulty acquiring 'before' than 'after'  <cit> . for example, stevenson and pollitt  <cit>  tested the understanding of temporal terms of english children aged  <dig> to  <dig> by letting them act out situations described by sentences containing the words 'before' and 'after'. children showed a tendency to act out only the first clause of 'before' sentences. this suggests that they do not understand the reversed temporal relation between events that is depicted by 'before' sentences and the authors concluded that the children had greater difficulty understanding 'before' constructions in comparison to 'after' sentences  <cit> .

parkinson patients have also been shown to make more errors for sentences starting with 'before', since they tend to understand 'before' sentences as if they had started with 'after'  <cit> . in a related study  <cit> , parkinson patients also failed to understand so-called object-relative clauses . these sentences were interpreted as subject-relative clauses, i.e. the subject of the main clause was also assumed to be the subject of the relative clause. because of fewer filler/gap positions in subject relative clauses, these sentences are less demanding on working memory. taken together, it appears that the understanding of non-chronological order sentences is more difficult for parkinson patients because these sentence constructions require more working memory processing.

the role of working memory in the processing of temporal connectives has been investigated by event-related brain potentials   <cit> : participants read sentences that started with the temporal connectives 'before' and 'after'. the sentences appeared one word at a time whilst eeg was recorded . 'before' sentences differed from 'after' sentences by a ramp-like negativity which started around  <dig> ms after onset of the sentence's initial word and lasted for the entire sentence. this 'before/after'-difference was greater for those participants with better individual working memory capacity, indicating an immediate interaction  between working memory and linearization of conceptual events. the authors concluded that sentences containing a non-chronological order of events are more demanding on working memory than chronological order sentences, possibly leading to different discourse representations for the two types of sentences.

in sum, these studies show that non-chronological order constructions  seem to be more difficult to understand than chronological order constructions . furthermore, it seems that the difficulty with 'before' sentences is due to higher verbal working memory load. the aim of the present paper is to investigate whether this difference in linearization complexity is also reflected in language production. is it plausible to expect a similar complexity effect in production, or would the mere fact of producing, hence choosing a temporal relation between events extinguish possible differences in difficulty?

speech production is achieved with amazing speed, going from the initial planning stage to articulation in just a few hundred milliseconds. if one intends to capture the neural events involved in speaking as they unfold in time, electrophysiological measures are the method of choice. a number of erp studies have used surrogate tasks  to study information availability of linguistic information  <cit> . some have used delayed vocalization in order to avoid possible speech artefacts. most recently, overt vocalization tasks in erp studies  <cit>  have shown that reliable and artifact-free erps can be generated in the interval between a stimulus onset and the respective vocalization of an overt utterance.

the present study uses this method to investigate the conceptual planning of chronological and non-chronological order constructions. moreover, the erp analysis in the present study focus on a relatively smaller time window  to minimize possible interference of speech and other artefacts, but also to reduce the influence of speech preparation. subjects saw a sequence of two pictures, followed by a cue. they were instructed by the colour of that cue to utter, in german, a sentence describing the typical actions starting with the temporal connectives 'before' or 'after'. an example for a chronological order would be 'nachdem ich fahre, lese ich', . a non-chronological order would be: 'bevor ich lese, fahre ich', ). the proportion of each utterance format was 50% and it was randomized across blocks.

as we supposed that the two conditions differ in working memory load, we expected to find erp differences related to this fact .

RESULTS
behavior
voice onset latencies  were collected by means of a voice key . the responses of seventeen subjects were averaged and included in the analysis. the overall amount of errors for each subject was less than  <dig> percent. there was no significant difference in the error proportions of the two conditions  = -. <dig>  p = .47) also, no significant difference in onset latency were observed .

erps
the grand average erps time-locked to the fixation cross are shown in figure  <dig> 

the two conditions started to diverge around  <dig> ms, with the 'before' condition being more positive than the 'after' condition in the entire time window. this difference appeared to have two different portions as is illustrated by the isovoltage maps in figure 2: the earlier portion around  <dig> ms had a fronto-central distribution, whereas the later portion around  <dig> ms had a more posterior distribution.

for the early time-window , reliable differences between 'before' and 'after' sentences were revealed by main effects of the factor order for midline  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ), parasagittal  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ) and temporal  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ) electrode sites. no reliable interactions were obtained between order and the topographical factors .

for the later time-window , a significant order by anterior/posterior interaction for the parasagittal  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ) and temporal sites  =  <dig> , p <  <dig> ) reflected the fact that during this time window a posteriorly distributed difference between 'before' and 'after' sentences was present . order did not reach significance  =  <dig> / <dig> / <dig> ; all p > .05) for midline/parasagittal/temporal electrode sites, see table 1).

to test whether indeed the early and late portions of the 'before/after' differences had different distributions, we determined the mean amplitude of the 'after' minus 'before' difference waves in the 180– <dig> ms and 350– <dig> ms time-windows for all  <dig> scalp electrodes. these values were subjected to the vector normalization procedure described by mccarthy and wood  <cit>  and then entered into an anova with time-window  and electrode site  as factors. a significant interaction between time-window and site  =  <dig> , original p <  <dig> , huynh-feldt corrected: p =  <dig> ) indicated that the difference between condition had indeed a different distribution in the two time-windows.

discussion
the present study investigated conceptualization processes while subjects generated a verbal description of two events in a chronological and non-chronological order sequence. the erp results revealed differences between 'before/after' sentences in terms of an early fronto-central negativity for 'after' versus 'before' sentences. this effect is followed by a later parietal positivity for 'before' in comparison to 'after' sentences. further, no difference in voice-onset latency  was found between the two order constructions.

the observed lack of effects for vol might seem counterintuitive at a first glance, as one would assume longer latencies for the presumably more difficult planning in the 'before' case. note that vol measures the end of an entire information processing sequence. strategic effects and execution are included next to the process of interest, i.e. the conceptual planning. however, this result may also be related to a ceiling effect or a strategy to delay naming until the entire utterance plan is available.

whereas the vol are not informative in this case, erp results show that the brain clearly distinguishes between sentences in which a sequence of events is uttered in chronological order or non-chronological order. an early fronto-central difference  differentiated between 'before' and 'after' sentences. this result is in line with previous fmri studies showing that the prefrontal cortex plays a critical role in temporal sequencing  <cit> . moreover, patients with prefrontal lesions are known to be impaired in generating and evaluating order of series and actions  <cit> . more specifically, a fronto-temporal network involved in verbal semantic memory decision or categorization processes has been found in several studies before  <cit> .

in parallel to an earlier comprehension study  <cit>  using sentences with temporal connectives which had shown an interaction between working memory and linearization processes reflected in a frontal negativity, it seems plausible to interpret the early negativity in the context of working memory. indeed, several studies looking at the comprehension of various syntactic sentence structures  revealed an anterior negativity for the more complex sentence structures   <cit> , which was interpreted in terms of more working memory demands for the understanding of more complex sentence structures.

the present study reveals a higher negativity for chronological order sentences. this might seem counterintuitive, as it implies that working memory demands are higher during the conceptualization of a chronological order sentence. the direction of this effect can be explained by taking a closer look at the setup of the experiment. the object pictures were presented sequentially during this study, meaning that the first picture needed to be kept in mind longer when subjects had to create a chronological order sentence. this is contrary to the production of the non-chronological order that started with the utterance of the last presented object. taken together, in order to utter a chronological order sentence, subjects had to go back two steps to start with the first presented object and this process naturally appeared to demand more working memory processing.

further, we found a parietal positivity between  <dig> and  <dig> ms for the before condition. its distribution and polarity suggest that this may be an instance of the p <dig>  or p3b. the p <dig> is a well-known component often found in tasks investigating attention devoted to a stimulus, stimulus salience, task relevance, objective and subjective probability among a stimulus sequence, or the amount of resources needed to process a stimulus  <cit> .

in this light, the greater p3b for 'before' constructions in the present study may reflect greater attentional processing in terms of 'context maintenance' processes. a recent study from our laboratory tapping into process-related strategies during conceptualization, found a similar parietal positivity. as described in the introduction, process-related strategies are used when content-related information  is not available. in this experiment, process-related strategies were investigated by manipulating the complexity of utterances describing the direction of an arrow in a network of geometrical forms   <cit> . in this case, medium and complex utterances were associated with a parietal positivity when compared with the "easy" condition.

to sum up, the present study showed that conceptualization of 'before' and 'after' order sentences leads to more conceptualization processing when non-chronological order constructions are being built. this finding is in line with language comprehension studies that have shown that these types of sentences are more difficult to understand, and with a second study in our laboratory that investigated complexity differences in process related strategies. moreover, both the frontal and the parietal effect are in line with a fronto-temporal network found in fmri studies looking at verbal semantic categorization processes  <cit> .

the result is explained in terms of the p3b component reflecting attentional processing. in addition, this component might not reflect attention related processes per se, but rather a more general demand of resources required for stimulus processing. seeing that 'before' sentences are the more complex sentences in our study, one could argue by extension that conceptualization in this case takes up more resources. a remaining question, at this point, is what the exact nature of the conceptualization difference is that we found in the present study. whereas, in daily life, topicalization occurs when one event bears more significance in relation to another event, the current study's use of neutral items made events less salient and therefore, might have affected the conceptualization process of non-chronological orders. while we cannot exclude this line of reasoning entirely at this stage, the lack of difference in voice onset latency and error results for both conditions seem to speak against that possibility.

although it is reasonable to suspect that this finding reflects the inverted narration relation between events that are expressed in non-chronological order constructions, further experiments are needed to address this question in more detail.

CONCLUSIONS
in this erp study addressing conceptualization processes during language production, a frontal negativity likely associated to greater working memory demands for chronological order constructions was found, which can be explained by the fact that the first event needs to be retrieved from working memory. importantly, as in marek et al  <cit> , a parietal positivity was found for the more difficult  condition, which appears to reflect effects of conceptualization complexity.

