BACKGROUND
the three parahox genes, gsx, xlox, and cdx, were first described as a gene cluster in the invertebrate chordate branchiostoma floridae  by the elegant work of brooke et al.  <dig>  <cit> . parahox and hox genes are believed to have evolved from a single ancient proto-hox cluster composed of two to four genes prior to the divergence of cnidarians and bilaterians. thus, they are considered evolutionary sister  clusters  <cit> . vectorial expression of the parahox genes in anterior, middle, and posterior tissues of amphioxus and its distinct similarities to vertebrate parahox gene expression suggest that these genes may be responsible for axial patterning of the digestive tract  <cit> .

expression of parahox genes in deuterostomes
parahox gene expression and genomic organisation have been studied extensively in deuterostomes. in vertebrates, gsh <dig> and gsh <dig> genes are restricted to the central nervous system   <cit> . vertebrate xlox is expressed both in cns and the developing gut  <cit> . cdx <dig> to cdx <dig> genes of vertebrates are involved in posterior patterning, since they are expressed in posterior parts of cns and gut  <cit> . within invertebrate deuterostomes, apart from amphioxus, expression of parahox genes has been traced in the ascidian, ciona intestinalis, the echinoderm, strongylocentrotus purpuratus, and in a starfish, archaster typicus  <cit> . in invertebrate deuterostomes, gsx is expressed more anteriorly and only in the nervous system, while xlox and cdx are expressed within the gut primordium with xlox anterior to cdx  <cit> . in the sea star, however, the aty-xlox expression is found in the archenteron as well as in ectodermal cells near the vegetal region of early and mid-gastrula stages  <cit> . this expression pattern is very different from those of xlox homologues in other deuterostomes.

expression of parahox genes in ecdysozoans
in ecdysozoans, gsx expression has been documented in the insects drosophila and tribolium  <cit> . insect gsx  is expressed along a pair of medio-lateral neural columns and promotes neural precursor formation in the medial and intermediate columns of the cns  <cit> . the central parahox gene, xlox, is lost in all insect genomes sequenced to date. caudal has been known as a posterior patterning gene in several arthropods during segmentation  <cit> . cdx is also a posterior patterning gene in the nematode caenorhabditis elegans. here, this gene is called pal- <dig> and patterns the precursor cells of alae and rays in the posterior of the worm  <cit> . gsx and xlox orthologs are absent in the nematode  <cit> .

expression of parahox genes in lophotrochozoans
within lophotrochozoa, expression of the full complement of parahox genes has been described in the polychaetes capitella teleta, nereis virens, and platynereis dumerilii  <cit> . in capitella, gsx is not expressed in the gut but in some neuroectoderm cells of the anterior brain  <cit> . this is very different from the expression of gsx in the nereid polychaetes, nereis virens and platynereis dumerilii  <cit> . nereid gsx is first expressed in symmetrical bilateral domains in the dorso-medial episphere of the trochophore  <cit> . later this gene is expressed during formation of the midgut and the posterior foregut in both nereids  <cit> . xlox is expressed throughout the midgut in the polychaete capitella  <cit> . this is also true for the xlox genes, named lox <dig> in the leeches helobdella triserialis and hirudo medicinalis  <cit> . expression of xlox is not reported in the nervous system of these annelids  <cit> . nereid xlox is also expressed in the midgut, but in contrast to capitella and the leeches its expression is additionally detected in the cns  <cit> . as in arthropods, cdx is a posterior patterning gene in the annelids. however in platynereis, nereis, tubifex, and capitella there are both anterior and posterior expression domains of cdx  <cit> . capitella cdx is expressed in the cerebral ganglia, nvi-cdx expression is detectable in the ventral nervous system, while pdu-cdx is not detected in the nervous system  <cit> . expression of cdx is also detected in more posterior parts of the gut  <cit> . moreover, cdx is expressed in the posterior ectodermal cells that form the pygidium epidermis of both nereids  <cit> . additionally, cdx expression can be traced in mesodermal cells in capitella, tubifex, and platynereis  <cit> .

little is known of parahox genes in other lophotrochozoa than annelids  <cit> . the only available data are on the cdx gene expression during the early development of the marine limpet, patella vulgata  <cit> . pvu-cdx is expressed at the onset of gastrulation in the ectodermal cells at the posterior edge of the blastopore and in the paired mesentoblasts  <cit> . during trochophore larval stage, pvucdx is expressed in the posterior neurectoderm of the larva, as well as in part of the mesoderm  <cit> . within mollusca, a full complement of parahox genes has been shown for the chiton nuttallochiton mirandus and the scallop pecten maximus  <cit> . however the information is limited to partial homeobox sequences, whereas expression patterns of gsx and xlox or chromosomal organisation of parahox genes have not been reported yet in any mollusc species.

ancestral role of parahox genes
holland  elaborated the hypothesis of the ancestral role of parahox genes proposed by the original work of brooke et al.  <dig>  <cit> . holland's hypothesis proposes that the three parahox genes originated from the proto hox gene cluster and pattern anterior, middle and posterior gut regions in a colinear manner in basal animals  <cit> . according to this hypothesis, a link of gsx and anterior gut development existed in basal animals. however, gsx is not expressed in the anterior gut of deuterostomes. this is explained by the loss of the primary mouth and formation of a secondary mouth in deuterostomes  <cit> .

aim
gastropoda is undoubtedly the most successful taxon of the mollusca, embracing more than 80% of all mollusc species  <cit> . the vetigastropod gibbula varia l. is a shallow subtidal top shell snail with encapsulated development. the lecithotrophic larval development is completed within the eggs. the juveniles leave the gelatinous egg masses only after metamorphosis. in order to elucidate the function of the parahox genes in molluscs and to gain broader insights into the evolution of the parahox genes in the lophotrochozoa, we describe the sequences as well as expression patterns for all three parahox orthologues by whole mount in situ hybridization from embryonic through juvenile stages in the top shell gibbula varia. this is the first report of expression patterns of the full parahox complement in a mollusc.

RESULTS
gibbula varia life history
gibbula varia is a dioecious species. the eggs fertilized via copulation are laid in gelatinous egg masses . development of the embryos and larvae takes place inside the egg capsule and takes about four days. the main stages of g. varia development are presented in table  <dig>  epibolic gastrulation occurs by the micromeres rapidly spreading downwards and enclosing the macromeres. the blastopore, being wide at first, gradually becomes constricted at  <dig> to  <dig> hours post fertilization , when the trochoblasts start to become ciliated. at  <dig> hpf, the prototroch is clearly visible as a circular ciliary band, separating the trochophore larva's episphere from the hyposphere . there is no sign of apical cilia  at any stage in the development of the trochophore, although the pretrochal cells were observed to be smaller than those of the posttrochal region . by this stage the blastopore gradually moves to a position just below the prototroch, forming the stomodeum. simultaneously, the shell-gland invagination appears as a thin patch of cells gradually spreading over the dorsal region of the larva . at  <dig> hpf, the late trochophore larva comprises a prototroch, the shell field surrounded by the mantle edge, and a pedal rudiment . the late trochophore  turns into an encapsulated pretorsional veliger larva by differentiation of the prototroch to a distinct velum . the mantle fold and mantle cavity become visible mid-ventrally on the posterior surface of the pedal rudiment . at  <dig> hpf, the pretorsional veliger has a velum, an apical organ marked by apical cilia , a mouth opening, and a pedal rudiment with the operculum anlage . the first 90° of torsion take place between 36- <dig> hpf, presumably by contraction of the larval retractor  muscle. this results in a 90° displacement of the mantle cavity to the right side, and, when viewed from the front, the foot and velum are rotated anti-clockwise in relation to the protoconch. the remaining part of torsion is completed within one day while the velum gradually becomes reduced in size and splits ventrally . at  <dig> hpf, the operculum appears in the posttorsional veliger larva . the radula and cephalic eyes appear about three days after fertilization. as the eyes form, the cephalic tentacles begin to appear as outgrowths of the prevelar surface. the juvenile hatches on the fourth day of development  and after that mineralization of the shell begins. the animals become sexually mature after 11- <dig> months.

development of gut in g. varia
the development of the digestive tract starts with the development of the stomodeum  in the trochophore . the mouth opens during the pretorsional veliger stage  whereas the anus opens in the late posttorsional stage at the site of a few ciliated cells . the development of the digestive tract is very similar to that described in g. cineraria and haliotis tuberculata  <cit> . the digestive gland begins to differentiate on the left side of the veliger just before torsion sets in  <cit> . the gut develops from differentiated endodermal cells initially scattered within the yolk in the pretorsional veliger. they later migrate to the yolk boundaries to form the definitive midgut in the posttorsional veliger  <cit> . later, the hindgut develops from actively dividing cells of the digestive gland migrating to their final positions in the intestine  <cit> . the competent larva's digestive system comprises a mouth opening and a bipartite oesophagus , a stomach with the digestive gland, the hindgut leading to the anus that opens into the mantle cavity over the back of the head . the radula anlage is a ventral differentiation of the foregut where mesenchym cells aggregate. the radula teeth become visible in the competent larva at the distal end of the radula sheath .

parahox gene sequences
the entire coding sequences for all three g. varia parahox genes were isolated by a combination of 3' and 5' rapid amplification of cdna ends . 3' and 5' race together yielded a complete cdna of  <dig> bp with the complete open reading frame  of  <dig> bp  for gva-gsx, a complete cdna of  <dig> bp with complete orf of  <dig> bp  for gva-xlox, and a complete cdna of  <dig> bp with complete orf of  <dig> bp  for gva-cdx. alignments of each g. varia parahox amino acid sequence to orthologs of other species are shown in additional file  <dig>  figure s <dig>  s <dig>  and s <dig>  beside the homeobox which is the main region of conservation between parahox genes, further conserved domains are the n-terminal domain in gsx, and the hexapeptide motifs just upstream of the homeodomains in both xlox and cdx . the classification of the g. varia parahox genes into their orthology groups is apparent from phylogenetic analyses . the species names and accession number of the genes used in phylogenetic analysis are provided in additional file  <dig>  although the phylogenetic analysis clearly assigns the gibbula parahox genes to the gsx, xlox and cdx classes with high support values, the internal grouping remains unclear.

parahox gene expression in the trochophore larva
we did not detect gva-parahox transcripts by whole-mount in situ hybridization  in developmental stages before the trochophore stage. a scanning electron micrograph  of a late trochophore larva  is shown in figure 2a.

the expression pattern of gva-gsx is rather dynamic. the first signs of transcripts of gva-gsx are already detected at  <dig> hpf in early trochophore larvae, when a pair of intensive, bilateral expression domains appears in the dorso-medial episphere . when viewed from the anterior, each pair of expression domains appears to be composed of 4- <dig> gva-gsx-positive cells, presumably in the area of future cerebral ganglia . this pattern of expression continues in  <dig> hpf trochophores . here, the pattern of expression becomes considerably more complex. in addition to the paired expression domains in the dorso-medial episphere, gva-gsx transcripts can now be detected in a pair of cells at the tip of the developing apical sensory organ . these two gva-gsx-positive cells at the tip of the apical organ do not bear any cilia or apical tuft in the trochophore stage of g. varia . the expression of gva-gsx in the apical sensory organ is restricted to two groups consisting of three sensory cells . beside the expression in prospective neural or sensory tissues, gva-gsx transcripts are also detected around the stomodeum where they appear for the first time in trochophore  <dig> hpf in two intensely stained bilateral semicircular clusters located anteriorly at the sides of the mouth and a less intensely stained semicircular domain at the posterior part of the mouth . figures 2h and 2i show the trochophore stomodaeum and gva-gsx expression around it at  <dig> hpf. about  <dig> hpf, gva-gsx is expressed in a complete circle around the stomodeum  and in three episphere domains: a pair of adjacent cells at the tip of the apical sensory organ, and two pairs of cell groups dorsolaterally marking presumptive sites of future cephalic neuroectodermal differentiation .

gva-xlox transcription begins later than gva-gsx expression. no expression is detectable until  <dig> hpf when gva-xlox transcripts appear in a group of cells located ventrally in the hyposphere and in a pair of symmetrical expression domains in the medio-ventral episphere of the trochophore larva . these symmetrical expression areas are located ventrally of the more intensely stained gva-gsx expression domains in the pretrochal area. gva-xlox is also expressed in the hyposphere in 8- <dig> cells forming a semicircle around the anal marker . these weakly stained gva-xlox-positive cells are probably part of ventral neuroectoderm.

gva-cdx transcripts are first detected in the early trochophore larva . it is expressed at  <dig> and  <dig> hpf in two domains in the ventral vegetal plate: one in an area of presumptive posterior neuroectoderm, the other in a bilateral pair of cells in the interior of the larva . using patella vulgata as a reference, the latter expression of pvu-cdx probably marks the left and right primary mesentoblasts . gva-cdx-positive neuroectodermal cells are first observed as a patch of cells expressing this gene in varying intensities . gradually they migrate to the boundary of the expression area  so that they from a circle of gva-cdx-expressing cells around the anal marker at  <dig> hpf . the expression of gva-cdx around the anal marker at  <dig> hpf partly overlaps with the expression of gva-xlox in the ventral area at this stage, which is visible as a semicircle located ventrally around the anal marker .

parahox gene expression in the pretorsional veliger larva
the transcripts of all three gva-parahox genes are detected almost simultaneously in the visceral mass area of the pretorsional veliger larva prior to torsion , on the left side of the larva where the digestive gland is forming . at this stage, the velum forms a complete circle and a pair of apical tufts is observed in the velar area . in addition to the apical tufts, there are "sensory cups" in the velar area. these are ciliated pockets embedded within the apical ganglion . the expression of gva-gsx observed in the area of the mouth opening and of the apical organ of the late trochophore larva  is retained in the pretorsional veliger . gva-gsx transcripts are also detected in the ventral part of the forming digestive gland in the left side of the visceral mass . gva-gsx-positive signals are further detected in the area of the mouth opening  and in five cells in the area of the apical organ , the two apical tuft cells , and the sensory cup cells . similar to gva-gsx, gva-xlox is expressed in the left side of the pretorsional veliger in the forming digestive gland . the expression area of gva-xlox is located in the ventral part of the digestive gland, more dorsally but partly overlapping gva-gsx expression . the expression pattern of gva-xlox detected on the ventral side of the episphere of the late trochophore larva  is lost in the pretorsional veliger stage . additionally, five ectodermally derived gva-xlox-positive cells appear on the right side of the larva prior to torsion . similar to the trochophore stage , these ectodermal cells form an incomplete circle and are presumably linked to the ventral nervous system . gva-cad is expressed weakly in the whole area of the nascent digestive gland of the pretorsional veliger larva . the intensity of expression is stronger in a few cells in the dorsal area of the visceral mass in the left side of the larva .

expression of parahox genes in veliger and competent larvae
after torsion , the velum reduces in size with a ventral split, and the mantle expands over the back of the head . as the digestive tract continues to develop in the posttorsional veliger larva, expression patterns of gva-parahox become more elaborated. at this stage, gva-gsx expression in the ventral part of the digestive gland and in the area of the mouth opening persists . sections reveal gva-gsx-positive cells at the ventral border of the area of yolk-filled cells . gva-gsx transcripts are further apparent as paired domains beneath the apical organ where the formation of the cerebral ganglia commences . at about three days post fertilization, expression of gva-gsx fades in the digestive gland. instead, the gene is now expressed in the foregut around the area of the radula anlage . at metamorphosis, when the apical sensory organ starts to dissociate, gva-gsx continues to be expressed in the area of the cerebral ganglia . gva-xlox expression persists on the left side of the visceral mass from the pretorsional to the posttorsional stages . sections through the left side of the larva reveal that these gva-xlox-positive cells are part of the developing digestive gland . six or seven ectodermally-derived gva-xlox-positive cells are located in the ventral part of the visceral mass . gva-cdx is mainly expressed in the newly formed hindgut and rectum, and weakly in the digestive gland .

post-larval parahox gene expression
serial section in situ hybridizations were used to trace the expression pattern of all three gva-parahox in the hatchling . no positive signals for gva-xlox and gva-cad transcripts are detected at this stage. gva-gsx is the only parahox gene that is expressed in the most posterior part of the radula sac during postlarval development . the juvenile hatchling has a complete radula with the radula sheath, buccal musculature, and radula bolsters . the posterior end of the radula sac forms the odontoblastic cushion which consists of a single-layered epithelium arranged in a semicircle and protruding into the sac's lumen. the epithelial cells are produced by two separated dorsolateral mitotic centres at the end of the sac . mitotic activity is scattered over the posterior area of odontoblastic cushions where the cells are small and undifferentiated. towards the anterior of the cushions, the cells gradually elongate and form the tall odontoblastic epithelial cells . gva-gsx transcripts are mainly detected in the paired odontoblastic cushions at the base of the radula . gva-gsx is expressed both in undifferentiated cells located at the back of the cushions and in odontoblastic epithelial cells. no transcripts were detected in the cells separating the two halves of the odontoblastic cushion . the intensity of expression of gva-gsx diminishes gradually from posterior to anterior, i.e. from the undifferentiated cells to fully differentiated epithelial odontoblasts .

discussion
is parahox gene expression colinear during patterning of gut?
it has been proposed that the origin of the three germ layered animals, the bilateria, is associated with the innovation of several gene clusters of the antp family, with the hox-cluster genes participating mainly in patterning of the neuroectoderm, the nk-cluster genes in formation of the mesodermal layers, and parahox in colinear regionalisation of the endoderm  <cit> . of the animals studied to date, the chromosomal linkage of parahox genes has been shown only in amphioxus, mouse, and human  <cit> . the parahox genes are not linked in teleost fishes, the ascidian or the sea urchin  <cit> . the only description of the expression patterns of all three parahox genes for lophotrochozoans in relation to their genomic organisation is for the polychaete p. dumerilii  <cit> . here, gsx and xlox are clustered and cdx is separated, without clear evidence of colinear expression.

we were unable to detect clear colinear expression of parahox genes in gibbula prior to torsion. if present, it is obscured by the permanent migration of cells from the digestive gland to their final positions in the gut, and by torsion processes. after torsion, however, a spatially colinear expression of parahox genes is obvious in the digestive system, with gva-gsx patterning the mouth opening and radula anlage, gva-xlox expressed in the midgut, and gva-cdx in the hindgut . therefore, our results support holland's hypothesis that parahox genes are involved in gut regionalization along the anterior-posterior body axis in protostomes  <cit> .

there also seems to be a temporal colinearity in expression of parahox genes in the gradual formation of the digestive system. in the trochophore larva, development of the digestive system begins with the formation of the stomodeum involving gva-gsx expression only . gva-xlox and gva-cdx are expressed at later stages in the more posterior parts of the gut. when the patterning of the gut is completed in the hatchling, expressions of gva-xlox and gva-cdx cease while gva-gsx continues to be involved in the patterning of the radula . during postlarval development, gva-gsx is expressed in the paired odontoblastic cushions of gibbula . the gradient of gva-gsx expression from posterior to anterior in the odontoblastic cushions suggests that this gene is associated with mitotic features of these cells and their ability to divide and replace the odontoblasts, rather than direct involvement in secretion of radula teeth.

expression of parahox genes in cephalic neural and neurosensory cells
gastropod larvae are well provisioned with multicellular sensory structures, but only the apical sensory organ is typically present in both plankton-feeding and non-plankton-feeding veligers  <cit> . this suggests that information detected by the apical sensory organ is important during the entire larval stage, regardless of the length of larval life or capacity for feeding. moreover, the apical sensory organ disappears at metamorphosis in species where this has been studied  <cit> . therefore the apical sensory organ has functions restricted to the larval stage. during larval development in gibbula, gva-gsx exhibits a complex pattern of expression in potential cephalic neural cells and in the apical organ. this pattern shows distinct similarity to pdu-gsx expression in the trochophore stage in which pdu-gsx expression is detectable in flask-shaped sensory-neurosecretory cells in the medial forebrain  <cit> . prior to torsion, the gva-gsx pattern is spotted in the paired apical tufts and several neurosecretory cells or sensory cups of the apical organ . this gene also appears to be involved in the formation of parts of the cerebral ganglia from the apical sensory organ in competent larvae. this compares well to the polychaetes capitella, nereis, and platynereis, where gsx is expressed in the cerebral ganglia  <cit> . our results may lend further support to the theory of complex ancestral expression of gsx that was secondarily simplified in several lineages. in addition to gva-gsx expression in the dorsal episphere of the trochophore, gva-xlox is detected in a pair of expression domains located more ventrally. it is possible that these cells contribute to neural cells of future cerebral ganglia. however this pattern of expression is transient and is lost in later developmental stages.

possible expression of parahox genes in the trunk neuroectoderm
expression of parahox genes in ventral or dorsal neuroectoderm has been demonstrated in several species. within lophotrochozoa capl-cdx is expressed in posterior neuroectodermal cells in the polychaete capitella. in platynereis, pdu-gsx is expressed in a central part of the larval ventral neuroectoderm in which somatic serotonergic neurons are identified  <cit> . nereis is the only species studied so far in which all three parahox genes are known to be involved in patterning of the trunk neuroectoderm  <cit> . in gibbula, gva-xlox and gva-cdx are expressed around the anal marker in the trochophore larvae. it has been shown that these cells express soxb in the prospective neuroectoderm of the trunk in patella  <cit> . therefore, it is likely that these cells expressing gva-xlox and gva-cdx contribute to the trunk neuroectoderm. temporary expression of gva-cdx in ventral neuroectoderm earlier during development, and expression of gva-xlox in overlapping regions at a later stage , may suggest that gva-cdx contributes to patterning of ventral neuroectoderm upstream of gva-xlox.

hypothetical ancestral parahox gene expression
comparative analyses across the animal kingdom show conservation of parahox gene expression domains in distinct tissues. comparing platynereis parahox gene expression to that of the orthologues in deuterostomes and ecdysozoans, hui et al.  <dig> confirmed holland's hypothesis about the ancestral role of parahox genes, suggesting that the pattern of gsx expression in the protostome-deuterostome ancestor was complex, with gsx domains in several structures of the nervous system, and was secondarily reduced to small patches of expression in the anterior cns in several lineages  <cit> . holland's model further suggests that gsx was expressed in the mouth region of the last bilaterian ancestor  <cit> . lack of gsx expression in the anterior gut of deuterostomes is explained by loss of the primary mouth and evolution of a new secondary mouth  <cit> . if this be the case, protostomes should maintain gsx expression in anterior gut structures. capitella results do not support such a model since capi-gsx expression is limited to a restricted region of the forming brain. the expression of nvi-gsh, pdu-gsx, and gva-gsx described here provides further support to the ancestral mouth patterning role of gsx  <cit> .

xlox is expressed during midgut development in annelids  <cit> . pdu-xlox and nvi-xlox are also expressed in the nervous system. in gibbula, gva-xlox pattern is detected in the digestive gland and ventral neuroectoderm, and expression in potential cephalic nerve cells is transient. therefore, our results provide additional support that the expression of xlox may reflect an ancestral function in central regions of the gut as well as a role in the nervous system. if this hypothesis is true, however, it would once more imply secondary simplification and loss of neural xlox expression in several lineages  <cit> . however, the possibility that ancestral xlox expression was simple and has become more complicated in different lineages cannot be ruled out since xlox is expressed in ventral neuroectoderm in nereis and gibbula, in addition to cerebral ganglia, but is lacking in all other protostomes studied to date  <cit> .

cdx shows a complex, dynamic pattern of expression in cells of the ectoderm, endoderm and possibly mesoderm, extending to extremely anterior regions in all annelids studied so far  <cit> . this anterior expression of cdx was also recently described in the acoel flatworm, convolutriloba longifissura  <cit> . clcdx is expressed in the commissures posterior to the statocyst, following the paths of nerve tracks and extending anteriorly. clcdx is also expressed in an area surrounding the eyes, forming direct connections to the brain commissure  <cit> . cdx anterior expression seems to be the case in the limpet patella as well, in which the gene is expressed in posterior ectoderm during gastrulation. the posterior ectodermal expression starts to fade in the trochophore, while expression extends anteriorly in the shape of an incomplete equatorial ring of ectodermal cells that corresponds to some cells of the prototroch  <cit> . later in the young free swimming trochophore, pvu-cdx expression in the prototroch disappears. the gene is also transiently expressed in the stomodeum  <cit> . gva-cdx expression differs from that of pvu-cdx by being absent during gastrulation. in addition, we did not detect any sign of gva-cdx expression in the trochophore prototroch or stomodeum. in contrast, the detection of cdx in mesentoblasts and in ectodermal cells situated on the posterior most part of the ventral side of the trochophore is a common feature in gibbula and patella. these are some of the cells that also express soxb, a neurectodermal marker  <cit> . therefore, cdx seems to pattern the ventral neuroectoderm as well as mesentoblasts in gastropods. anterior expression of cdx was not observed during the larval development of gibbula at any stage. this can be either interpreted as secondary loss of the anterior function of cdx in gibbula, or as a gain of function for this gene in several tissues in other species. the first possibility has been favoured since it can be explained by the separation of the gene from the cluster  <cit> . nonetheless, variety in the pattern of expression of cdx in different animals can serve as another example for the plasticity of gene expression during evolution. whether the expression of the parahox genes in nervous systems is related to their function in the gut, i.e. innervation of different parts of the gut and/or to feeding behaviour, awaits future research. gene function experiments, therefore, would be desirable to give us better understanding of how these genes are employed.

CONCLUSIONS
the expression of parahox genes during anterior-posterior development of the digestive system  suggests that these genes are involved in anterior-posterior specification of the g. varia gut. our results support holland's hypothesis that parahox genes are involved in gut regionalization and offer further support to the ancestral mouth patterning role of gsx in protostomes. all three parahox genes of g. varia are involved in patterning of the nervous system. gva-gsx and gva-xlox are expressed in neural precursors of cerebral ganglia, the expression domain of these two genes does not coincide in the episphere and fades away in the case of gva-xlox in later larval stages. additionally, gva-gsx patterns the neurosensory cells of the apical organ. gva-xlox and gva-cdx pattern the ventral neuroectoderm with cdx possibly acting upstream of xlox. during postlarval development, gva-gsx transcripts are detected in the precursor cells of odontoblasts at the base of the radula sac. this is probably a molluscan novelty related to radula evolution. further research in other molluscan classes and use of experimental tools, e.g. rnai, are required to improve our understanding of gene functions and enable a sound reconstruction of their ancestral role.

