BACKGROUND
there is a growing body of evidence that natural antisense transcripts  play important regulatory roles in various biological processes. nats are usually transcribed from the opposite strand of a particular gene locus, and they are thought to regulate sense gene expression  <cit> . one of the proposed models of nat-mediated regulation is for the antisense transcript to act as a cis-repressor of gene expression from the sense strand. for example, in early embryogenesis, transcription of the antisense genes tsix and air determines the fate of expression of their sense partners xist and igf2r, respectively  <cit> . the appearance of nats within several imprinted loci suggests that nats may regulate gene expression by controlling the epigenetic status of surrounding genes  <cit> . moreover, nats may function in pathological conditions by causing epigenetic alterations such as histone modification and dna methylation  <cit> .

the other primary model of nat-mediated gene regulation is induction of the production of small rnas from nat loci and their subsequent function in rna interference  pathways. endogenous small interfering rna  molecules, generated from nat loci, are induced specifically under conditions of salt stress and immune response in plants  <cit> . recent experimental data also suggests the presence of nat-associated endo-sirna molecules in animals  <cit> .

although the number of nats thought to have biological functions has gradually increased, the functions of most nats discovered in recent large-scale in silico studies are unknown. computational identification of nats is based mostly on the analysis of cdna and est sequence collections by sequence alignment, and this process has identified several thousand sense-antisense pairs  <cit> . however, in principle, cdna sequencing accumulates data on transcripts with poly-stretches and does not access the non-poly-adenylated population of transcripts. a recent genome-wide tiling array study of the human genome revealed that many genomic regions that could not be identified from cdna collections are apparently transcribed and tend not to be poly-adenylated  <cit> . this finding indicates that antisense transcriptome analyses based solely on cdna information may be inefficient. in addition, most publicly available cdna sequences are derived from normal cellular conditions, such as normal adult tissues, and thus are not useful for the identification of nats specific to abnormal cellular conditions.

to discover novel nats expressed under various biological conditions, we proposed a microarray-based technique involving the use of 60-mer oligonucleotide dna probes selected from the complementary sequences of cdnas , referred to as artificial antisense sequence  probes. this approach has the ability to detect antisense expression that cannot be identified by using information from the cdna and est collections and has the advantage of compatibility with the computational methodology widely used for sense gene expression analysis  <cit> . we performed microarray analyses with afas probes by using oligo-dt and random primed target samples to provide a comprehensive approach for the detection of novel non-poly-adenylated transcripts in the antisense transcriptome.

here, we designed afas probes to correspond to the antisense strand of well-studied selected genes, including oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes, imprinted genes, and human-mouse orthologous genes. we studied the expression profiles of targeted transcripts in normal mouse adult tissues and in mouse mammary tumor virus -induced mammary tumors. this technique is applicable to all genes and sample types and can be used for antisense expression identification that is not possible by using conventional cdna information alone.

RESULTS
afas probes detect previously known nats
to verify whether our methods can detect nat expression, we initially examined the signal intensities of afas probes that targeted previously identified antisense transcripts. for example, afas probes designed for tsix, which reflects the abundance of xist rna, detected expression in the  <dig> adult mouse tissues , but not in the testis, as expected . such expression patterns were detected only for probes corresponding to the exonic-overlapping regions between tsix and xist, and also for the sense probes corresponding to xist rna . this finding suggests that afas probes for tsix can identify not only the presence of its antisense counterpart, but also its exonic regions. in addition, afas probes for several imprinted genes , which are known to give rise to antisense transcripts  <cit> , also gave prominent signals . moreover, previously known antisense transcripts, such as those arising from myc   <cit>  and tgfb <dig>   <cit> , were also detected by our microarray platform . although the number of documented nat examples in normal mouse adult tissues is limited, the mean signal intensities generated by afas probes corresponding to these genes were higher than those for the negative control genes. the control genes comprise a set of randomly selected genes, without cdna, est, and cage tags in the antisense orientation . these data indicate that endogenous nat expression of known genes is potentially detectable by probes designed for the complementary strand of known genes.

global analyses of afas probes
before screening for novel nats using afas probes, we first analyzed the global tendency of signal intensities from all afas probes applied to our custom microarray platform. because northern blot analyses for particular gene loci have previously shown that nats tend to be poly-negative  <cit> , we checked whether our afas probes also showed this tendency in normal mouse tissue expression profiling. a significantly higher number of afas probes than sense probes detected transcripts only within random-primed samples, but not among the oligo-dt primed targets . this result indicates that transcripts detected by afas probes also lack poly-tails, similar to the finding for nats characterized by northern blot analyses  <cit> . also, the number of sense probes detecting transcripts in both oligo-dt and random primed samples was higher than that of antisense probes . this finding indicates that sense transcripts with poly-tails can be identified by both priming methods, because sense probes target the protein-coding strand of the mrna, which is expected to have a poly-tail. another characteristic of endogenous nats is their nuclear localization  <cit> . a distribution comparison of afas probe signals between nuclear and cytoplasmic fractions clearly showed nuclear enrichment of detected transcripts .

several large-scale studies using information in cdna and est collections and from genome-wide tiling arrays in yeast previously showed that nats tend to be transcribed from the 3' region of its counterpart mrna  <cit> , thus implying the presence of regulatory mechanisms involving tail-to-tail overlapping. we also observed this characteristic for the afas probes, because the afas probe signals clearly showed positional preference relative to the sense mrna . this result indicates that afas probes indeed detect the positional bias of antisense transcription. similarly, we also observed higher signals within 5' regions , thus suggesting that nats may also arise near the transcriptional start site, as previously shown for head-to-head overlapping nats such as wt <dig>  sphk <dig>  and tsix  <cit> .

novel conserved nat detection by normal tissue profiling
to test the ability of afas probes to detect novel nats, we initially applied our microarray approach to the human-mouse orthologous gene set. in many studies, inter-species conservation of nats is implied by the presence of common cdna sequences between the two species  <cit> . however, recent genome-wide tiling array and cage analyses revealed that a large fraction of the genome is transcribed  <cit> , indicating that current cdna collection is not sufficient for comprehensive comparative genomics, including comparative antisense transcriptome analyses. in this situation, the use of afas probes corresponding to genes for which the antisense counterpart has been identified in humans, but not in mice, may lead to the detection of novel conserved nats .

we designed afas probes corresponding to  <dig> mouse orthologous partners, for which the antisense counterpart has been identified in humans, but not in mice . we then profiled the expression of these genes to detect antisense expression within  <dig> normal mouse tissues. we identified  <dig>  probes that gave a signal , at least in a single particular tissue, and  <dig> of these  showed tissue-specific expression. probes of  <dig> genes gave signals with a higher than average intensity according to inter-array normalization . these results suggest that many nats identified only in the human cdna collection may also be expressed in mice.

we attempted to validate the expression of two candidate conserved nats  by performing northern and in situ hybridization  analyses. whereas human acaa <dig>  overlaps with dlec <dig>  in a tail-to-tail overlapping manner, its orthologous counterpart in the mouse genome  shows a tail-to-tail relationship but not a reciprocal overlapping relationship, according to the annotated gene structure . both microarray and northern analyses confirmed that the acaa1b sense transcript is expressed within liver and kidney . northern analyses were not able to detect the antisense transcript of acaa1b from either poly+ or total rna , but quantitative rt-pcr, ish and microarray analyses were able to detect this transcript within the testis and kidney . this result implies that nats detected by microarray analysis using afas probes are transcribed in vivo.

we also analyzed the expression of aard , which is a functionally uncharacterized gene but is known to be expressed within the adult testis and xy fetal gonad  <cit> . in humans, exons of aard  overlap with that of an unnamed uterus est , whereas mouse aard has no est arising from the antisense strand . northern analysis confirmed that expression of the sense transcript of aard was testis-specific ; however, northern analysis of the antisense transcript showed laddered hybridization patterns for total rna, but not for poly+ rna isolated from all samples . by comparison, both the sense and antisense transcripts  were detected by ish within a particular region of the seminiferous tubules , thus confirming that the aard-as is also expressed in the testis. in addition, aard-as was most likely located within the nucleus, whereas aard was located within the cytoplasm . because ish shows that aard-as is expressed in a particular region of the seminiferous tubules, we checked our microarray data on fractionated testis samples that reflected the three steps of spermatogenesis . we found that aard-as was expressed within the early period of spermatogenesis, whereas the sense transcript appeared at a later phase . this finding shows that sense and antisense transcripts of aard are transcribed exclusively and in a mutually antagonistic fashion during spermatogenesis. in addition, aard-as expression was detected only in the random-primed target sample, not in the oligo-dt primed target , indicating that aard-as tends to be poly-negative and nuclear-localized.

these data clearly confirm that afas probes can detect the expression of antisense transcripts in normal tissues, and that they can also identify transcripts expressed in a tissue- and cell-type-specific manner. detection of such expression dynamics for antisense transcripts is possible only by using the analytical platform targeting the complementary strand of the annotated genes. thus, afas probes, when used within appropriate biological samples and combined with other analytical modalities, can be used to discover genuine functional nats; this is an advantage over conventional approaches that depend on publicly available cdna data.

detection of novel nats differentially expressed under pathological conditions
we next checked whether afas probes have the ability to detect antisense transcripts in cancerous tissues. examples of functional antisense transcripts identified in abnormal cells are cdkn2b, wt <dig>  and hba <dig>  <cit> . these antisense transcripts control the epigenetic status of surrounding genes by dna methylation or histone modification and thus are thought to affect the expression of their sense partners. to confirm this notion, we applied the afas probe technique to the  <dig> well-characterized genes including oncogenes and tumor suppressors . we used these probes in microarray experiments based on the grs/a mouse strain, which frequently suffers from -induced mammary tumors  <cit> .

for the probes designed to detect the sense transcripts, we identified  <dig> genes showing differential expression. among these,  <dig> were up-regulated and  <dig> were down-regulated within tumor regions, compared with in normal regions, according to a set statistical threshold  . among the up-regulated genes in tumors,  <dig> genes  showed loss of antisense expression , whereas among the down-regulated genes nr2c <dig> showed up-regulation of its antisense expression in an anti-correlated manner with the sense transcript counterpart . these genes are reminiscent of the model in which antisense transcription may lead to the silencing of sense gene expression, such as cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor  and its antisense counterpart  <cit> . these genes may be regulated through an antisense-mediated pathway.

interestingly, the expression of antisense transcripts representing  <dig> genes  was found to increase, despite the absence of changes in expression of their sense transcript counterparts . we also identified down-regulated antisense transcripts corresponding to  <dig> genes  for which there were no changes in expression of their corresponding sense transcripts. because ish using cancerous tissues, like microarray analysis, can detect antisense expression arising from thbd  , there might be more examples of genes for which antisense expression is altered in cancerous tissue but cannot be detected by microarray analysis that targets expression from the sense strand of genes.

discussion
this paper shows that microarray probes targeting transcription from the complementary strand of known genes can identify novel nats, an approach that has not been possible solely on the basis of publicly available cdna data. recently described high-density oligonucleotide tiling-array platforms are designed to overview the transcriptional landscape of specific genomic regions at high resolution. by comparison, our platform uses multiple probes to specifically screen for transcription from the antisense strand of known genes. many previous studies have attempted to identify nats by dna microarray analysis using cdna-oriented custom microarrays or commercially available microarray platforms  <cit> . since our microarray platform is custom-made and not commercial, it can be applied to any genes or gene loci of interest. furthermore, our method does not introduce bias from cdna synthesis between sense and antisense profiling because it does not require specific protocols for target cdna synthesis for nat detection. in addition, our microarray platform approach can simultaneously profile sense and antisense expression in one microarray hybridization experiment.

many nats detected by afas probes were appeared only in the random-primed targets. this was concordance with previous cdna-based microarray profiling of nat expression  <cit> . whereas poly-plus rna population is roughly represented by oligo-dt primed cdnas, whole transcriptome -minus rna population) is represented by cdnas synthesized by random primers. therefore, nats detected by our analysis tend to be poly-negative. although oligo-dt primers can pick the internal poly-stretches, this is not an issue at the level of microarray-based nat screening, because the vast majority of the poly-stretch  is located within the 3' end of the transcripts .

by designating afas probes to human-mouse orthologous genes, we identified many probes showing positive signals. two of these probes identified transcripts for which in vivo expression was confirmed. thus, our approach may reveal more, as yet unidentified, conserved nats; this has not been possible by conventional approaches, as previously reported using cdna data  <cit> . of the individually validated examples , expression of aard-as was localized to the nucleus and was detected only in random-primed target samples. in addition, multiple-size hybridized bands pattern was observed especially for total rna membrane, not for poly+ rna membrane. this observation is similar to that of previously identified antisense transcripts  <cit> , and this is probably due to heterogeneously sized molecules of aard-as transcripts. because ish and the microarray data on other antisense transcript examples also show nuclear localization and poly-avoidance , it is possible that these features are general characteristics of the antisense transcriptome.

we also designed afas probes for well-characterized genes and identified several examples of correlated and anti-correlated expression between the nats and the corresponding sense transcript within mmtv-induced mammary tumors. we observed differentially expressed genes for which expression of the antisense transcript had changed, whereas that of the sense transcript had not. given that differential antisense expression might induce changes in epigenetic status, for example in cdkn2b and cdkn2bas  <cit> , antisense transcription may cause changes in the methylation status of neighboring genes. this notion can be tested by using methylated dna immunoprecipitation  and chromatin immunoprecipitation  on chip analyses to further characterize the antisense transcriptome and to determine whether specific nats function as epigenetic regulators. whereas this study revealed nats specific to mouse tumors, human clinical samples have also been analyzed to screen for novel nats by the same methodology; this new study has identified many antisense transcripts showing increased or decreased expression in human colon cancer tissues compared with controls .

although next-generation high-throughput transcriptome sequencing  might replace microarray-based expression analyses, antisense transcriptome analysis by sequencing is still under development because of the laborious nature of strand-specific library construction  <cit> . dna microarray-based profiling makes it possible to gain a detailed view of specific genes or gene loci and can also provide expression profiles of both poly-plus and poly-minus rnas.

CONCLUSIONS
we showed here that probes targeting the complementary strand of the annotated genes successfully identify novel nat expression, including those altered tissue- and tumor-specifically. the results suggest that there are more examples of nats that cannot not be collected from public cdna sources. further functional investigation is required for such dynamically expressed nats, and the use of microarray platforms targeting both strands of the gene locus will help to narrow down the proper candidates for further functional analyses.

