BACKGROUND
understanding the selective pressures affecting the evolution of dispersal strategies is of prime importance for a broad range of biological fields, ranging from conservation biology to research on the evolution of species, host-parasite interactions and communities of species  <cit> . dispersal strategies of living organisms affect the dynamics, and the demographic and genetic structure of their populations  <cit> , and impacts often crucially on the survival and reproductive success of individuals  <cit> . for example, dispersal has been theoretically demonstrated to profoundly influence the evolution of sociality  <cit>  and dispersal strategies affect selection on other core life-history traits, e.g. reproductive strategies and effort, survival capacity, colonization ability, defenses against predators, parasites and diseases  <cit> .

co-variation among life-history traits has been the centre of much research in the past decades in the context of adaptive evolution as well as from the point of view of constraints on this evolution due to trade-offs between traits  <cit> , and the existence of syndromes encapsulating dispersal strategies has been hypothesized  <cit> . for example, baker and stebbins  <cit>  hypothesized that species living in unstable habitats in metapopulations with a high turn-over develop a set of co-adapted traits where high dispersal and colonization ability are linked to high fecundity and short life span , allowing excellent exploitation of freed-up patches   <cit> . such hypotheses have been supported by correlative approaches, especially by comparing species in different types of habitats  <cit> . theoretical models equally predict the evolution of syndromes in which dispersal ability influences or is influenced by the evolution of other life history traits  <cit> , even if sometimes they come to a different conclusion than verbal or correlative approaches  <cit> . for example, ronce and olivieri  <cit>  predicted a positive association between life span and dispersal while crowley and mcletchie  <cit>  predicted the reverse, the direction of the trend seemingly depending on details of the functioning of metapopulations  <cit>  and also, we note, on potential constraints  on life-history traits and their capacity to evolve  <cit> . similar complex theoretical results have also been found for the evolution of social traits and dispersal ability  <cit> .

the evolution of dispersal syndromes through natural selection requires that the traits in question are under genetic determinism, and we must therefore demonstrate this to corroborate the theoretical view on dispersal syndrome evolution. detailed studies on genetic variation in life history trait associations may also increase our understanding of the process of dispersal syndrome evolution, by allowing an evaluation of the degree to which the directionality of these patterns follow theoretical predictions or might be limited by trade-offs, and can also suggest additional selective factors that may have shaped syndromes. nevertheless, only quite few studies test for and explore variation in dispersal syndromes apart from species comparisons, although genetic variance for dispersal itself has been demonstrated for some species . some correlative studies have found differences in the life-history of dispersing versus philopatric individuals  <cit>  or intra-specific differences in dispersal strategies related with the cause of dispersal and landscape structure  <cit> . other studies have found clear associations between individual propensity to disperse and some morphological, physiological or behavioral characteristics  <cit> . such associations may, however, be due to maternal or environmental factors . this means that our empirical and experimental insight into the evolution of these syndromes remains relatively poor.

one reason for the scarcity of evidence for genetic variation in dispersal strategies and other life history traits within species is that most studies have been done either on vertebrates, where assessing the genetic determinism of traits associations is difficult, or on invertebrates where an individual following up is often impossible. for this reason, artificial microcosms and clonal organisms with short generation time seem one of the best ways to investigate such syndromes . microorganisms, characterized by the general ease of maintaining large population sizes in the laboratory under controlled environmental conditions, should therefore be very well-suited organisms for studies on the co-variation between dispersal strategies and other core life history strategies. surprisingly, however, very few studies have addressed the relationships between dispersal rate and core life history traits in microorganisms .

we here present a study on the co-variation of dispersal strategies with other life-history traits in the unicellular, ciliated protozoan tetrahymena thermophila. this small  eukaryote feeds on bacteria and dissolved nutrients in fresh water ponds and streams in america  <cit> , and while it is widely used as a model system by molecular and cell biologists  <cit> , it has been surprisingly little studied by evolutionary biologists .

yet the life history characteristics of t. thermophila make it particularly exciting for studies on dispersal. firstly, this organism lives in habitats likely resembling those of meta-populations with high turn-over of local patches. studies on life history trait associations in t. thermophila would therefore allow gaining insight into the degree to which central theoretical models can predict dispersal syndrome evolution in ruderal species . secondly, genetic variation in all core life history traits can be easily estimated in t. thermophila because separate clonal lineages can be kept in the laboratory. reproduction remains clonal whenever nutrients are present  <cit>  and even under conditions inducing sexual reproduction , conjugation is impossible between clone mates because they carry the same mating type . thirdly, t. thermophila shows an intriguing co-existence of apparent short- versus long-distance dispersal strategies . t. thermophila of both morph-types swim about and explore their environment , but the much greater swim speed  and more directional movements  reported for the elongated morph suggest that it is specialized for committed long-distance dispersal. finally, t. thermophila cells form aggregations and secrete substances favoring the survival of other cells  <cit> ; the evolution of dispersal strategies in this organism may therefore also be affected by a balance between kin-benefits and -competition .

through experiments in the laboratory, we assessed variation in dispersal rate  and differences in the colonization capacity of single cells, and studied growth rate, patch carrying capacity, starvation resistance and concomitant changes in cell shape for ten strains of t. thermophila. these experiments and observations allowed us to  test for genetic variation and co-variation in core life history traits,  examine whether the directionality of life history trait associations across genetic lineages followed predictions for ruderal organisms  and  generate testable hypotheses on how the semi-social life style of t. thermophila may affect the evolution of its dispersal strategies.

RESULTS
growth from low density in presence of nutrients
all strains displayed a similar pattern of logistic growth, first exponential growth then reaching a plateau, where cells became smaller and rounder in a first time due to the rapid cell divisions and returned to their starting size and shape values once again when reaching the plateau. however, strains differed quantitatively. growth rate and carrying capacity were largely strain-dependent , while variation between replicates within strain showed significant variation for some strains only and to a much lesser extent . at the end of the experiment, where strains were at their carrying capacity, strains also differed in cell density , size , and shape .

strains differed with respect to the co-variation among traits as well. this was shown by a principal component analysis on growth rate, final cell density, final cell size and final cell shape , followed up by a discriminant analysis on the principal components . such discriminant analyses test whether strains can be significantly distinguished from each other on the basis of the variables under study; they do not force artefactual strain separation  <cit> . all pca components were significantly implicated in discriminating strains  with  <dig> % of the replicates well classified within their strain. pc1g  represented a factor that was negatively associated with final cell size and positively with final cell shape . this means that at the carrying capacity some strains had small and elongated cells, others rounder and bigger cells. pc2g  represented a contrast between growth rate and final cell density . thus, some strains grew rapidly in the beginning but reached only a low final cell density , whereas others grew slowly in the beginning but reached a high final density . pc3g  represented the overall performance of growth  from low density in the presence of nutrients, contrasting strains performing well  to strains performing less well  .

starvation in a medium devoid of nutrients
at the start of the experiment, cells were still dividing as if they were in a nutrient-rich environment. although there was some variation between replicates and strains, a peak was observed at  <dig> h for density and cell elongation. then density was steadily decreasing and cell shape rounding. strains, however, differed significantly in survival rate, as estimated by survival as a density sum over time . they also differed significantly as regarded cell elongation in response to starvation, as measured by mean  and variance  of maximal elongation, elongation persistence  and frequency of disperser morphs .

strains differed regarding the impact of starvation on trait associations, too, as was shown by a principal component analysis on cell survival, elongation, and production of disperser morphs, followed up by a discriminant analysis on the principal components . the first two pca components explained  <dig> % of the variance in the data, were highly significantly implicated in discriminating strains  with all replicates well classified within their strain . the first principal component, pc1s,  expressed the overall survival performance, cell elongation and production of disperser morphs in starvation conditions, positively associated with all five included variables . pc2s  represented a contrast of elongation reactions: strains with a larger and persisting mean maximal elongation but a limited variance in elongation  versus strains with a larger variation between cells, some elongating far more than other, up to becoming real disperser morphs .

dispersal in presence of nutrients
the rates at which t. thermophila cells dispersed from one tube  through a connecting tubing to another tube  were strongly positively correlated with the degree of cell elongation  and with the initial shape of cells. a linear model analysis revealed that the differences in dispersal rate were primarily situated between strains . when controlling for this strain effect, the correlation of dispersal rate with cell elongation was still significant , but not the correlation with initial shape . elongation also significantly differed between strains . our tests hence showed that dispersal rates vary significantly among strains and also supported that elongation of t. thermophila cells is linked with dispersal.

single cell colonization capacity in presence of nutrients
strains differed significantly as concerned the probability of successful colonization in new patches while replicates did not differ significantly .

correlation among life-history traits across experiments
across experiments, strains that showed a great dispersal rate in the two-patch dispersal experiment in presence of nutrients also had a greater probability of successfully colonizing new patches as single cells . dispersal and colonization capacities were not associated with the cell sizes and shapes attained at carrying capacity after growth from low density in the presence of nutrients, as shown by their non-significant co-variation with pc1g , nor with the trade-off between growth rate and cell density at carrying capacity  . however, dispersal rate and colonization probability were positively associated with the overall growth performance  . dispersal rate was positively associated with the overall survival capacity and trend to elongate when faced with starvation in a nutrient-free medium , but colonization probability was not . dispersal rate and colonization probability in a nutrient-rich medium were higher for strains where all cells elongated similarly and for a long time but did not produce dispersal morphs, as shown by a negative association with pc2s . this elongation strategy  was also associated with strains presenting big round  cells at carrying capacity  and to the overall performance of growth in nutrient-rich medium . furthermore, strains showing high carrying capacities but low growth rates  in presence of nutrients also showed superior abilities to survive and elongate under starvation conditions . finally, elongation in nutrient-rich and nutrient-free  conditions were highly correlated  but elongation was always greatly more pronounced under starvation conditions.

the above associations were well represented by the first two axes of a final principal component analysis  performed on the seven variables summarizing the four experiments . the first axis of this comprehensive pca explained on average 39% of the variance  and the second axis 23% of the variance . these two axes allowed discriminating strains very efficiently, with only on average 16%  of the replicates not correctly classified. some strains  were always perfectly discriminated, and misclassifications only concerned a single replicate for the majority of the strains; only b strain was more frequently misclassified for all replicates.

discussion
genetic variation in dispersal and life history strategies
our study provided strong evidence for genetic variation in dispersal and life history strategies in tetrahymena thermophila protozoans. strains varied considerably and significantly in nearly all aspects of life history  under different environmental conditions, and showed significant differences in the associations of these traits under our experimental conditions . life history trait differences were in many cases significantly related with dispersal strategies, which also varied significantly between strains. among-strain differences in life-history traits and trait associations were not just due to variation in strain quality, although some t. thermophila strains did perform better than others as regarded a series of core fitness traits . this is because strains also differed with respect to various trait associations that cannot as such be considered to represent differential quality but rather different strategies. examples are the observed among-strain differences in growth rates r versus final population density in presence of nutrients , cell shape versus size in presence of nutrients , and the opposition between a high degree of phenotypic plasticity of cell shape  with some cells turning into dispersal morphs versus a more durable and greater, but less plastic, mean cell elongation under starvation . the t. thermophila ten strains hence differed also with respect to the patterns of their investment along different trait axes. hence, our study adds to the limited evidence  for genetic variance in dispersal syndromes within a species. also, the among-strain variance in the degree of plasticity of cell shape found in t. thermophila is similar to recent findings of genetic variance in plasticity for core life-history traits in other animals, e.g. caenorhabditis elegans nematodes  <cit>  and in dispersal related morphological traits in pea aphids   <cit> .

the life-history trait association differences found among t. thermophila strains should be attributed to among-strain differences in genes of the macronucleus , not directly the micronucleus . this is because macronucleus genes represent a modified, often variably amplified and rearranged subset of micronucleus genes  <cit> . the genetic trait variance expressed among clonal lines is therefore not necessarily the same that would be found in crossing experiments . another curiosity of ciliates, the amitotic divisions of macronuclei making daughter cells from a clonal division potentially have slightly different alleles or amounts of alleles  did not invalidate our study. such differences among cells within a clone line would only make our tests for genetic differences among strains more conservative. equally, non-genetic 'maternal' effects are not likely to have contributed importantly to among-strain differences and so confounded our study, because all strains were maintained under the same conditions for some  <dig> generations before the start of experiments . finally, the observed strain differences in morphological responses to starvation were very unlikely to be artefactual. we used standard techniques  to eliminate nutrients from the medium , and any damage during centrifugation would rather lead to ciliae loss and so to a decreased, not a greatly enhanced swimming speed. cells, moreover, started swimming within seconds after centrifugations indicating perfectly preserved cell integrity, verified also under the microscope . also, all strains were subjected to precisely the same manipulations .

covariation of dispersal strategies with life history traits
dispersal strategies, growth performance, and survival
the association of t. thermophila dispersal rates in presence of nutrients with other life history traits fits partly with the classic 'colonizer syndrome'  <cit>  envisioned typical for species living in variable patches in metapopulations . strains with great short-distance dispersal rates in presence of nutrients had a better growth performance, and high colonization abilities as predicted , but contrary to classical predictions they also had a better mean strain survival rate than did less dispersive strains. an actual negative co-variance  between two life-history traits could be masked by differences among strains in overall condition, because some strains would have more resources to invest both in growth and in survival  <cit> . our experiments were not set up to explicitly explore this issue. all our strains were, however, kept in the same conditions of nutrient availability in the growth experiments, and so should have had the same amount of resources available. also we note that our findings could be explained by some alternative dispersal evolution models that do predict positive associations of survival with dispersal rates and reproductive effort for ruderal species, the precise expectations depending on landscape characteristics , that are only little known for t. thermophila.

the opposite end of the spectrum, namely t. thermophila strains dispersing little, growing less, and colonizing less well as single cells in presence of food, and surviving food-stress poorly, represented relative philopatry as long as the environment remained good, and likely long-distance dispersal  when the environment turned bad. such a long-distance colonizer strategy could allow coexisting with better competitor strains . alternatively, 'philopatric' strains may come from habitats with less local spatio-temporal variability  but more catastrophic patch degradations . finally, the variation among strains in dispersal strategies and life history could represent non-adaptive variance around an adaptive mean. in all cases, relative philopatry in presence of food did not signify an adaptation to a more intensive exploitation of already colonized patches , because the growth performance of philopatric strains was inferior and also philopatry was not related significantly with r versus k strategies. nevertheless, the lower dispersal rate of philopatric strains suggests that they freely tolerate higher densities without dispersing massively. density-dependent dispersal strategies are indeed predicted by several theoretical models and have been reported in a number of species .

potential density-dependence of dispersal strategies is particularly interesting given the primitive form of cooperation exhibited by t. thermophila. cells secrete certain chemical compounds  that increase the survival of other cells  <cit>  and also actively form aggregations  <cit> , which should enhance the effective concentration of these substances. those t. thermophila strains that disperse little even when at high density and are less good at colonizing as single cells, could be strains adapted to and dependent on greater cooperation than the more dispersive strains. consistent with this, strains producing many dispersal morphs  have smaller cell sizes , and so each cell likely has fewer resources than is the case in more dispersive strains. the inferior rates of survival under starvation for philopatric strains corroborate this idea. if our hypothesis is correct, the philopatric strains should show a stronger degree of aggregation and only disperse much when densities are very high and benefits of 'cooperation' outweighed by costs of conspecific competition. we are currently testing this.

dispersal morphs
morphological differences between dispersers and non-dispersers were found in our study, as in a series of other species . morph diversity was, however, greater than suggested by previous morphological studies on t. thermophila  <cit> . dispersing cells were more elongated than non-dispersers in our two-patch dispersal experiment, as expected, and strains that elongated much in presence of nutrients also showed greater mean cell elongation under starvation . elongated disperser cells, however, differed in shape from the more elongated cells produced under starvation, and strains dispersing much in presence of nutrients surprisingly produced only few of the fast-swimming dispersal morphs described by nelsen and debault  <cit> . importantly, the differential production of dispersive morph types by different strains was linked to variation in core life history trait associations , with strains performing poorly under normal conditions producing more fast-swimming dispersal morphs under starvation.

that the fast-swimming very elongated dispersal morphs likely constitute a commitment to long-distance dispersal in degraded environments was supported by our study. firstly, our dispersal experiment showed that normal cell morphs or partially elongated cells were very capable of short-distance dispersal  <cit> . secondly, our starvation experiment confirmed that considerable time is required for a cell to transform itself into the very elongated dispersal morph . hence transformation, likely also energetically costly, should only occur when cells need to surpass the mobility capacities of normal or partially elongated morphs. strains producing many fast-swimming morphs should therefore benefit from a dispersal-distance advantage, which may help explain the coexistence of low performance strains with strains doing well .

other selective factors could also have contributed to the observed variation among strains in dispersal distance strategies. for example different strains may come from habitats that vary with respect to the selective pressures of kin competition versus spatio-temporal variation in habitat quality, distributions of resources and kin in space, or the shapes of distance-dependent dispersal cost functions . finally, we cannot reject that strain variation in life history traits could represent non-adaptive variation around an adaptive mean strategy. intimate knowledge on the habitats of origin of different strains or, better still, experimental evolution studies will be required to test this.

CONCLUSIONS
we found strong evidence for genetic variation in dispersal syndromes in t. thermophila protozoans, because strains differed in overall life-history associations, with dispersal strategies, colonization capacity, survival, reproductive performance, and cell shape plasticity showing complex patterns of variation. while some strains fit rather well with the classic colonizer syndrome , they were also characterized by good survival abilities and produced few of the putative long-distance dispersal morphs when subjected to environmental degradation. poorly performing, locally philopatric strains, by contrast, produced relatively many of these fast-swimming dispersal morphs, and so likely benefit from a dispersal-distance advantage which may facilitate their persistence. finally, the smaller cell size of these latter strains at carrying capacity and their poorer skills at colonizing as individual cells, suggest that they may be adapted to greater levels of dependency on clone-mate cells . overall, differential exposure to selection on competitive and cooperative abilities, in conjunction with selective factors targeting specifically dispersal distance, likely contributed importantly to shaping t. thermophila dispersal and life history evolution. ongoing studies on aggregation behavior and density-dependence of dispersal strategies will explore this further.

