BACKGROUND
most flowering plants that are predominantly self-pollinating have an annual life history  <cit> . interpretations of this association usually involve one of two main hypotheses.  compared with perennials, annuals may generally accrue greater fitness benefits from selfing through 'reproductive assurance', i.e., because ovules may be generally more outcross-pollen-limited and/or pollen grains may be more outcross-ovule-limited  <cit> .  perennials may incur a higher fitness cost of selfing through seed discounting and inbreeding depression; hence, possibly most selfers are annuals simply because relatively few perennials can be selfers  <cit> .

a recent third hypothesis, the 'time-limitation' hypothesis, predicts that both selfing and the annual life cycle are concurrent products of strong 'r-selection' associated with high density-independent mortality risk in ephemeral habitats with a severely limited period of time available to complete the life cycle  <cit> . both the traditional reproductive assurance hypothesis and the time-limitation hypothesis involve a fitness advantage for selfing through ensuring that at least some reproduction occurs, but they involve very different selection mechanisms – pollinator/mate-limitation , versus time-limitation . accordingly, these two hypotheses for selfing involve very different assumptions and predictions.

the time-limitation hypothesis has direct and indirect components. the indirect component predicts higher selfing rates in annuals as a trade-off of selection for earlier reproductive maturity in annuals  <cit>  . more rapid floral maturation is expected to result in smaller flowers with increased overlap of anther dehiscence and stigma receptivity in both space  and time  thus, increasing the frequency of selfing as an incidental consequence  <cit>  . if selfing also shortens the time between flower maturation and ovule fertilization, then higher selfing rates for annuals in time-limited habitats may also be predicted as a direct fitness benefit; abbreviating the time between anthesis and ovule fertilization may ensure that there is enough remaining time in the growing season  to allow complete seed and fruit maturation  <cit>  . selection favors selfing here by favoring increased overlap in anther dehiscence and stigma receptivity in both space and time, which are in turn facilitated by smaller flower size and shorter flower development time, respectively .

however, the two components of time-limitation cannot be separated clearly, as they operate simultaneously; i.e., earlier onset of flowering, shorter flower development time, smaller flowers and selfing can all be interpreted to have direct fitness benefits because they may all contribute directly to accelerating the life cycle  <cit> . indeed, time-limitation associated with strong r-selection would be expected also to favor an acceleration of the final stage in the life cycle – seed/fruit development time  – resulting, as a trade-off, in smaller seeds and/or fruits  <cit> .

the time-limitation hypothesis remains untested. some recent studies have explored the rapid growth and maturation time of annuals in terms of bud development rates and ontogeny  <cit> . however, these studies have compared growth and development rates between selfing and outcrossing populations of only a single species. since their effective sample size is only one, this makes it difficult to extrapolate the predominant selection pressures that may have promoted the general association of selfing with the annual life cycle.

the objective of the present study was to compare, for annuals exclusively, life history traits associated with selfing versus outcrossing using several species from a wide range of plant families. phylogenetically-independent contrasts  were used to control for confounding effects due to common ancestry among species  <cit> . using a database of  <dig> species involving  <dig> families, plant size, flower size, and seed size were compared between selfing and outcrossing annuals. the time-limitation hypothesis predicts that all of these traits should be smaller in selfing annuals because the severely time-limited growing season that promotes selfing also imposes an upper limit on the maximum sizes that can be attained for plant traits  <cit>  . the trend for outcrossers to be taller, and have larger flowers and larger seeds has often been noted  <cit> . we used a multi-species, across-family comparison, however, to investigate whether this trend also holds true within annuals exclusively.

data on the timing of life history stages  were also obtained from a greenhouse study of  <dig> annual species involving  <dig> families. the time-limitation hypothesis predicts that selfers should produce mature flowers more quickly and should have shorter flowering times.

RESULTS
data base analyses
based on phylogenetically-independent contrasts, selfing annuals had significantly shorter plant heights , significantly smaller flowers , and significantly smaller seeds .

greenhouse study
bud development time  and flower longevity  were significantly  shorter in selfing annuals in all of the families except the fabaceae . selfing annuals also had significantly shorter bud development times , and floral longevities  in three of the four genus pairs. selfing and outcrossing annuals of the genus ipomoea did not differ significantly in either bud development time  or flower longevity . age at first flower was not significantly related to mating system for any of the family or genus comparisons .

discussion
there is a rich body of theory and empirical work on the evolution of selfing in flowering plants , but practically none of it involves an explicit role of selection involving time-limitation. the present paper is only the second to explore the implications of the time-limitation hypothesis and contribute to the maturation of this idea. according to the time-limitation hypothesis, selfing in annuals has evolved as a consequence of strong r-selection in ephemeral habitats, resulting either as an indirect consequence  of selection for shorter time to reproductive maturity , or as a direct consequence of selection for shorter pollination time, i.e., the time between flower maturation and ovule fertilization , or both  <cit> . consistent with the predictions of this hypothesis, we found, using phylogenetically-independent contrasts, that  selfing annuals in general had significantly shorter plant heights, smaller flowers, shorter bud development time, shorter flower longevity and smaller seed sizes.

at the same time, these results are not inconsistent with the predictions of selection resulting from pollinator/mate-limitation associated with the traditional reproductive assurance hypothesis. just as with many situations where two different mechanisms can potentially produce the same outcome/pattern, it is not easy here to clearly distinguish between the roles of "pollinator/mate-limitation" and "time-limitation". nevertheless there are two important contributions from our study: first, in reporting significant life history differences between selfers and outcrossers, our multi-species study is unique in its comparison of monocarpic annual species exclusively. all previous multi-species studies of trait comparisons between selfers and outcrossers have involved variable mixes of monocarpic and longer-lived polycarpic species. second, by comparing annuals exclusively, our results provide indirect support for the time-limitation hypothesis, not by rejecting the role of pollinator/mate-limitation, but rather by representing a system in which it is more plausible to argue for the role of time-limitation; i.e., compared with pollinator/mate-limitation, time-limitation as a selection factor favoring selfing is likely to have been much stronger, more persistent and more widespread. the strength of this argument lies in the fact that the annual life history is unequivocally a product of some type of time-limitation favoring an abbreviated life cycle, which is promoted by  selfing  . it is much less plausible to suspect that selection associated with pollinator/mate-limitation has been sufficiently strong and persistent to favor selfing in such a wide range of annual taxa across the many genera and families considered here. we emphasize, therefore, that for annuals the time-limitation hypothesis provides a more parsimonious explanation for the differences in traits between selfers and outcrossers. we consider each of these traits in turn below.

plant height and time to anthesis
taller plants may attract more pollinators and, hence, experience greater outcrossing rates  <cit> . the pollination benefit of being relatively tall, therefore, is presumably experienced only by outcrossers. if, however, selfers have evolved from outcrossers  <cit> , then why should selfers be shorter than their outcrossing ancestors? the relatively small size, including short height of selfers can be predicted as an indirect consequence of selection, from time-limitation, favoring precocious maturation time  <cit>  . in the present study, however, selfers and outcrossers did not differ significantly in age at first flower. andersson  <cit>  found similar results between selfing and outcrossing populations of crepis tectorum. arroyo  <cit> , however, reported that selfing individuals of limnanthes floccosa flowered earlier than the outcrossing l. alba, as predicted by the time-limitation hypothesis. the results for flowering times in the present study may be confounded by the controlled greenhouse environment of constant day-length, temperature and moisture regime. in the field, flowering times may be triggered by environmental cues. l. floccosa, for example, uses soil moisture to trigger the early onset of flowering, thus escaping the detrimental effects of soil desiccation during seed development  <cit> . note also that age at first flower is only a crude estimate of time to reproductive maturity. future studies may employ more detailed measures such as rate of mature flower production.

flower size
one of the most well established trends of predominantly self-fertilizing species is their reduced flower sizes compared with outcrossing species  <cit> . the present results indicate that this trend is also evident even within annuals exclusively. in all but three of the  <dig> pics, selfing annuals had smaller flowers than the outcrossing annuals . outcrossers and selfers had similar flower sizes in the fabaceae and plantaginaceae. in the poaceae, outcrossing annuals had smaller flowers than selfers.

under the time-limitation hypothesis, smaller flowers and selfing may be tradeoffs of selection for precocity , or smaller flowers may be favored by selection because they promote selfing and hence, direct fitness benefits by abbreviating pollination time . also, if selfing evolves from outcrossing , then selection may subsequently favour a reduction in flower size since relatively large flowers are no longer needed to attract pollinators. hence, higher fitness may result if the resources required to construct and support these larger flowers are invested instead in other functions   <cit> .

bud development time
selfers had significantly shorter bud development times in all but one of the independent family contrasts  and all but one of the genus comparisons . results from previous studies, however, are inconsistent. shorter bud development times were found in selfing populations of mimulus guttatus  <cit>  and in clarkia xantiana  <cit> . however, no significant differences in bud growth rates were found between the selfing and outcrossing populations of c. tembloriensis  <cit> . hill, lord and shaw  <cit>  reported that flowers from selfing populations of arenaria uniflora develop over a longer period of time than observed in outcrossing populations. in the field, selfing populations of a. uniflora were also observed to flower at the same time or even later than outcrossing populations  <cit> , suggesting that time-limitation is not currently a strong selection pressure. self-fertilization in a. uniflora may have arisen through reproductive assurance in response to competition for pollinators  <cit> . the evolution of self-fertilizing species from outcrossing progenitors has occurred repeatedly and independently in several lineages  <cit> , each of which may have been associated with different contexts of natural selection vis-à-vis the fitness benefits of selfing.

flower longevity
the families and genera in which selfers had shorter bud development times also had significantly shorter flower longevities . in fact, all of the selfers had flowers that remained open for less than four days , with a large proportion of flowers open for only one day, which is common amongst self-fertilizing species  <cit> . the present data again indicate that this generalization apparently holds true even within annuals exclusively. by having flowers that remain open longer, outcrossers increase the probability of visitation by pollinators and successful cross-pollination  <cit> . this fitness benefit is realized, however, only if there is sufficient time remaining after cross-pollination to complete seed and fruit development before the maternal plant succumbs to density-independent mortality in strongly r-selecting habitats  <cit> . if time is limiting in this context, selection should favor selfing  with no advantage in having long-lived flowers.

it is important to note that our data measure maximum flower longevity, since there were no pollinators in the greenhouse, nor was hand pollination conducted. pollination has been shown to induce floral senescence in numerous species  <cit> . this effect was not tested on any of the study species, which means that our observed flower longevities in outcrossing species may be longer than would normally be seen in the wild. nevertheless, since selfing may have evolved as a method of shortening pollination time, and flower longevity was used as a measure of pollination time, the maximum floral longevity gives an indication of how long outcrossers can delay flower abscission or self-pollination .

seed size
strong r-selection associated with the annual life form presumably favors wide dispersal mechanisms  which may be conferred by small seed sizes  <cit> . the reproductive assurance hypothesis would predict, therefore, that most selfers are annuals because annuals are more likely than perennials to disperse further, or colonize new habitats where conditions are unsuitable for successful outcrossing  and where selfing, therefore, provides reproductive assurance. the present study indicates that even among annuals only, selfers have smaller seeds than outcrossers . future studies are required to test whether smaller-seeded selfing annuals are more likely than their outcrossing annual relatives to disperse further or colonize new habitats and thereby incur potential reproductive assurance benefits of selfing.

an alternative explanation, however, is offered by an extension of the time-limitation hypothesis: strong r-selection favors an acceleration of all stages of the life cycle , including not only earlier reproductive maturity  and a shorter pollination time  , but also a shorter seed and fruit maturation time, which, on a per-seed basis, is facilitated in turn through the production of smaller seeds. andersson  <cit>  found that self-fertilizing individuals of crepis tectorum took an average of  <dig> days for fruit maturation, whereas outcrossing individuals of the same species required  <dig>  days. small seed size may also be simply a trade-off of selection for high fecundity, also favored by strong r-selection  <cit> .

habitat selection and time-limitation
while most selfers are annuals, it is not the case that most annuals are selfers. an unbiased literature survey  <cit>  suggests that roughly half of all annual species are selfers and half are outcrossers. if, however, selfing annuals evolved in habitats with a short window of time for completing the life cycle , then selfing annuals should be significantly more common than expected  within habitats associated with historically regular, early-season disturbances , or in habitats where severe droughts follow quickly after a wet season . hence, we should expect to find more selfers than outcrossers among annual weeds of cultivated habitats and among desert annuals in particular. similarly, for annuals with both selfing and outcrossing ecotypes or races, we should expect selfers  to be more commonly associated with these severely time-limited habitats  <cit> .

while rigorous tests of these predictions have yet to be explored, some preliminary support is available from published surveys. from a representative sample of mediterranean annuals  <cit> , we find a much greater representation of selfers: i.e.  <dig> selfers versus  <dig> outcrossers. selfing and outcrossing desert annuals have been shown to be distributed along a moisture gradient. outcrossing annuals are found generally in the wetter areas and selfers in the more arid zones, as seen in clarkia xantiana  <cit>  and between outcrossing populations of limnanthes alba and its selfing relative l. floccosa  <cit> . since the length of the growing season is limited by the amount of moisture in the soil, selfers have a much narrower window of time to complete their life cycle before desiccation. during a severe drought, seed production in l. alba was reduced by one sixth, whereas the seed set of l. floccosa found in the same area was virtually unaffected by the identical drought  <cit> .

the association between 'weediness' and self-fertilization has also been noted  <cit> . an extensive survey of colonizing herbaceous plants of canada showed that agricultural weeds of row crops and grain fields are almost exclusively annuals, and most of these are self-compatible  <cit> . a published list of the world's worst weeds of agricultural crops  <cit>  includes  <dig> species,  <dig> of which are annuals. based on previous literature, we were able to identify the breeding system for  <dig> of these annuals, and, as predicted, the majority  are selfers.

CONCLUSIONS
botanists have long known that selfing is particularly associated with the annual life cycle in flowering plants  <cit> . the present study shows further that, among annuals exclusively, selfing is particularly associated with shorter plant heights, smaller flowers, shorter bud development time, shorter flower longevity and smaller seed sizes compared with annuals that are outcrossing. also, in spite of the null prediction that selfing and outcrossing annuals should be equally represented if there is no bias associated with time-limitation, we found instead that two of the most time-limited habitats on earth that support flowering plants have a significantly higher percentage of selfers among the resident species that are annuals. because we focused on annual species only, all of these results are explained more parsimoniously by selection associated with time-limitation than by selection associated with pollinator/mate limitation. the role of pollinator/mate-limitation  is likely to be of greater importance in longer-lived polycarpic species , simply because by comparison, there is no convincing basis to argue that selection associated with time-limitation is likely to have been important in species with longer life cycles. we suggest therefore, that most selfers, because most of them are annuals, are likely to have evolved not because of fitness benefits through reproductive assurance associated with selection from pollinator/mate limitation, but rather because of fitness benefits associated with selection from time limitation.

the effect of time-limitation under strong r-selection is to minimize the duration of the life cycle, with selfing favored directly  and/or indirectly . there is no basis for predicting that either mechanism is more probable than the other; both are likely to operate simultaneously and perhaps indistinguishably. indeed, the predicted effects under direct and indirect selection involve the same phenotypic outcome for the same suite of traits . it is particularly significant that the shorter bud development time reported here for selfing annuals is predicted explicitly by the time-limitation hypothesis but not by selection associated with pollinator/mate limitation. although, we cannot of course rule out the possibility that shorter bud development time may be a pleiotropic consequence of the evolution of autonomous selfing through other mechanisms.

designing empirical studies that clearly distinguish between mechanisms involving time-limitation versus pollinator/mate limitation remain a challenge but we anticipate that our results and our discussion of these issues may help to inspire further research along these lines. future studies may be designed to test more directly the role of limited pollination time  by comparing the time required for effective pollination under selfing versus outcrossing for closely related species or ecotypes within natural habitats, taking care of course to control for other aspects of the pollination environment  that might affect time-to-effective pollination.

