BACKGROUND
dna microarrays have become a widely used biotechnology for assessing expression levels of tens of thousands of genes simultaneously in a single experiment  <cit> . whether microarrays are being used for global tissue profiling or for differential expression studies, data normalization is an essential preliminary step before statistical analysis methods can be applied. the purpose of all normalization techniques is to transform the data to eliminate sources of variability stemming from experimental conditions, leaving only biologically relevant differences in gene expression for subsequent analysis. normalization can be divided into two stages, intra-array normalization and inter-array normalization. intra-array normalization deals with variability within a single array caused by factors such as differences in print-tip characteristics, channel differences in two-dye systems, and spatial heterogeneity across the array surface  <cit>  and should be carried out using accepted methods before inter-array normalization is applied. this paper assumes intra-array normalization has been performed and presents an inter-array normalization method for comparison of gene intensity levels between multiple microarrays to deal with variation caused by such factors as differences in rna isolation efficiency, labeling efficiency, hybridization conditions, exposure times, and detection efficiencies.

it is now clear that simple inter-array normalization techniques, such as simple scaling to housekeeping genes or normalizing to a global mean, are not adequate for microarray data  <cit> . housekeeping genes have been found to be more susceptible to modulation than previously thought  <cit> . along with others  <cit> , this paper underscores the potentially serious drawbacks of the global mean and other such methods. recent literature has thus provided a plethora of more sophisticated normalization and analysis techniques as researchers struggle to cope with the task of microarray data analysis, some of which include maximum likelihood analysis  <cit> , centralization  <cit> , principal component analysis  <cit> , analysis of variance  <cit>  and bayesian network analysis  <cit> .

analysis of publicly available large-scale sage gene expression data sets  <cit>  and an intra-phyletic survey of genome wide affymetrix microarray experiments  <cit>  have indicated that the large majority of expressed genes exhibited power-law distributions, while some microarray expression data exhibit a more log-normal distribution  <cit> . our normalization procedure was inspired by the observation that the intensities measured on our microarray system also followed a power law distribution and can therefore be described by a simple mathematical model. zipf's law  <cit>  is a power law function that states that the magnitude of an intensity measurement  is inversely proportional to the rank  of that data point in the data set,

y∝rc     

where c is a coefficient close to - <dig>  our microarray data can be classified as a generalized form of zipf's law because the coefficient  is not always close to - <dig> and, in fact, varies between individual microarrays, making simple linear normalization procedures, such as global normalization to the same mean, inappropriate. however, the normalization procedure proposed here demonstrates that by taking zipf's law into account, it is possible to apply a simple intra-array normalization procedure such that all filters have the same coefficient c and proportionality.

we demonstrate the zipf's law based normalization technique on microarray data sets representing both single channel and two channel technologies. in the single channel category, we produced two radio-labeled, nylon membrane based cdna data sets, one commercial and one generated "in-house". both systems contain a selection of genes chosen without regard to functional or pathway considerations, which make them especially appropriate for normalization using zipf's law. these data sets were also normalized to a global mean   <cit> , and the quantile normalization method  <cit> . in addition we produced a two channel, fluorescently labeled, glass slide, oligo-based microarray data set generated 'in-house'. this microarray can be classified as a 'boutique' microarray because it consists of a selection of genes involved in apoptosis. this data set was normalized with a variant of the zipf's law normalization method that uses a subset of the distribution as a proxy for normalizing the entire microarray. a comparison was then conducted against a variant of the loess normalization method that uses an a priori selection of 'housekeeping' genes as a proxy for normalization.

the finding that our microarray data distributions conform to a power law distribution agrees with predictions based on genome wide gene expression studies  <cit> , however hoyle, et. al.  <cit>  observed that microarray distributions were log normally distributed with possible power law tails. to investigate this discrepancy, and to verify that our normalization technique could be useful in the normalization of data sets from other microarray systems, we also surveyed publicly available data sets from the ncbi gene expression omnibus  <cit> .

the two assumptions upon which the normalization method are based are the same as those used in other normalization methods  <cit> , namely that in comparisons between similar tissues or cell lines under different experimental conditions i) most genes are not, or only moderately, regulated, and ii) approximately equal numbers of genes are up regulated as down regulated. systems which conform to these two assumptions will be referred to as 'well-behaved' in this paper. while these assumptions probably hold for microarrays derived from a diverse sampling of genes, for example an est library survey, they may not hold for microarrays containing genes specifically selected based on function or pathway  as it is likely that most genes will be affected by the experimental treatments. one way to circumvent the restrictions resulting from these assumptions is to use a subset of data, or proxy, from the boutique array data set which fulfils the 'well-behaved' criteria. in developing a boutique microarray normalization technique, wilson et. al.  <cit>  have devised a method for selecting a subset of genes within a microarray data set that have low variation between arrays and are well representative of the spectrum of intensities measured on the microarray. they term this a priori selected subset 'housekeeping' genes, however it should not be confused with the a posteriori set of genes typically envisioned when the term is used. another possible proxy that could meet the 'well-behaved' criteria are control spots which are included on the microarray during it's manufacture. we tested our normalization method on data from a two channel boutique microarray experiment using two types of control spots as proxies for normalization . the zipf's law normalization methods were then compared with the variant of the loess method developed by wilson et. al.  <cit>  using housekeeping genes.

RESULTS
verifying zipf's law
before applying the described normalization method, the adherence of the reference curve  to zipf's law was verified. the most common method of verifying conformity to zipf's law is a linear regression on the loge-loge transformed data set. our regression showed a good fit, with a correlation coefficient of - <dig>  and a slope of - <dig>  for microarrays representing human colon , a correlation coefficient of - <dig>  and a slope of - <dig>  for rat brain microarrays , and a correlation coefficient of - <dig>  and a slope of - <dig>  for the mouse apoptosis microarrays . it should be noted that while the low ranking intensities may show a marked deviation from the regression line, this data typically accounts for a very small proportion of the total data and does not have a large affect on the regression curves.

normalization results – single channel microarrays
a comparison of the zipf's law normalization method to the simple method of setting all arrays to a global mean  and to the quantile method was conducted on the single channel microarray data sets. five human unigene microarrays from the panel of thirty-two microarrays used in the sigmoidal colon experiments were selected to represent the greatest variability in pre-normalized data observed in the experiment . normalization to a global mean  yielded data sets that displayed a higher variability in the coefficient c of the zipf's power function  than that observed after normalization by the zipf's law method  or the quantile method . the zipf's method showed the lowest variation in the zipf's exponent and had the lowest spread of the data around the ln vs. ln line. results of an identical loge intensity versus loge rank plot comparison in clontech rat microarrays showed little difference between the quantile and zipf's methods . however it should be mentioned that this method of data plotting provides one view of the data which is especially favorable to the zipf's law normalization method. next we examine the results of the ma-plots, a technique that is especially favorable to the quantile normalization method.

in order to access the effectiveness of the normalization method, pairwise comparisons using ma-plots   <cit>  were carried out on the raw data, and data normalized with the global mean method, quantile normalization and zipf's law on both data set a & b . with the raw data, the distribution of log-intensity ratios is not centered around zero which is as expected in an un-normalized data set. there is a noticeable intensity dependent effect, sometimes described as a 'banana' curve, which is characteristic of many microarray data sets. normalization with the global mean method results in a shift of the center of the log-intensity ratio distribution closer to zero, one important criterion for well normalized data, however, especially in the low log mean range, the bulk of the data points still deviate appreciably from zero. the intensity dependent effect is evident, with the low intensity end of the loess fit curving away from the zero axis. the intensity dependent effect is removed using the quantile method. the log intensity ratios of the data distributions normalized using zipf's law are well centered around zero, but the intensity dependent effect is still apparent. in this case however, the bulk of the data lies very close to zero on the log-ratio scale.  this is due to the fact that zipf's law normalization not only shifts the data distribution on the log ratio scale, but also rotates the whole distribution in log-ratio log-intensity space.

the kolmogorov-smirnov test is often used to determine whether data distributions differ significantly and provides a test statistic that measures the proportion of overlap between distributions which ranges from  <dig>  to  <dig>   <cit> . mean kolmogorov-smirnov values  showed the expected trend, with the high values for raw, unnormalized data decreasing when global median normalization was applied, decreasing again after zipf's law normalization, and reaching zero for both data sets under quantile normalization. it should be noted that the kolmogorov-smirnov test statistic will always be zero after quantile normalization because this method forces the data distributions of all microarrays to be identical.

normalization results – two channel boutique microarray
plots of loge intensity versus loge rank fitted with linear regressions show that the zipf's law normalization based on internal controls  and on selected housekeeping genes  have relatively similar coefficients c according to zipf's power function  as evidenced by the similarity in slopes of the regression lines. loess normalization using selected housekeeping genes  showed slightly more variation in c coefficients. the unnormalized raw data is also depicted  along with two other normalization results, the loess method  and the quantile method . these are provided for reference only. neither method can be validly applied to boutique arrays because both rely on the 'well-behaved' genes assumption.

it should be noted that much of the variation in c coefficients under the various normalization regimes is due to one channel  on one microarray which had low median intensity and high variance due to low labelling efficiency . when normalized with the loess techniques  the second channel  on this array is adjusted to have a similar median intensity and variance, possibly skewing the results in favour of the zipf's normalization techniques. to make the normalization method comparison unbiased, we eliminated this array from the analysis . the zipf's normalization based on internal controls  showed the lowest variation in c coefficients, the methods based on selected housekeeping genes  performed approximately equally well. here again, raw , quantile normalized , and loess normalized  plots are provided for reference only.

we generated ma plots for each of the normalization methods we compared . typically, ma plots are produced from data from each channel of a single microarray. in addition to these 'within-array' plots , we also examined 'between-array' plots to evaluate the potential of the normalization methods to allow us to perform across array comparisons. the zipf's using internal controls was slightly more well centered around the zero log ratio axis than the methods using selected housekeeping genes, especially in between-array plots. the raw and loess normalized plots are provided for reference only.

finally, to quantify the differences between distributions after normalization, pairwise kolmogorov-smirnov values were computed for both the complete boutique array data set  and after eliminating the array which contained a low median intensity and high variance due to low labelling efficiency . in addition to computing the kolmogorov-smirnov values for all possible between-array pairwise combinations, we also summarized just the within-array pairwise comparisons . of the normalization methods which can be applied to boutique microarrays, the zipf's method using internal controls produced the most similar data distributions when all possible between-array comparisons are taken into consideration. when only within-array comparisons are considered, the zipf's method using internal controls was better after the low labelling efficiency array was eliminated. the zipf's method using selected housekeeping genes did not perform as well as the other methods in within-array comparisons, and was the middle performer when all possible between-array comparisons were computed. kolmogorov-smirnov values were computed from the global mean, zipf's general, quantile, and loess normalization methods and are provided for reference only.

microarray platform comparison
in a survey of seventeen microarray data sets, hoyle et. al.  <cit>  reported that microarray data follow a log-normal distribution with power-law tails. the three data sets presented in this paper exhibited distinct power-law distributions . to ascertain whether the data sets we used were unusual, we surveyed nine additional data sets  to determine their conformity to zipf's law and the log-normal distribution respectively. the microarray data sets fell into two broad categories, power law distributions  and log normal distributions . of the six power law data sets, two  clearly followed zipf's law distributions. the remaining four , while still power-law distributed, showing noticeable deviations from the distribution at the lower rank  portion of the distribution. of the platforms that where recognizably log normal in distribution, two fluorescent dye labeled, oligo-based affymetrics platforms  followed the distribution most closely and two dye labeled, cdna systems  were perceptibly log normal. the two sage experiments  which were included for comparison purposes, exhibited zipf's law distributions. coefficients of determination  of the log mean intensity vs. log rank are a measure of conformation to a power-law distribution and ranged from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for microarray data sets,  <dig>  and  <dig>  for the sage experiments .

discussion
zipf's law is based on observations made by linguist george kingsley zipf that the frequency of word occurrences in natural languages is proportional to the negative power of the rank order of the word. beside the original findings in natural languages  <cit> , zipf's law has been found to apply to a plethora of natural phenomena, from the populations of cities to the impact factors of scientific journals as well as a variety of biological data, of which a review made available by wentian li  <cit>  is an excellent online resource. it is important to point out, that being a phenomenological principle, zipf's law does not imply that there is a universal underlying physical process at work. however, in much the same way that the gaussian-normal distribution occurs naturally in data and can be used to statistically test or otherwise manipulate the data, the fact that microarray data conforms to zipf's law can be adapted for the purpose of microarray normalization.

zipf's law is a power law function that states that the magnitude of an intensity measurement is inversely proportional to the rank of that data point in the data set, where c is a coefficient close to - <dig>  ranking is a method common in statistics, which has previously been used to analyze microarray data. hoyle el. al.  <cit>  used ranking as a method for evaluating microarray data and proposed the use of several statistics including χ <dig> to quantify the agreement of the distribution to benford's law  <cit> , and σ <dig> as a quality control measure to detect such factors as low signal to background ratio, or mrna probes extracted from mixed cell types. ranking also figured prominently in the evaluation of a survey of inter-array normalization methods  <cit>  where the statistics 'absolute rank deviation' and 'relative rank deviation' were used to select the method that produces the most 'well-normalized' data. the normalization procedure described in this paper is the first to combine these two ideas, namely that ranking can be used to judge the effectiveness of a normalization method, and that microarray data conforms to zipf's law. we evolved these ideas into a novel and easily applicable normalization method and compared this method with existing methods to eliminate non-biological variation from microarray data sets.

in order to implement an appropriate data normalization technique, it is important to know the distribution of a given data set. several publications have examined the data distributions that typically result from microarray experiments. in a survey of seventeen microarray data sets, sixteen of which were fluorescent dye labeled, hoyle et. al.  <cit>  reported that microarray data were found to have a log normal distributions with power law tails. more recent publications have reported that the abundance of expressed genes exhibit power-law distributions  <cit> . results from our own data sets and a subsequent survey of publicly available data sets from both radioactively and fluorescently labeled platforms suggest that both types of distributions can be manifested in microarray data.

comparisons between the zipf's law and quantile normalization methods using ma plots showed that the quantile method effectively removes intensity dependant effects, sometimes referred to as 'banana' curves, from microarray data sets, while the zipf's law method has no effect on the curved nature of the intensity dependent effect. this is not altogether unexpected as the quantile method was specifically designed to remove such effects. while the zipf's method does not remove the curve from the intensity dependent effect, it does minimize negative consequences by rotating the data distribution such that the maximal number of data points lie on the zero of the log ratio axis. in this respect, the zipf's law normalization technique can be considered inferior to the quantile method, however, it may still be a useful tool where the quantile method cannot be applied.

one such case, in which quantile normalization is inappropriate, is with so called 'boutique' microarrays where the genes spotted on the array represent a selected set of genes, for example from a specific pathway or those involved with a particular biological process or disease state. in such systems, most genes are expected to be differentially regulated when control and experimental samples are compared and the expected data distribution of control samples may be significantly different than that of experimental samples . the quantile normalization method would effectively remove this difference by replacing the data distribution of each microarray with the mean distribution of all arrays. in contrast, the principle of normalization according to zipf's law can also apply to arrays of this type if a group of control spots are included on the microarray. these control spots could be an external reference probe which hybridises to a concentration gradient of matching spots on the array, or internal positive  and negative  control spots on the microarray, or an a priori selected set of housekeeping genes using a method such as that described by wilson et. al.  <cit>  or schadt et. al.  <cit> . a linear model can be fitted to the control spots alone, and the normalization procedure can then be applied using the control spots as a proxy for the entire data distribution. the critical assumption in using control spots in normalization is establishing their relationship to the experimental spots.

the results of our comparison between methods which are designed to normalize boutique microarray data show that zipf's law normalization using internal control spots results in a relatively well normalized data set when compared to zipf's law normalization using selected housekeeping genes and the modified loess method using selected housekeeping genes. in addition, the zipf's law method produced data distributions which are more similar between arrays allowing for between-array comparisons which are advantageous in terms of both cost, because of the reduced number of microarrays that need to be run, and, statistical power, by allowing for greater numbers , experimental design permitting.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we examined the applicability of using zipf's law as the basis for a novel normalization technique, which is applicable to both one channel microarray data and two channel microarrays. this method is shown to out-perform such methods as global normalization to the mean but would appear to be inferior to quantile normalization. the quantile method was superior to zipf's law in removing intensity dependent effects commonly seen in microarray data. while the latter method cannot be applied to boutique arrays, we show that the zipf's normalization method used with internal positive and negative controls or with selected housekeeping genes normalizes boutique arrays as well as currently existing methods. additionally, data normalized with the zipf's method using internal control spots seems more amenable to between-array gene intensity comparisons when compared to other methods.

