BACKGROUND
transcription activator-like effectors , a group of bacterial plant pathogen proteins, have recently emerged as new engineerable scaffold for production of engineered dna binding domains with chosen specificities . the targeting specificity of this family of proteins is driven by a central core composed of multiple repeated units. these  <dig> to  <dig> amino acids repeated units are nearly identical to one another except for two polymorphic amino acids called rvds , responsible for the specific recognition of a unique nucleotide  <cit> . in addition to this central core domain, the n-terminal domain of tale has been reported to play a key role in tales specificity and binding mechanism. this domain displays a strong specificity bias toward a thymine nucleotide, the so called “t0”, systematically located at the 5’end of the tale target  <cit> . these different biochemical features were confirmed by the high resolution structure of tale/dna complexes, illustrating how the tale protein wraps around its dna target, from the 5’ t <dig> to the 3’ last nucleotide, in an n- to c-terminal orientation  <cit> . the particular dna binding properties of tale dna binding domain, their exquisite specificity as well as their modularity have been used to develop engineered tale nucleases named talen with tailored dna specificity. the original talen architecture developed by christian et al.  <cit> , consisted of a custom tale dna binding domain linked to the n-terminal end of the non-specific foki nuclease domain . because foki needs to dimerize to catalyze a double strand break , talen work by pairs. each pair unit binds in a tail to tail  orientation to adjacent binding sites, starting by a 5’ t <dig> and respectively located on the sense and antisense strand of the dna. such symmetrical architecture, originally designed to respect , the natural organization of the endonuclease and dna binding domains of foki , the orientation of tale dna binding and , the requirement of a t <dig>  led to an incredibly robust tale-based nuclease platform. considered as the gold standard talen architecture, it has been extensively optimized and used for different gene editing applications  <cit> . furthermore, the versatility of the tale scaffold was demonstrated by the accumulation of studies reporting fusion  of the tale core to various catalytic domains  <cit> . in particular, we  <cit>  and others  <cit>  have reported the development of tale-based nuclease with an n-terminal fusion foki catalytic domain.

in this study, we further explored and exploited the versatility of the tale scaffold to develop a novel asymmetrical hybrid tale and foki-based nuclease architectures, the tail to head  architecture referred herein as tth. we demonstrated the potential of this architecture to generate targeted mutagenesis at different endogenous loci in mammalian cells. in contrast to the conventional talen architecture, the tth architecture only required one dna strand of a given locus to efficiently bind and process it. thus, our work presents a new advance in the development of tale nucleases and further extends their targeting possibilities.

RESULTS
design and evaluation of the head to head  symmetrical architecture in a yeast ssa assay
to investigate the versatility of the tale scaffold and generate alternative nuclease architectures, we used a yeast-based nuclease activity assay  <cit> . this assay was previously demonstrated to be suitable to assess the intrinsic nuclease activity of tale nuclease without being biased by epigenetic modifications or chromatin context. in addition, we have previously found a good correlation between data obtained with the yeast ssa assay, an extrachromosomal ssa assay in cho-k <dig> and chromosomal disruption experiments in cho-ki  <cit> . we thus believed that the yeast model system could serve as an appropriate and representative assay to compare characteristics of different nuclease architectures. this assay relies on two yeast strains, one expressing the nuclease of interest and the other the target sequence flanked by overlapping truncated lacz genes . after mating of the two strains, the restoration, upon target cleavage, of the lacz marker though the ssa pathway of recombination recontitute a functional lacz gene. the resulting β-galactosidase can further be quantified and related to the nuclease efficiency. the experimental conditions were optimized to avoid saturation of the signal, thus allowing a direct comparison on the whole range of activities.

in order to evaluate alternative configurations to the standard ttt talen , we designed a construction harboring a foki catalytic domain fused to the n-terminal domain of a tale , leading to the symmetrical head-to-head nuclease architecture referred herein as hth . throughout this study we used the avirulence protein avrbs <dig> as scaffold . the first step for developing the alternative hth and tth architectures was to re-engineer a fusion protein to create an efficient foki::tale scaffold. early works performed on tale protein showed that the first  <dig> amino acids of the n-terminal domain could be deleted  without affecting the protein activity  <cit> . we used an approach previously described to create an active i-tevi based tale nuclease  <cit>  and fused the foki catalytic domain  to the n-terminal end of the Δ <dig> tale variant via a  <dig> aminoacids  flexible linker. in addition, we removed most of the c-terminal end of the tale domain  to minimize the global size of the final protein. to allow the specific targeting of the desired dna sequences, we used the canonical rvd/nucleotide association code   <cit> .

a rvd array targeting an  <dig> base pairs sequence of interest  was cloned into the foki::tale backbone. the nuclease activity of the resulting construction was tested in yeast using the extrachromosomal single strand annealing  assay  and homodimeric dna targets containing respectively two identical recognition sequences juxtaposed with the 5’ ends proximal . to determine the optimal distance for cleavage activity between the two recognition domains, a series of homodimeric targets were designed with spacers ranging from  <dig> to 35 bp . furthermore, we also prepared the classical ttt talen targeting the same dna sequence to serve as a reference for the currently used architecture . in this study, we used a + c <dig>  talen scaffold as, in our hands, this truncation presented a good balance to obtain a high activity associated with a good specificity . we additionally designed series of homodimeric targets containing respectively two identical recognition sequences juxtaposed with the 3’ ends proximal  with the same spacing described above. the results obtained from this ssa assay showed that, despite not preserving the natural n-terminus  to c-terminus  layout of the wild-type foki, similar levels of activity for both architectures can be obtained . interestingly, one major difference between the two configurations was the spacing pattern reached by the hth architecture, with a much narrower window of cleaved spacers compared to the ones obtained for the classical architecture .

design and evaluation of the tail to head  asymmetrical architecture in a yeast ssa assay
having demonstrated that the foki::tale scaffold display a high nuclease activity in a symmetrical hth configuration, we next evaluated its ability to pair up with the tale::foki fusion scaffold and produce an active nuclease . the nuclease activity of the resulting asymmetric tail-to-head architecture, referred herein as tth, was assessed in yeast on a collection of hybrid asymmetric targets. these targets contained two different recognition sequences juxtaposed with the 3′-5′ ends proximal and separated by a dna spacer ranging from  <dig> to 35 bp . the yeast ssa assay results showed activity levels comparable to the ones observed for ttt and hth architectures, with two distinct windows of cleaved dna spacers . this result suggested an optimal cleavage every one helix turn of dna. interestingly, the optimal cleavage distance of tth architecture was 5 bp shorter than the one obtained for hth architecture .

nuclease activities of tth asymmetrical architecture in mammalian cells and molecular characterization of nuclease-induced events
once the activity of the new tth architecture was demonstrated in yeast, we next investigated its activity in mammalian cells. two loci of interest for potential therapeutic applications, previously chosen to investigate other tailored-made nucleases  <cit> , dmd  and rag <dig> j recombination-activating protein 1), were selected in the human genome and an additional locus of interest for bioproduction, the fucosyltransferase  <dig>  gene, was chosen in the chinese hamster genome.

because the nuclease activity of hth architecture towards endogenous loci had never been reported, we also characterized this architecture in the following experiments. targets were selected for both nuclease architectures according to the spacer profile  determined previously with the yeast ssa assay . the nucleases were then assembled using the optimal scaffolds containing an additional n-terminal sv <dig> nuclear localization sequence to improve their in vivo nuclear targeting . these nucleases were then assayed for their ability to promote targeted insertions or deletions of nucleotides  via error prone non-homologous end joining , in the adequate cell-line .

the number of unique events  is indicated in brackets. control  indicates a tranfection with an empty vector plasmid.

three days post transfection, genomic dnas were recovered and amplified by locus specific pcrs . pcr amplicons were then analyzed by deep sequencing to determine the amount of indels promoted by the different nucleases at their respective target site. deep sequencing analysis demonstrated that two out of the three hth nucleases displayed significant levels of targeted mutagenesis . for the tth conformation, all three nucleases showed activity on their respective target sequence, with indel frequencies ranging from  <dig> to 9% . however, the level of targeted mutagenesis generated by these two architectures  was lower than that reported for the classical ttt in two large scale studies   <cit> .

we next compared the nhej-dependent molecular events promoted by the nuclease activity of the two different architectures versus the classical ttt. toward this goal, we generated  <dig> ttt talen, performed targeted mutagenesis experiments in 293h cells and recovered the resulting deep-sequencing dataset . we first compared the deletion length induced by the three different architectures and found similar patterns  with a large proportion of deletions smaller than 20 bp , a feature previously described for the conventional ttt architecture  <cit> . however the important error bars obtained for some deletion sizes indicated a variability of dna repair outcomes from one locus to another. such variability could be due to several parameters including the rvd composition  and the presence of micro-homologies in the targeted locus.

we then compared the position of mutagenic events within the spacer of each architecture target. considering the fact that the optimal distance of cleavage was different for the two ttt and hth symmetrical architectures, we hypothesized that the position of mutagenic events within the target spacer of tth asymmetrical architecture would be eccentric. interestingly, a statistical analysis of the deletion profiles revealed that its activity led to a significant shift of the deletion pattern  towards the tale::foki binding site . due to their symmetrical configuration, the ttt and hth architectures were expected to cleave right in the middle of their optimal target  and thus,  <dig> to 8 bp and  <dig> to 13 bp away from the 3’ end of their respective foki::tale and tale::foki binding sites. however, due to its asymmetrical configuration, the tth architecture was rather expected to cleave  <dig> to 3 bp away from the middle of its optimal target. the consistency between our experimental data and theoretical expectations indicated that the position of cleavage catalyzed by the tth nuclease is constrained by its foki::tale scaffold component.

discussion
in this paper, we explored the versatility of the tale scaffold and exploited it to generate a novel asymmetric foki-based tale nuclease architecture. this architecture called tth tale nuclease consisted of the asymmetrical association of tale::foki and foki::tale scaffolds , two different engineered tale dna binding domains fused to the n- and c-terminal ends of foki nuclease domain. its nuclease activity was characterized in yeast toward extrachromosomal surrogate targets as well as in mammalian cells at different endogenous loci. our results showed that this architecture was active in yeast and further allowed to promote targeted mutagenesis at multiple endogenous loci in mammalian cells. importantly, the tth architecture only required one dna strand of a given locus to efficiently bind and process it. such novel configuration thus extends the range of tale nucleases applications.

today, the conventional tale nuclease architecture used by most investigators results from the symmetrical association of two tale::foki scaffolds . to be active as nuclease entity, this scaffolds need to bind in a tail to tail  orientation to adjacent binding sites bearing a t <dig> at their 5’ ends and located on the reverse and forward strand of the locus to process. although highly efficient, such architecture is unable to process loci devoided of thymidine residues either on one or two strands. to overcome such requirement for t <dig> and at the same time, to extend the range of tale-based applications, two different groups employed rational design and directed evolution to modify the tale n-terminal domain, a region reported to play a key role in the t <dig> specificity of tale  <cit> . in another study, such requirement for t <dig> was reported to be overcome by using a new modular base-per-base binding domains  scaffold from burkholderia rhizoxinica <cit> .relaxing the t <dig> specificity of tale binding domain might not be the only strategy to extend the range of tale-based applications. alternative approaches, exploiting the versatility of the tale scaffold, could also be considered to abrogate the requirement of two t <dig> located on adjacent and anti-parallel tale binding sites while still delivering efficient tale nuclease activity. to develop such alternative approach, we first ruled out altering the t <dig> specificity of the tale n-terminal domain, considering that keeping this binding anchor at the 5’ end of each tale dna binding domain would be beneficial for the specificity and safety of the resulting designer nuclease. we thus sought to set up a novel dimeric tale nuclease architecture that would require two adjacent tale binding sites located on only one strand of the locus of interest. because of the oriented fashion of tale domain binding and the requirement for foki dimerization, such architecture named tth, required the asymmetrical association of two different tale scaffolds, the tale::foki and the foki::tale in a tail to head orientation .

we developed and tested combinations of the foki::tale and tale::foki scaffolds and found that the symmetrical hth and ttt architectures as well as the asymmetrical tth architecture could efficiently catalyze targeted dsbs in a yeast-based nuclease assay. although the different architectures displayed similar activity levels, they showed marked differences regarding the properties of their targets. interestingly, the narrower spacer range cleaved by the two new hth and tth architectures could represent an advantage by reducing the number of potential off-site targets in a genome of interest. indeed, off-site targets are usually determined as sequences  diverging from the intended target site by a few base pairs. in addition, to be considered as a potential off-site target, the two binding sites have to be separated by a spacer compatible with a nuclease activity. based on the results presented in this study ,  <dig> different spacers have to be taken in account for the “classical” ttt architecture. regarding the hth and tth architectures only  <dig> or  <dig> different spacer lengths need to be considered respectively . these differences resulted in an approximate  <dig> and  <dig> fold higher numbers of potential off-site targets for the ttt compared to the hth and tth architectures respectively. in addition, we believed that the global nuclease activity and specificity could still be improved by optimizing the flexibility and/or rigidity of the aminoacid linker between the foki and tale domain. indeed, mercer and colleagues have recently shown that fusion of recombinase catalytic domain to alternative truncations of tale n-terminal domain  could enhance the efficiency of their chimeric tale recombinase system  <cit> .

as the levels of activities obtained in the yeast ssa assay were fully satisfactory, we evaluated the performance of the two hth and tth architectures in a chromosomal context. we thus generated three pairs of nucleases for both architectures following the guidelines  obtained previously in yeast, to target a total of six loci in two mammalian cell types . the efficiency of these nucleases to induce dsb events was monitored 3 days post transfection by measuring indels generated by nhej at their cleavage sites. we cannot exclude that variation in nuclease activity is dependent on multiple parameters and is thus not exclusively resulting from the difference in architecture. indeed, the rvd composition of the nuclease, the targeted dna sequence and the presence of micro-homologies within the targeted loci are likely to influence several biochemical parameters such as overall dna binding, cleavage efficiency and global dna repair outcome. nevertheless, we found that both architectures induced a substantial level of targeted mutagenesis . additionally, the molecular characterization of deletion events allowed us to observe that the dsb occurred in the middle of the spacer region for the ttt and hth architecture while being shifted toward the tale::foki scaffold binding site of the new tth architecture.

while tth architecture does not significantly increase the number of targetable loci, it could be endowed with a new technological advantage for the field of gene therapy. indeed, when considering the human chromosome  <dig> as a model, and using standard criteria for the array  and spacer  length  <cit> , we estimated that the classical ttt architecture could target about  <dig> % of this chromosome. the remaining  <dig> % comprised a total of  <dig> regions of  <dig> to 1983 bp  that were devoided of any ttt nuclease target. we noted that more than half of these sequences could be potentially targeted using the tth configuration  and that an important proportion of these sequences was composed of highly repetitive motives. expansion of triplets or quadruplets is commonly linked to several genetic disorders and different neurological syndromes  <cit> . their expansion induces aberrant protein expressions and subsequent aggregation, as well as formation and persistence of rna:dna hybrids responsible for genomic instability and inhibition of replication. processing such pathogenic sequences represents important therapeutic potentials to cure their related genetic disease and, in that matter, the advantages of the new tth architecture are twofold with respect to conventional talen architecture. first, it could process and thus stimulate contraction of expanded sequences harboring thymidine on one unique strand . second, through the well known ability of foki to cleave dna:rna hybrids along with the capacity of tale domain to interact with such molecule  <cit> , it could also reduce the deleterious downstream effects of dna:rna duplex via their targeted processing. noteworthy, such approach could also be used in general to process dna:rna hybrids.

finally, besides its potential for specific gene therapy application, the tth architecture could be beneficial for the field of genome editing by allowing for more precise positioning of tale nuclease without affecting their t <dig> specificity, one of the hallmark of their dna specificity.

CONCLUSIONS
overall, although a larger dataset would be desirable, our results demonstrate that the level of genome modifications that can be obtained in mammalian cells with the new tth architecture is compatible with most, if not all, genome editing applications. an additional benefit of this particular asymmetrical architecture is the availability of both n- and c-termini that can also expand the “cargo” possibility of tale-based nucleases. we believe that this particular tth architecture will further expand the possibilities of the tale-based nuclease technology for targeting sequences with biased nucleotide composition  or dna-rna hybrids.

