BACKGROUND
primordial germ cells  are the embryonic precursors of gametes. in most model systems, pgcs are migratory and navigate through or around diverse tissues in order to find the site of the developing gonads. pgc migration shares conserved features in many species indicating the process arose in a common ancestor. in vertebrates, however, the majority of factors implicated in pgc guidance are either secreted or membrane bound protein growth factors ; whereas, evidence in drosophila points to a lipid-based guidance system  <cit> . a recent study bridged the gap by demonstrating that zebrafish pgcs, like drosophila pgcs, require 3-hydroxy-3-methylglutaryl-coenzyme a reductase  for normal migration  <cit> .

hmgcr is the rate limiting enzyme in isoprenoid and cholesterol biosynthesis. in flies, hmgcr was shown to act within the somatic gonadal precursors to control release of a secreted pgc attractant  <cit> . drosophila lack enzymes required downstream of hmgcr for cholesterol synthesis indicating that isoprenoids are the relevant downstream effectors  <cit> . in support of this, santos and lehmann demonstrated that mutations in the geranylgeranyl transferase  <dig> β subunit cause pgc migration defects. it has been proposed that geranylgeranylation of small gtpase in the ras, rac, or rho families regulate secretion of hedgehog  <cit>  or other putative drosophila pgc attractants  <cit> . in zebrafish, evidence also points to a role for hmgcr and isoprenoids in pgc migration  <cit> . inhibition of hmgcr or geranylgeranyl transferase i cause pgc migration defects. however, in this system it remains unclear whether hmgcr is required in pgcs themselves or within the soma. additionally, zebrafish unlike flies are capable of de novo cholesterol synthesis and this branch of the pathway was not carefully evaluated.

cholesterol plays a vital role during vertebrate development. mutations in genes required for cholesterol biosynthesis cause severe developmental defects. loss of hmgcr  <cit>  or squalene synthase  <cit>  result in early embryonic lethality in mouse models. mutations in 3b-hydroxysterol-Δ <dig> reductase  or lathosterol 5-desaturase  cause skeletal, neural, and in some cases urogenital defects in humans  <cit>  and in mice  <cit> . additionally, mutations in genes required for cholesterol transport are also associated with embryonic lethality or patterning defects  <cit> .

several models have been evoked in order to explain the role of cholesterol during organogenesis. first, cholesterol is the precursor of steroid hormones, glucocorticoids, and oxysterols, all compounds known to mediate cell-cell signaling via activation of nuclear hormone receptors. second, cholesterol directly regulates cell-cell signalling by controlling the diffusion  <cit>  or reception  <cit>  of members of the hedgehog growth factor family. finally, cholesterol is a key structural component of the plasma membrane. cholesterol controls membrane fluidity and modulates membrane protein interactions. membrane cholesterol has been shown to influence the activity of growth factor receptors and cell-adhesion molecules by clustering these cell surface proteins into lipid rafts  <cit> . of particular note, lipid rafts have been shown to affect epidermal growth factor-induced chemotaxis  <cit>  and migration on fibronectin  <cit>  in cell culture. this suggests that cholesterol levels might also alter cell migration in vivo.

considering the roles of cholesterol in cell-cell signalling and cell migration, we thought it imperative to test whether this branch of the hmgcr pathway is required for germ cell development in a vertebrate model. in mice, pgcs migrate from the gut to the genital ridges between embryonic day  <dig>   and e <dig> . steroid hormones and hedgehog growth factors are unlikely to play a role in this process. enzymes required to convert cholesterol into steroid hormones are not expressed in the gonads until e <dig>   <cit> . likewise, the three vertebrate members of the hedgehog growth factor family are not expressed in the right place or time to play a role in pgc guidance in this system  <cit> . however, changes in cholesterol could very well impact the ability of pgcs to respond to proposed chemoattractants such as sdf <dig>  <cit>  or kitl  <cit> .

to examine the role of cholesterol in pgc migration, we first measured cholesterol in living tissue dissected from e <dig>  embryos and were surprised to find that cholesterol was enriched in the genital ridges relative to the surrounding tissue. this asymmetric distribution appears to be maintained via selective uptake of cholesterol by cells within the genital ridges. we further demonstrate that inhibition of hmgcr reduced total cholesterol and impaired germ cell survival and migration in culture. these defects were rescued by co-addition of geranylgeraniol and cholesterol indicating that both compounds are required. to test if cholesterol biosynthesis is necessary for pgc migration in vivo, we examine the number and distribution of pgcs in embryos lacking dhcr <dig> or sc5d . pgcs were normally distributed in both lines, but cholesterol levels are only modestly affected in these embryos  <cit> . we conclude that cholesterol is required for pgc migration but that this requirement can be met by uptake of cholesterol from maternal sources. we propose that the asymmetric accumulation of cholesterol within the genital ridges controls signaling interactions required for pgcs to colonize the gonads.

RESULTS
cholesterol is elevated in the genital ridges
drosophila hmgcr mrna is elevated in somatic gonadal precursors  <cit>  supporting the model that hmgcr acts non-cell autonomously to guide pgc migration. however, zebrafish hmgcr <dig> is uniformly expressed in cleavage stage and gastrulating embryos, raising the possibility that hmgcr has both non-autonomous and autonomous effects  <cit> . like in zebrafish, mouse hmgcr is ubiquitously expressed in e <dig>  embryos based on in situ hybridization  <cit> . however, in situs are not sensitive enough to reveal modest changes in gene expression. as a more sensitive technique, quantitative rt-pcr was used to compare hmgcr mrna levels within the genital ridge and non-ridge tissue during pgc migration  . mouse hmgcr was uniformly expressed at this stage confirming the previous in situ hybridization results.

hmgcr activity is controlled by transcriptional and post-transcriptional mechanisms. for example, cholesterol and its oxysterol derivatives feedback and inhibit hmgcr expression at the transcriptional level  <cit> , while both steroids and isoprenoids inhibit hmgcr activity by inducing degradation of the hmgcr protein  <cit> . therefore, the absolute amount of hmgcr mrna is unlikely to be an accurate indicator of the activity of the pathway. the distribution of cholesterol was examined to provide an indirect measure of hmgcr pathway activity . in initial experiments, filipin staining  <cit>  was used to map the distribution of cholesterol during pgc migration . filipin is a naturally fluorescent antibiotic that binds unesterified cholesterol. filipin staining was uniform at e <dig> ; however we were concerned that fixation and processing  might have caused diffusion of cholesterol in the samples. to avoid processing artifacts, we took advantage of both an electrochemical method developed to measure plasma membrane cholesterol levels in living cells  <cit>  as well as time of flight secondary ion mass spectrometry   <cit>  . a cholesterol oxidase tipped bioprobe was used to compare surface cholesterol levels within the genital ridge and midline tissues . current generated by the probe is proportional to the cholesterol level at the contact site of the probe which has a tip diameter of  <dig> μm. the bioprobe detected a moderate, but consistent elevation of cholesterol within the genital ridge relative to the midline . tof-sims analysis performed on tissue slices that were snap frozen immediately after dissection did not detect a consistent elevation of cholesterol in the ridges . however, accumulation of cholesterol in the genital ridges was detected when the embryonic tissue slice was incubated for  <dig> minutes in soluble cholesterol prior to freezing . this suggests that cells within the genital ridges accumulate high levels of cholesterol via uptake instead of de novo synthesis. we propose that localized uptake of cholesterol within the ridge modulates the signalling interactions required for early development of the gonad.

inhibition of hmgcr causes germ cell and somatic cell apoptosis
cells in the developing embryo can obtain cholesterol via either de novo synthesis or via uptake. this makes it challenging to manipulate cholesterol levels in utero. to test the role of cholesterol in pgc migration, we have used an organ culture system in which pgc containing tissue is allowed to develop in cholesterol-free media. this eliminates the possibility of uptake from maternal sources and allows us to manipulate cholesterol levels simply by inhibiting synthesis. to test the role of cholesterol in pgc development, tissue slices dissected from e <dig>  embryos were cultured in the presence of statins, drugs that act as competitive inhibitors of the hmgcr enzyme. dose response curves were established for mevinolin, simvastatin and atorvastatin . all three statins caused a dose dependent decrease in pgc numbers after  <dig> hours.  <dig>  μm simvastatin and  <dig> μm atorvastatin reduced pgc survival to 80% and 59% respectively but mevinolin was only effective at comparatively high doses.  <dig> μm mevinolin was the lowest dose of this drug found to induce a statistically significant drop in pgc survival. high doses of atorvastatin were toxic.  <dig> μm atorvastatin reduced pgc survival to 13%  and caused sloughing of the somatic cells from the surface of the tissue slices .

to examine whether statin-treatment affects total cell survival, we compared the level of apoptosis in statin treated and untreated slices . both atorvastatin and mevinolin induced a slight increase in pgc apoptosis. this trend was not statistically significant and may reflect the fact that immunostaining was performed at the end of the assay , a timepoint at which many of the pgcs had already died and been cleared. in support of this, time lapse analysis of atorvastatin treated slices revealed that germ cells fragment and disappear at an average rate of  <dig>  pgcs per hour . pgc apoptosis was not elevated in the simvastatin-treated samples consistent with the weaker effect of this drug on pgc survival . however, both simvastatin and mevinolin caused an increase in somatic cell apoptosis. mevinolin-treatment was particularly toxic, causing a two fold increase in cleaved parp signal. of the three statins, atorvastatin had the most potent and specific effect on pgcs. the  <dig> μm dose reduced pgc numbers without causing an increase in somatic cell apoptosis.

recent evidence suggests that statins can elicit responses that are independent of their effects on hmgcr  <cit> . additionally, the effects of inhibiting hmgcr itself may be complex, involving modulation of isoprenoids, cholesterol or both. to test whether our treatment was effective at inhibiting hmgcr, we used filipin staining and the cholesterol oxidase tipped bioprobe to compare cholesterol levels in atorvastatin-treated and untreated tissue. atorvastatin-treatment caused a dose dependent reduction in both filipin staining and current response .  <dig> μm atorvastain was the lowest dose capable of causing a statistically significant drop in cholesterol levels. it is interesting to note that  <dig> μm atorvastatin had little effect on cholesterol levels despite causing a significant reduction in germ cell numbers. this indicates that germ cells may be more sensitive to inhibition of hmgcr than the surrounding tissue.

pgc migration requires both cholesterol and isoprenoids
rescue experiments were used to test if isoprenoids and cholesterol have independent roles during pgc migration . in these rescue experiments, atorvastatin was used at  <dig> μm, the lowest dose found to reduce cholesterol levels in organ culture . tissue dissected from e <dig>  embryos was treated with atorvastatin alone, with atorvastatin and isoprenoids , with atorvastatin and cholesterol, or with atorvastatin, isoprenoids and cholesterol. cholesterol, geranylgeraniol or farnesol alone had a very modest and not statistically significant protective affect . however, co-treatment of slices with cholesterol and geranylgeraniol or with cholesterol and farnesol partially rescued pgc survival .

while performing these experiments, it was noted that statin-treated slices often had pgcs accumulating on the midline whereas pgcs in control slices normally cleared the midline and formed two distinct clusters at the genital ridges . treated slices were filmed and this effect was found to be caused by a reduction in pgc velocity . neither cholesterol nor isoprenoids alone were sufficient to rescue this defect in pgc motility but co-treatment of slices with both geranylgeraniol and cholesterol was able to rescue this defect . co-treatment with farnesol and cholesterol did not rescue pgc migration. in fact farnesol treatment in any combination appeared to inhibit normal migration .

de novo cholesterol synthesis is not required for pgc migration in vivo
our in vitro culture data suggests that both isoprenoids and cholesterol are necessary for pgc survival and motility. to test the role of cholesterol in germ cell development in vivo, we examined the distribution of pgcs in embryos lacking dhcr <dig> or lacking sc5d, the last two enzymes in the cholesterol biosynthetic pathway . these animals exhibit late gestational deficits in cholesterol levels, but are still able to obtain some cholesterol via uptake from maternal sources. we could not examine pgcs in animals lacking hmgcr because a loss of this enzyme results in early embryonic lethality  <cit> . animals lacking dhcr <dig> die shortly after birth and exhibit reduced body weight, reduced motility, and a failure to feed  <cit> . animals lacking sc5d, the second to last enzyme in cholesterol synthesis are more severely effected. they are stillborn and exhibit skeletal malformations  <cit> .

gonads were dissected from e <dig>  dhcr7-/-, sc5d-/- embryos and their littermate controls and the numbers of pgcs compared by immunostaining for ssea <dig>  there were no obvious defects in pgc number or position in these animals . this does not rule out a possible role for cholesterol in pgc guidance. dhcr7-/- mice were shown to have normal liver cholesterol levels at e <dig>  and only exhibit cholesterol deficiency at later stages  <cit> . also, sc5d-/- mice, despite having a more severe spectrum of malformations than the dhcr7-/- mice, exhibit similar late gestational reductions in total cholesterol  <cit> . this demonstrates that the cholesterol requirement for early post-implantation development can be provided via the yolk sac or placenta. perturbing cholesterol levels during pgc migration in vivo will require interventions affecting both synthesis and uptake of cholesterol.

discussion
this study demonstrates that cholesterol is required for primordial germ cell survival and motility. inhibition of hmgcr reduced cholesterol levels and induced pgc apoptosis in culture. addition of cholesterol and farnesol or cholesterol and geranylgeraniol rescued germ cell survival; however, pgc motility was only rescued by the latter combination. additionally, we found that cholesterol is elevated in the urogenital ridges and present evidence that this asymmetric distribution can be maintained by differential uptake. in support of this, embryos lacking the last or penultimate enzyme in cholesterol biosynthesis do not have germ cell defects but these embryos do not exhibit cholesterol deficits until late in development  <cit> . we conclude that the cholesterol requirement for early developmental processes including pgc migration can be met by uptake of maternal cholesterol.

hmgcr and isoprenoids are required for migration of cardiac progenitors and pgcs in both fly and zebrafish model systems  <cit> . in these systems, isoprenylation of heterotrimeric g-protein subunits and/or isoprenylaton of small g-proteins in the ras superfamily are thought to be altered by loss of hmgcr activity resulting in the observed developmental phenotype. our rescue experiments demonstrate that isoprenoids may play a similar role during pgc migration in mammals and demonstrate differential roles for ggoh and foh. both farnesol and geranylgeraniol co-treatments were able to rescue pgc survival, but only geranylgeraniol co-treatment assisted migration. this probably reflects differential isoprenylation requirements for different small gtpase  <cit> . for instance, ras proteins are typically farnesylated, but when farnesylation is inhibited some ras family members can be geranylgeranylated. likewise, the small gtpase rhob can be modified by either isoprenyl group, but the selection of group has a profound effect on its subcellular localization and presumably function. we propose that either farnesylation or geranylgeranylation can support signalling via a ras family member involved in controlling pgc survival or proliferation. however, geranylgeranyl modification is required to support the activity of a small gtpase  required for cell motility.

in addition to reflining what has already been shown about the function of hmgcr and isoprenoids in pgc development, our data also hints at a function for cholesterol in pgc survival or motility. a role for cholesterol during gonadal development is not entirely without precedent. first, genes known to coordinate cholesterol uptake are elevated within the urogenital ridges . steroidogenic factor  <dig>  is expressed in the ugrs at e <dig>  and its expression becomes confined to the testis by e <dig> . nr5a <dig> is a member of the nuclear receptor family and controls expression of genes required for cholesterol synthesis  and uptake  as well as genes required for steroid production  <cit> . scarb <dig> mrna has been detected in the sexually naive genital ridge as early as e <dig>  and like nr5a <dig>  it later become enriched in the testis  <cit> . loss of nr5a <dig> results in loss of scarb <dig> expression in the ugrs  <cit>  and an absence of gonads and adrenal glands in both male and female mice  <cit> . second, in the adult ovary, genes required for cholesterol synthesis are elevated within the granulosa cells surrounding the oocyte and cholesterol synthesized by the soma helps support oocyte growth by metabolic coupling  <cit> . curiously, migratory pgcs appear to lack mevalonate kinase and mevalonate decarboxylase enzymes required for isoprenoid and cholesterol biosynthesis  <cit> . this suggests that migratory germ cells are already deficient in cholesterol synthesis and may rely on interactions with the soma to supply their metabolic needs.

cholesterol alters development via its ability to regulate cell-cell signaling. cholesterol is covalently attached to members of the hedgehog  growth factor family and this modification controls diffusion of the hh proteins  <cit> . additionally, cholesterol is required for cells to respond to hh and evidence suggests that it is this process that is perturbed by mutations in dhcr  <dig>  <cit> . in flies, hh is a proposed attractant for pgcs  <cit>  but in mice, the expression pattern of hedgehog family members  <cit>  does not suggest a role in pgc guidance. additionally, a screen for transcripts expressed in migratory pgcs failed to detect expression of gli genes  <cit>  transcription factors required for hh response. we prefer a model in which changes in cholesterol alter the secretion or reception of growth factors known to be required for mammalian pgc migration. for instance cholesterol rich lipid rafts have been shown to be required for reception of kitl  <cit>  and sdf <dig>  <cit>  growth factors implicated in pgc guidance  <cit> . alternatively, the cholesterol rich environment within the genital ridge might help support pgc survival via metabolic coupling  <cit>  .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, hmgcr and its downstream products isoprenoids and cholesterol are required for mammalian pgc survival and motility in organ culture. however, in vivo support for this awaits the development of a system for efficiently manipulating cholesterol levels in utero. the role of hmgcr and isoprenoids in pgc migration has been well established in fly and zebrafish systems but this is the first study reporting a role for cholesterol in this process. additionally, we have demonstrated that cholesterol preferentially accumulates in the genital ridges. this observation suggests that cholesterol may play a non-cell autonomous role in pgc development by either controlling secretion of growth factors required for pgc migration or by regulating development of the somatic support cells of the gonads. this study provides insight into how changes in cholesterol  might contribute to changes in development that ultimately impact fertility later in life.

