BACKGROUND
taxonomic names represent one of the fundamental tokens that bridge biological knowledge, regardless of its form, across multiple resources  <cit> . the standardized format of genus species associated with a taxonomic name is universally accepted and identifiable across multiple levels of expertise. furthermore, a well-formed taxonomic name includes a proper name and a four-digit number, which represent the taxonomic authorship and date of description. efforts such as the catalogue of life program , an international joint effort to create a single checklist for all known species, are a significant step towards developing common resources to keep track and integrate organism-based biological information across disparate resources.

the universal biological indexer and organizer , is a complementary taxonomic information system designed to provide the core services that address name-based impediments to information retrieval  <cit> . in addition to collecting taxonomic and vernacular names from centralized resources such as the aforementioned colp, scientific names and authority information are also gathered from a range of sources that provide downloads or data transfers. through the use of natural language processing techniques, organism name, authority, and date information are also extracted from primary literature sources . the ubio database of organism names currently exceeds  <dig>  million records. of these records, approximately  <dig> million are associated with authority and year information.

implementation
a series of ruby scripts were developed to identify and process the requisite data into a form that could be imported microsoft excel. first, taxonomic names that contain authority and year information were identified from the ubio namebank database. next, the identified names were organized into a unified taxonomic hierarchy that consisted of the kingdom, phylum, class, order, and family information inferred from ncbi taxonomy, itis taxonomy, and catalogue of life taxonomy. the number of taxonomic names associated for each year from  <dig> to  <dig> was tabulated and output into a pipe-delimited format  that could be imported into microsoft excel . searching and graphing features were enabled for the data imported into excel using series of visual basic macros. the data were also loaded into a mysql database, which was subsequently incorporated into a ruby on rails web application.

through the resulting interfaces  trend-lines can be generated for major super-generic linnaean taxonomic groups  and also determine the number of pre- or post- descriptions relative to any date between  <dig> and  <dig> 

RESULTS
on organizing the taxonomic names from ubio according to their years of description, discernable patterns emerge. as shown in figure  <dig>  the first three major influxes of names occurred in  <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig>  these dates can be correlated with the respective publication dates of species plantarum, systema naturae, and systema entomologica.

two major declines in taxonomy are observed during the periods of 1912– <dig> and 1939– <dig>  both of these declines are coincident with world wars i and ii. in these periods, the number of taxonomic descriptions falls significantly. interestingly, while there are large declines in animal and plant descriptions, the number of taxonomic descriptions for bacteria encounters an increase during the same epochs. a speculative hypothesis might be that bacteriology experienced an insurgence during the early 1900's that carried on through subsequent years. this might be reflective of the emergence of methods to study microbes  <cit> . however, it is important to note that claims of the world wars directly affecting the rate of taxonomic descriptions would require deeper discussions and historical inquiry of biological/taxonomic activity that is outside the scope of the present discussion.

following the world wars, the rate of taxonomic descriptions per year does not reach the pre-world war i peak of  <dig>  descriptions until  <dig> . between  <dig> and  <dig>  the number of all taxonomic descriptions per year remains around  <dig> . again, it is difficult to speculate on the actual cause for the last peak in  <dig>  some of the cause may be rooted in the quality of the data in the ubio namebank database, which is a reflection of the data sources wherefrom the taxonomic names originate. for example, the analyzed data indicate that a significant portion of the  <dig> peak is due to an increase in descriptions of the family cerambycidae, a large group of beetles. this may very well be reflective of the sources that are used to populate ubio namebank, which may be more complete with contemporary descriptions of particular taxonomic groups. thus, we would like to emphasize that it is likely that the last decade of the data analyzed  may be incomplete, and thus potentially misleading, since there is a delay between taxonomic descriptions and their official vetting and appearance in centralized checklists. a caveat when exploring taxonomic trends and inferring conclusions from these data is that they are dependent on only the currently organized data within the ubio resource. nonetheless, for the data still likely reflect the general historical trends of data before the 1990's. to this end, names within ubio are dependent on the accuracy and completeness of both expert community checklists and centralized taxonomies. for example, when considering the taxonomic group for butterflies and moths , the spreadsheet is biased towards those names that were gathered from lepindex  <cit> , which is in turn based on a database of a paper-card catalogue that has had few additions since the 1980's . in addition to continuing to add new checklists and keeping them updated, we are developing natural language processing tools to identify new taxonomic name descriptions as they appear in the literature . it is our hope that through navigating the data through exploratory tools, such as the excel workbook presented here, that additional checklists and other name sources can be identified and shared via resources such as ubio.

variance in taxonomic nomenclature also accounts for underestimates of some taxa represented in these data, most notably viruses. because virus nomenclature generally does not follow the linnaean binomen, author, year format, it can be difficult to automatically infer the author and year for virus taxa. there are plans to identify year information using source data from the ictvdb  <cit>  and incorporate it into a future version of the dataset.

within the context of heritage literature digitization activities, such as the biodiversity heritage library , the exploration of taxonomic trends for those taxa that are described before a particular date might be useful. for example, an aspect of these types of digitization activities is the determination of how many original descriptions may not publicly be available due to a particular country's copyright laws. figure  <dig> shows the number of descriptions from before and after the year  <dig>  for each of the major taxonomic kingdoms. it was found that over  <dig>  million descriptions  are pre- <dig> ;  <dig>  million descriptions  are post- <dig> . it is important to note that the sum of these descriptions  is inflated due to many species that are re-described – for example, escherichia coli was first described in  <dig> as "bacterium coli," and then again in  <dig> when it was renamed, therefore it is associated with two dates. the can be particularly pronounced in some groups. for example, in the case of the family felidae, the present analysis accounts for  <dig> names; however, only  <dig> species of cats are currently known. the present analysis thus suggests that  <dig>  million descriptions  may be made potentially publicly available in the united states through digitization efforts like the bhl. an interesting future study might also be to compare the number of 'invalid' taxonomic names that are associated with these  <dig>  taxonomic descriptions, but can still be linked to contemporary 'valid' taxonomic names. such a study would involve supplementing the ubio namebank data with information from current expert-vetted checklists.

CONCLUSIONS
the valuable insights that are possible from analyses such as the ones presented here are due in large part to the meticulous and systematic nomenclature that has been in place for scientific organism names since first suggested by linnaeus in the 1700's. here, we have leveraged the systematic annotation of dates associated with scientific names to develop a mechanism to explore taxonomic trends. the resulting excel workbook and web interface enable one to explore temporal taxonomic trends for major taxonomic groupings, from kingdoms to families.

availability and requirements
• project name: taxatoy

• project home page: http://sarkarlab.mbl.edu/taxatoy

• operating system: excel workbook requires microsoft office ; pipe-delimited file can be viewed on any platform; the web application can be viewed in web browsers in any operating system

• programming language: visual basic; ruby on rails

• other requirements: microsoft excel ; web browser with javascript enabled 

• license: gnu gpl

• any restrictions to use by non-academics: none

authors' contributions
ins developed the processing scripts in ruby and the excel workbook that also involved the development of ms visual basic macros. rs developed and deployed the ruby on rails application version. cnn helped with the debugging and design of the excel workbook. all the authors contributed to the drafting of the manuscript.

supplementary material
additional file 1
taxongroupbyyears.txt. this file is the pipe-delimited file that was used as the data source for the excel workbook. it can also be downloaded from the aforementioned website, http://sarkarlab.mbl.edu/taxatoy

click here for file

 additional file 2
tby_excel.xls. this file can be viewed on recent versions of microsoft excel. the workbook requires that macros be enabled. a separate download of this file and additional instructions can be seen at http://sarkarlab.mbl.edu/taxatoy

click here for file

 additional file 3
fig3_taxabyyearskingdomfigure.pdf. this file contains the full image of figure  <dig> 

click here for file

 acknowledgements
the work presented here was funded in part by the mblwhoi library and the dab lindberg research fellowship from the medical library association to ins. the authors also thank david remsen and patrick leary for the development and encoding of ubio data in a form that made the analyses presented herein possible. finally, the authors thank the reviewers of earlier versions of this manuscript for their insightful comments and suggestions.
