BACKGROUND
the growing availability of the whole-genome sequences of eukaryotes has accelerated large-scale functional studies to understand the mechanisms of animal development and evolution  <cit> . many of these studies have highlighted the importance of regulatory evolution and the fundamental role that transcription factors  play in this process. alterations in tf function and regulation are linked to phenotypic variation  <cit>  as well as numerous pathologies, including cancers  <cit> . therefore, a detailed analysis of sequence and function of tfs across animal phyla will provide important information about their evolutionary patterns, thereby increasing our ability to understand the molecular basis of diseases and organismal complexity. the nematode caenorhabditis elegans serves as a powerful model organism to unravel tf function due to the wealth of available resources and the ease with which it can be reared, maintained, and manipulated in the laboratory  <cit> . the completion of its genome sequence has aided in the design of large-scale experiments that are beginning to elucidate the complexity of transcriptional regulation and gene interaction networks in multicelllular eukaryotes  <cit> . the recent releases of the genome sequence of two other caenorhabditid species, c. briggsae  <cit>  and c. remanei  <cit> , provide an excellent opportunity for genome-wide study of the conservation and evolution of transcription factors across nematodes. these three species are estimated to have shared a common ancestor between 20– <dig> million years ago  <cit>  and while they are morphologically similar, studies have shown differences in development and behavior  <cit> .

as a first step in facilitating the comparative study of tfs in nematodes, we have compiled an updated list of putative tf genes in c. elegans and used it to identify orthologs in c. briggsae and c. remanei. our results show that two-thirds of all c. elegans tf genes have 3-way one-to-one best reciprocal orthologs in the other two species, whereas the remaining third are either species-specific paralogs or too divergent to assign proper orthologous relationships. we observed that among caenorhabditid species, although tf genes have a greater sequence divergence than the non-tf genes, they exhibit significantly more detectable interspecific orthologs than non-tf genes. we also identified  <dig> best reciprocal orthologs of the tf genes conserved among nematodes in fruit fly , mouse , and human  many of which are associated with known disorders. we also examined the relationship between gene function and interactions, the results of which demonstrate that conserved tf genes exhibit a significantly greater number of interactions and are more likely to be associated with mutant phenotypes when compared to those that lack detectable orthologs. our findings provide a framework for future studies of nematode tfs and facilitate the development of resources allowing us to study morphological and developmental diversity in metazoans.

RESULTS
the c. elegans tf gene set
as a first step in the identification of tfs in caenorhabditid species, we generated an updated list of putative c. elegans tf genes by searching its annotated genome sequence   <cit>  for gene ontology  terms associated with transcription factors. this led to the identification of  <dig> putative tf genes . since our criteria for selecting a tf was the presence of a well-defined dna binding domain that selectively modulates gene transcription , we manually inspected the above list of putative tfs. this allowed us to reject  <dig> genes as false positives since these encode factors that are associated with the basal transcriptional apparatus , chromatin alterations, dna packaging , as well as entries that were incorrectly curated in wormbase . to the remaining genes , we added  <dig> tf encoding genes found in published literature and other public database entries that were not identified in our initial search . the final c. elegans tf set included a total of  <dig> genes , of which  <dig> are shared with the previously annotated c. elegans tf set   <cit> . the  <dig> genes in the wtf <dig>  set that are not shared in our updated set either lack a known dna binding domain or are annotated as pseudogenes . the increased number of genes in the present tf set likely results from the availability of annotations published since the compilation of wtf <dig> .

the table lists numbers of all tf genes as well as those uniquely identified by each of the terms.

na: not applicable, nd: not done.

identification of transcription factors in nematodes and other phyla
we used the newly defined c. elegans tf set to search for homologs in the fully sequenced genomes of c. briggsae  and c. remanei   <cit> . we used inparanoid  <cit>  to identify  <dig> and  <dig> best reciprocal hit orthologs in c. briggsae and c. remanei, respectively . to these lists, we added  <dig> c. briggsae and  <dig> c. remanei putative tf genes that were identified through hidden markov model -based searches  <cit> . altogether, a total of  <dig> and  <dig> potential tf encoding genes were identified in c. briggsae and c. remanei, respectively . among the tf orthologs in the three nematode species, we identified  <dig> genes that exhibit a 3-way best reciprocal blast orthologous relationship  . the proportion of c. elegans tf genes with detectable orthologs in c. briggsae  is significantly higher compared to the proportion of all conserved genes between the two species   <cit>  , which may indicate strong selective pressure to maintain these genes.

to examine the evolutionary conservation of the nematode tf set of genes in other phyla, we searched for their orthologs in the genomes of fruit fly, mouse , and human . using the inparanoid database  <cit>  we identified a total of  <dig> tfs that exhibit reciprocal orthologous relationships between three nematode species and are conserved in fly, mouse, and human .

coding sequence divergence in nematode tf genes
best-hit reciprocal orthologs could not be identified for  <dig> tf genes in c. elegans,  <dig> in c. briggsae, and  <dig> in c. remanei . it should be pointed out that c. briggsae and c. remanei tf genes are based on computational predictions and that the c. remanei genome has yet to be assembled; hence while many of the tf genes without detectable orthologs may have arisen by lineage-specific gene duplication, others could result from incomplete annotation of the c. briggsae and c. remanei genomes. therefore, the actual number of divergent tf genes in these species is likely to be smaller than the numbers we have estimated. to further study this set of genes in c. briggsae , we searched for their closest homologs in c. elegans. this revealed  <dig> genes with weak sequence similarity  suggesting that these most likely represent candidate c. briggsae-specific tf genes . the remaining  <dig> appear to be species-specific paralogs, of which  <dig> are zinc finger-c4/nuclear hormone receptor  family members .

previous studies in humans and other organisms have shown that tf genes tend to evolve more rapidly than non-transcription factor  genes  <cit> , therefore we performed a similar analysis in nematodes by analyzing their coding sequence divergence and comparing it to non-tf genes. due to the large divergence times between the three species  <cit> , the rate of synonymous substitution per synonymous site  for many genes is likely to be saturated . therefore we restricted our analysis to the rate of non-synonymous substitution per non-synonymous site , which does not show such saturation  <cit> . we found a significantly higher dn for tf genes conserved among nematodes  when compared to 3-way conserved non-tf gene orthologs , whereas no difference was detected between tf genes with orthologs in nematodes, fly, mouse, and human  and non-tf genes .

distribution of tf families in c. elegans
we studied the distribution of protein families among c. elegans tfs based on known dna binding domains. this analysis revealed more than  <dig> distinct families of which  <dig> were found to contain  <dig> or more members . no significant difference was observed in the representation of various families between the c. elegans set and the set conserved among three nematodes , indicating that the distributions of tf families in these species may be similar. the majority of genes in c. elegans and nematode tf sets  were found to encode the nuclear hormone receptors , a c4-type sub-family of zinc finger proteins that play key roles in development and homeostasis  <cit> . the nhr genes was previously shown to have undergone extensive lineage-specific expansion in c. elegans  <cit> . besides nhr, hox genes that regulate cell fate specification and embryogenesis  <cit>  are also among the largest tf families in nematodes  . in contrast, the distribution of tf families among the divergent c. elegans gene set  differs significantly from that observed among the entire c. elegans tf set  due to its high proportion of nhr genes . likewise, the representation of different families among tf genes with orthologs in nematodes, fly, mouse, and human also differs from that of the c. elegans tf set . interestingly, the single largest conserved family represented among the orthologs in three different phyla is hox , supporting multiple previous studies indicating the importance of this family among all metazoans  <cit> .

chromosomal distribution of tf genes in c. elegans and c. briggsae
studies in c. elegans as well as other organisms have shown that genes that are co-expressed and/or functionally related are frequently clustered together on chromosomes  <cit> . to investigate whether tf genes in nematodes exhibit a similar pattern, we plotted the physical locations of c. elegans and c. briggsae tf genes using non-overlapping windows of  <dig> kb . figure  <dig> shows that tf genes in c. elegans and c. briggsae as well as those that are conserved among nematodes are non-randomly distributed on chromosomes. a total of  <dig> c. elegans tf genes were found to be located in  <dig> distinct clusters . a similar pattern was observed in c. briggsae  . chromosome v carries highest number of clusters  in both species   that are primarily composed of nhr family members .

the analysis of the chromosomal distribution of tf genes also revealed that many members of the large tf families, such as zf-c4/nhr, zf-c2h <dig>  t-box and hox are arranged in perfect tandem arrays  , the largest of which consists of  <dig> nhr genes in c. elegans and  <dig> nhr genes in c. briggsae . although the majority of such arrays consists of genes of the same tf family , less than half of all genes found in such arrays have best-reciprocal hit orthologs between the two species   suggesting significant lineage-specific duplication and expansion of the tandem arrays.

evolution of the nuclear hormone receptor family in nematodes
our findings extend robinson-rechavi et al.'s analysis of the extensive lineage-specific expansion of nhr genes in c. elegans  <cit>  to the other two caenorhabditid species . the sequence analyses revealed a total of  <dig> nhr genes having 3-way best-reciprocal orthologs among the nematode species . the remaining nhrs are composed of what appear to be lineage-specific paralogs and those that have diverged sufficiently in sequence such that orthologous relationships could no longer be assigned.

we constructed a phylogenetic tree of the nematode nhr family members  to study their inter– as well as intra-specific relationships. the most striking feature of the phylogeny is the frequent presence of several closely related nhrs located tandemly on the same chromosome . such groupings suggest the presence of extensive tandem duplications, which could explain the mechanism behind the expansion of the nhr gene family, and perhaps the independent occurrence of some nhr genes in the lineages of each of these species. in the case of c. elegans nhrs, we found at least  <dig> distinct groups on chromosome v including  <dig> that are located in one large cluster of the phylogeny .

the presence of nhrs in chromosomal clusters prompted us to study their distribution in further detail. we identified a total of  <dig> tandem arrays composed of contiguous repetitions of nhr genes in c. elegans, which are found on all chromosomes with the exception of chromosome iii . these include  <dig> arrays that are comprised of  <dig> or more genes, all of which are located on chromosome v. a similar analysis in c. briggsae identified  <dig> nhr arrays having  <dig> or fewer genes . in total,  <dig> nhr arrays were partially or completely conserved between c. elegans and c. briggsae. one of these arrays, for instance, consists of  <dig> genes in c. elegans  and the corresponding  <dig> in c. briggsae . this suggests that either the array has expanded in c. elegans or perhaps lost  <dig> of the genes in c. briggsae. examination of the c. remanei tfs revealed the presence of best reciprocal hit orthologs for all array members found in c. elegans with the exception of nhr- <dig> leading us to propose that nhr- <dig> and nhr- <dig> were most likely lost in the c. briggsae lineage. this analysis, however, carries a caveat in that the annotations of the c. briggsae and c. remanei genomes are based on computational predictions and lack experimental validation.

finally, we found that  <dig> tandem arrays in c. briggsae are composed of nhr genes that lack best reciprocal hit orthologs in c. elegans and c. remanei . the largest of these is comprised of  <dig> nhr genes  . these c. briggsae-specific arrays may be caused by lineage-specific expansion although the possibility of a selective loss of their orthologs in other species cannot be ruled out.

comparison of tf gene sequence conservation and function in c. elegans
we investigated the relationship between sequence conservation and function of tf genes in c. elegans. from a comprehensive list of  <dig>  rnai phenotypes associated with  <dig>  genes  <cit> , we identified  <dig> tfs that exhibit one or more mutant phenotypes . these consist of more than half of all tf genes conserved among nematodes, fly, mouse, and human , over one-third of genes conserved among the three nematode species , and one-fifth of the tf genes in c. elegans that did not have identifiable orthologs in the other nematode species . we also determined the number of distinct mutant phenotypes associated with tf genes in each of the above three groups as well as with non-tf genes. this analysis revealed that tf genes conserved among nematodes, fly, mouse, and human are linked to a significantly greater number of mutant phenotypes in c. elegans when compared to the other sets . no difference was found in pairwise comparisons between the other gene sets .

to further analyze the roles of c. elegans tf genes in specific tissues and developmental processes, rnai phenotypes were sorted into six broad categories: viability , fertility , sex , vulva , body , and behavior  . among the six categories, "viability" ranks highest in terms of the proportion of tf and non-tf genes . however, it is important to keep in mind that this may be linked to a greater interest in identifying transcription factors that are involved in growth and survival of c. elegans. a further sub-classification of this category into "embryonic viability" and "post-embryonic viability"  revealed that among the "embryonic viability" class tf genes conserved among nematode species are significantly under-represented when compared to the non-tfs  , while no difference was observed among the datasets for genes affecting post-embryonic viability . by contrast, the tf genes conserved among nematodes, fly, mouse, and human showed no enrichment for any of these two categories . among other categories, we observed an over-representation of mutant phenotypes for nematode-conserved as well as nematode-fly-mouse-human-conserved tf gene sets associated with vulval development  and sex determination and reproductive system-related processes  when compared to the non-tf gene set.

phenotypes associated with nematode tf orthologs in fly, mouse, and human
the above findings that more than half of c. elegans tf genes conserved across phyla are associated with rnai phenotypes prompted us to examine their mutant phenotypes in other organisms. we found that  <dig>  of tf genes conserved among nematodes, fly, mouse, and human are associated with lethal phenotype in fly . in the case of mouse, out of a total of  <dig> orthologs for which knock out and mutant phenotypes are described ,  <dig>  exhibit defects ranging from mild to gross abnormalities, including lethality . a similar analysis in human revealed  <dig> tf genes linked to various diseases and genetic disorders . in total,  <dig>  tf genes regulating c. elegans development and behavior are also essential either in mouse or human or both. these include  <dig> genes that control viability in the fruit fly. overall,  <dig>  tf genes conserved among nematodes, fly, mouse, and human play important roles in at least one of these organisms. this is likely an underestimate due to technical limitations of rnai experiments  and that comparisons between organisms involve different experimental approaches . thus, functional studies of conserved tfs in c. elegans promise to elucidate mechanisms involved in biological processes conserved across phyla.

analysis of tf interaction networks in c. elegans
to further explore the mechanism of transcription factor function in metazoans, we generated an interaction map of c. elegans tf genes based on known physical and genetic interactions  <cit> . the map consists of  <dig> interactions involving  <dig> tf genes and their direct non-tf interactors . the network appears to be scale free as seen by the presence of several nodes with high degree of connectivity  . lin- <dig> is an ortholog of the human retinoblastoma  gene which plays an important role in cell proliferation  <cit> . among the lin- <dig> interacting genes,  <dig>  encode tfs, of which  <dig> have best reciprocal hit orthologs in mouse and human. other prominent hubs include pal- <dig> , as well as other tf genes with orthologs in nematodes, fly, mouse, and human: tag- <dig>  eya- <dig>  and sma- <dig> . each of these genes plays important role in c. elegans development, and rnai-mediated knock-downs cause defects such as slow growth , lethality , larval arrest , uncoordinated movement , and small size   <cit> . interestingly, the subnetwork comprising of the hub gene tag- <dig>  and its  <dig> direct interactors appears to be largely isolated. a closer examination revealed that two-thirds of these  <dig> genes are conserved in nematodes yet lack best reciprocal hit orthologs in fly, mouse, or human genomes. the remaining third includes four genes conserved in nematodes, fly, mouse, and human  and whose human homologs are linked to disorders . it remains to be determined if the human genes interact with rnf113a as well as whether rnf113a is involved in any of these diseases. among the remaining hub genes, the eya- <dig> mammalian orthologs promote development of tissues and organs  <cit>  whereas the sma- <dig> ortholog smad4/dcp <dig> acts as a tumor suppressor  <cit> .

in addition to analyzing the prominent hubs in the interaction network, we also examined the relationship between connectivity of tfs, sequence conservation, and known function. the results revealed a significantly greater number of interactions among c. elegans tfs that are conserved in nematodes, fly, mouse, and human, as compared to those that are not . we also found that tf genes associated with mutant phenotypes in rnai assays exhibit significantly more interactions when compared to those that lack a detectable phenotype . these results are consistent with previous studies showing that highly connected hubs tend to be enriched in essential genes  <cit> .

discussion
this paper presents the first genome-wide comparative study of tf genes in nematodes and their orthologs in fly , mouse , and human . we took both computational and manual curation approaches to compile sets of tf genes in three caenorhabditid species, leading to the identification of  <dig> genes in c. elegans,  <dig> in c. briggsae and  <dig> in c. remanei. a comparison of these data sets has revealed  <dig> 3-way best reciprocal orthologs among these species. furthermore, using currently available genome annotations, we identified  <dig> tf gene orthologs shared among nematodes, fly, mouse, and human and shown that according to mutant phenotypes or associated disorders, many of these genes are functionally important. it should be noted that many of the tf genes identified in c. elegans as well as most of those identified as orthologs, paralogs, and divergent in the other two nematode species are based entirely on computational predictions, and thus await experimental validation. however, the results of our study suggest the most likely group of candidate genes from which further experimental tests of tf activity can be designed. in contrast, the majority of the orthologs identified in the two other phyla are annotated as tf genes themselves, owing to the extensive experimental validation performed in these organisms.

the sequence comparison of orthologs among nematodes has revealed that tf genes conserved among the three nematodes species  are evolving more rapidly than non-tf genes, which is in agreement with earlier reports from other species in which tf genes have been shown to be evolving more rapidly than the coding genome average, and that significantly more tf genes have been found to be evolving under positive selection when compared to the rest of the genome  <cit> . while our observation of a greater number of conserved orthologs among all three nematode species, coupled to an accelerated rate of divergence may seem paradoxical, it may be suggestive of widespread positive selection, and thus divergence, acting on genes that are otherwise functionally important. given the wide estimates of the divergence time between the three nematode species considered in this study, it is unsurprising that the rate of synonymous substitution  is saturated, and is therefore not amenable for use in analyses that could test the hypothesis of widespread positive selection among tf genes. additional data, such as a large-scale polymorphism analysis among multiple caenorabditid nematodes could provide the sensitivity to test for evidence of differential selective pressure affecting specific gene groups.

the analysis of tf families in nematodes has revealed several interesting features, such as the high proportion of c2h <dig> and c4/nhr class of zinc-finger family members relative to the other tf families in all three species . it was previously shown that the nhr family has undergone significant lineage-specific expansion in c. elegans and c. briggsae  <cit> . considering, for example, that drosophila and humans carry less than  <dig> identified nhr genes   <cit> , the presence of more than  <dig> genes in caenorhabditid species is striking. although it remains to be seen whether all of these have important roles to play, studies in c. elegans have shown that roughly 10% of nhrs mediate diverse processes including molting , neuronal differentiation , sex determination , and dauer formation   <cit> . we found that roughly half of all nhrs in each of the caenorhabditid species are conserved as 3-way best reciprocal orthologs and another 10% exhibit 2-way orthologous relationships with at least one of the other nematode species. the remaining nhrs are likely to have arisen from lineage-specific gene duplications, suggesting that this class of tf may have a significant role in many of those differences that make individual nematode species unique. while the expansion of the nhr family in nematodes is certainly unusual, other tf families show interesting lineage-specific features as well. previous studies as well as results presented here indicate that tf families such as zf-c2h <dig>  hox and t-box have also diverged between the c. elegans and c. briggsae lineages   <cit> .

our work demonstrates that tf genes are non-randomly distributed in the genomes of both c. elegans and c. briggsae. we found that members of gene families such as nhr, hox, and t-box are frequently clustered and present in tandem arrays. a subset of the rapidly evolving nhr family of tf genes in c. elegans was previously shown to be located on chromosome v  <cit> . we have shown not only that c. briggsae exhibits a similar pattern, but also that the majority of the chromosome v nhrs in both species is tandemly arrayed. our finding that many nhrs appear to be lineage-specific paralogs suggests that gene duplication has played a significant role in the expansion of this gene family in nematodes. the phenomenon of gene clustering has been observed not only in c. elegans, but also in other species such as d. melanogaster and mouse  <cit> , and in some cases these clusters are composed of genes that are co-expressed  <cit> . while the precise mechanism of the origin of such clusters remains to be determined, these may be caused by small-scale regional translocations and illegitimate recombination events leading to tandem gene duplications  <cit> .

our study has revealed that c. elegans tf genes conserved across multiple phyla are more likely to be associated with mutant phenotypes when compared to the remaining tf and non-tf genes. likewise, the fly, mouse, and human orthologs of c. elegans tf genes are enriched in essential genes when compared to c. elegans tf genes without detectable orthologs . the analysis of the relationship between gene function and interactions revealed that tf genes conserved across phyla exhibit greater number of interactions and mutant phenotypes when compared to those that are divergent. among the tfs with described interactions, lin- <dig>  appears to have an exceptionally large number of interactions. lin- <dig> is known to interact with cell cycle-related and chromatin remodeling factors to regulate tissue growth and morphology  <cit> . we found that among the lin- <dig> interacting genes,  <dig>  encode tfs, of which  <dig> have best reciprocal hit orthologs in mouse and human. it is important to keep in mind that conservation in sequence does not indicate the roles of orthologous genes in regulating similar biological processes. instead, it simply means that genes that are evolutionarily conserved are very likely to play important roles in the development and functioning of the organism. our results are also consistent with studies in other organisms that have found a significant correlation between connectivity, rate of evolution and gene dispensability , even across multiple metazoan phyla. in general, hubs with high degree of connectivity tend to be enriched in essential genes and appear to evolve relatively slower than genes with lower connectivity  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
this study describes a genome-wide analysis of tf genes in three caenorhabditid nematode species  as well as their orthologs in fruit fly , mouse  and human . we observed a significantly higher conservation of orthology for the tf genes among caenorhabditid species, while also noting that the coding sequence of tf genes diverges more rapidly than the coding genome average. finally, the analyses of sequence conservation, gene interactions, and function revealed that tf set conserved in nematodes, fly, mouse, and human is significantly more enriched in essential genes compared to those that lack orthologs in other phyla. our findings will serve as a resource in aiding us to understand transcriptional networks and their conservation and divergence among metazoa. the compilation of the tf sets also serves as a stepping-stone in generating various resources such as knock-out mutants, cdna and promoter clones, and reporter gene expressing lines, with the intent of systematically mapping and studying tf function in nematodes. in parallel with many of ongoing initiatives in c. elegans these resources will provide foundation for future studies of the conservation of tf function and interaction across the breadth of biodiversity.

