BACKGROUND
determining the extent and distribution of genetic diversity is an essential component of plant breeding strategies. assessing genetic diversity in plants has involved increasingly sophisticated approaches, from early allozyme work, to amplified fragment length polymorphisms , and microsatellites. due to their multi-allelic states, development of simple sequence repeats  or microsatellites is often the best option for investigating population differentiation, but development and genotyping of large numbers of samples can be costly and size homoplasy is often a concern  <cit> . recently, single nucleotide polymorphisms  have emerged as an increasingly valuable marker system. snps are a viable alternative for assessing population genetic structure for several reasons. first, as binary, codominant markers, heterozygosity can be directly measured. second, unlike microsatellites their power comes not from the number of alleles, but from the large number of loci that can be assessed. thus, even in a low diversity species the genetic population discrimination power can be equivalent to the same number of loci in a genetically diverse species, once the rare snps are discovered. third, the more evolutionary conserved nature of snps makes them less subject to the problem of homoplasy  <cit> . finally, snps are amenable to high-throughput automation, allowing rapid and efficient genotyping of large numbers of samples  <cit> . thus far, the major obstacle has been to discover rare polymorphic sites, but novel sequencing approaches are now mitigating this issue. in plants, snp discovery can be facilitated by using methylation-filtration libraries to exclude extensive repeat regions, targeting primarily informative snps  <cit> . methylation filtration is thus not a new method but it is not commonly used to target polymorphic sites in low diversity species and should serve as a useful tool for other plant species with limited genetic diversity.

low genetic variation is a key feature of some agro-economically important crops such as peanuts  <cit>  and watermelons  <cit> , which have experienced intense selection for a limited number of specific phenotypes. loss of genetic diversity is common in the domestication process of many plant species, likely due to population bottlenecks  <cit> . castor bean  is an agro-economically important species from the euphorbiaceae family and appears to have low genetic diversity and no geographically based patterns of genetic relatedness based on aflp and ssr studies  <cit> . compared with other crop plants, the genetics of r. communis has been relatively little studied. however, recent sequencing efforts have revealed a moderate sized genome  organized within  <dig> chromosomes  so in depth studies of castor bean genetics will be able to rapidly advance.

castor bean has historically been cultivated as an agricultural crop for the oil derived from its seeds, which has numerous industrial and cosmetic uses. in fact, castor oil has a long documented history of use for ointments and medicines by the ancient egyptians and greeks. worldwide production of seeds in  <dig> was  <dig>  million metric tones, with india, china, and brazil leading global harvests  <cit> . the plants are also grown as ornamentals due to their prolific growth on poor soils and vibrant leaf and floral coloration. the species has a worldwide tropical and sub-tropical distribution, including most of the southern united states. ricinus communis appears to have originated in eastern africa as suggested by the high diversity of plants in ethiopia  <cit> , but this has not been directly tested. plants can be self- or cross-pollinated by wind, with outcrossing a predominant mode of reproduction  <cit> . the seeds are highly toxic to humans, pets, and livestock and are the source of the poison ricin  <cit> . castor bean plants commonly escape cultivation and are found in disturbed sites such as roadsides, stream banks, abandoned lots, and the edges of agriculture fields, such that the species is considered an invasive weed throughout much of its introduced range  <cit> .

we used high-throughput snp genotyping to assess genome-wide diversity and population structure in a worldwide collection of r. communis samples. the objectives of this study were five-fold: 1) to test the utility of snps in determining population structure, 2) to assess worldwide genome diversity in castor bean using snps; 3) to determine large-scale patterns of introduction and relatedness among populations; 4) to examine geographical patterns of genetic variation based on country of origin; and 5) to investigate fine-scale population structure using a subset of naturalized populations distributed across  <dig> sites from  <dig> counties in florida, u.s.

RESULTS
our genome-wide assessment of snp variation in castor bean revealed relatively low levels of genetic variation. the  <dig> high quality snps were discovered in  <dig>  aligned bases, for a total of  <dig> % or  <dig> snp every  <dig> bases. we emphasize, however, that this still represents a small fraction of the genome, as reads of 98% identity and 98% read coverage in the hale genome revealed  <dig>  mb of total sequence before filtering the data set for snp discovery. given that reads with 100% identity among all  <dig> cultivars were excluded from this analysis , it is likely that the number of snps per base is overestimated  and true nucleotide diversity across the genome is much lower. nonetheless, these data constitute substantially more genome coverage than achieved with previous analyses based on aflps and ssrs  <cit> . average observed heterozygosity across all  <dig> snps and populations was  <dig>  and estimated heterozygosity was  <dig>  . these low levels of genetic variation are consistent with that identified using aflps and ssrs  <cit> .

%p = percent of polymorphic loci, he = expected heterozygote frequency, ho = observed heterozygote frequency.

nuclear snp genotypes of the worldwide collection of germplasm samples  were best described by  <dig> clusters, as determined by the best k value in structure . groupings were not consistent with continental patterns or country of origin. the amova results revealed that most of the molecular variance occurred within populations  followed by 22% among populations, and 4% among continents, results that are also consistent with previous work  <cit> . despite limited genetic variation worldwide, few countries showed groupings where the majority of genotypes were considered part of the same cluster. for countries with greater than one sample, only botswana, el salvador, iran, syria, usa  and us virgin islands had homogeneous groupings where all samples from the same country clustered together. thus,  <dig> of  <dig> countries had samples with genotypes from more than one group. furthermore, admixture was common within each sample, with possible membership in > <dig> cluster for the majority of samples. limiting our grouping results to a 60% threshold for population assignment for each sample provided an alternate depiction of genotype distributions . here, samples from  <dig> of  <dig> countries were identified as originating from a single source. nonetheless, worldwide populations were largely a mixture of genotypes with little geographic structuring. consistent with this finding, pairwise population ϕpt values indicate significant population differentiation for most countries; in a tally of the comparisons 83%  of samples from different populations/countries were separated at p <  <dig>  . genetic differentiation was not determined by private alleles , however, because no alleles were specific to any one population.

inclusion of samples from florida with the worldwide sample collection strongly influenced overall structure results and only two distinct clusters were indicated worldwide, with nearly all samples from florida assigned to the same group. analyzed separately, naturalized populations from  <dig> sites  throughout florida consisted of two distinct population groupings . only two populations, from hendry and putnam counties, had all samples in the same cluster, indicating widespread introduction and mixing of genotypes in most of the state. observed heterozygosity was only  <dig> , while expected heterozygosity was  <dig>  . the majority of molecular variance occurred within populations , rather than among populations . nonetheless, pairwise population ϕpt values indicated significant population differentiation; for  <dig> of  <dig> comparisons , the different populations were separated at p <  <dig>  . effects of inbreeding were apparent in the introduced florida populations; expected heterozygosity values  far exceeded observed heterozygosity . seven samples from five populations contained at least one private allele within florida. the genetic distances for samples from the same site were spatially autocorrelated , but it was not a linear relationship over geographic distance . assessment of genetic distances of the  <dig> populations using principal coordinates analysis indicated that samples from  <dig> of the  <dig> populations each clustered together in a plot containing the first two axes .

n = sample size, %p = percent of polymorphic loci, he = expected heterozygote frequency, ho = observed heterozygote frequency

ϕ-pt values are below the diagonal, with pairwise comparisons with p <  <dig>  in bold. probability values above the diagonal are based on  <dig> permutations.

discussion
our assessment of genome wide diversity in r. communis suggests that it has low genetic diversity and structure for all populations that we sampled. even our upwardly biased estimate of nucleotide diversity is far less than the average number of snps found in plants such as maize  <cit> . low rates of heterozygosity in snps found in our study corroborate findings of limited worldwide genetic variability seen with aflps and ssrs  <cit>  and argue for local breeding populations that are highly inbred. castor bean populations worldwide clustered into five distinct groups that were not geographically structured. this is despite the fact that there were often high levels of pairwise population differentiation based on country of origin. this suggests that plants within a particular region may have been derived from multiple sources or introductions, likely due to human-assisted migration via domestication. furthermore because plants from an accession or country did not fall into the same genetic-based cluster, we argue that multiple sources or introductions to individual countries is the most plausible explanation for the observed patterns.. one alternative hypothesis is that the observed patterns are due to worldwide gene flow, but we reject this idea based on the fact that castor bean seeds are gravity dispersed rather than bird dispersed; we know of no morphological adaptations that would assist in long distance dispersal . we also found no unique alleles in any of the sampled accessions, which is consistent with a domesticated species in which genetic variation has been reduced. limited genetic variation was also observed in plants collected throughout florida, but like the worldwide germplasm accessions, nearly all populations showed a mix of genotypes throughout state. low levels of genetic diversity in r. communis are consistent with comparable reduced variation in many cultivated plants  <cit> , such as soybean  <cit>  and cotton  <cit> . conversely, many ornamental species have relatively high genetic diversity, likely because of multiple introductions  <cit> . as both a crop and ornamental plant, r. communis may have lost much of its diversity through cultivation but human-assisted introductions and seed mixtures from different sources appear to have maintained this limited diversity in most populations. low genetic diversity is likely a consequence of a genetic bottleneck due to domestication, as seen in a range of other crops  <cit> . alternatively, fragmentation of populations, subsequent loss of gene flow and the effects of genetic drift could also account for loss of heterozygosity , but more research on the timing of introductions is needed to verify these alternative explanations.

one aspect of working with populations that contain a mix of diverse genotypes is that they are often difficult to partition into well-defined groups, even with computationally rigorous programs such as structure   <cit> . for example, twito et al.  <cit>  found that  <dig> snps from gene regions could be used to accurately assign the correct population in  <dig> breeds of chicken, but  <dig> diverse breeds were excluded from analysis due to difficulties with population assignment. furthermore, our data suggest that additional snps may be necessary for better resolution of relationships of samples among populations within countries. turakulov and easteal  <cit>  found that at least  <dig> snp loci were necessary for definitive population identification and > <dig> snps were necessary for assignment probabilities over 90% in their sample set. although we could assign genotypes to specific groupings, additional loci will be needed to increase confidence in assignments, possibly providing much clearer differentiation among populations within country of origin. nonetheless, based on the mixed population structure observed thus far, it is possible that each accession/population, no matter how extensively sampled, will reveal a mixture of genotypes, but this remains to be confirmed. finally, we employed traditional analytical methods for population genetics, such as fst comparisons, with some caution due to issues with non-equilibrium dynamics often associated with recent introductions of species  <cit> .

the power of snp discovery using our methods should not be misconstrued as an indication of diversity in a species that shows low overall genetic diversity; our snp discovery found relatively few snps despite extensive survey of several castor bean genomes . measures of population structure such as fst  are typically based upon these rare snps and are not directly comparable to unbiased snp discovery methods in other species. therefore, our results are not directly comparable with other species for which snp markers have been developed .

comparison of genetic to geographic distances in naturalized florida populations indicated spatial structuring of populations and no evidence of a sequential spread from a single introduction point. rather, there also appears to have been multiple introductions in florida. local differentiation, however, was present  among most of these populations. it appears that once plants have been introduced, inbreeding occurs within local demes, as evidenced by the significantly higher values of expected vs. observed heterozygosity in the florida populations . gene flow is not regional, and r. communis is not dispersed widely after its initial introduction. therefore, dispersal appears to be dependent on human introduction, or by limited escape into nearby disturbed areas, owing to the fact that the capsules are heavy, and seeds are explosively and therefore gravity-dispersed only meters from the parent plant  <cit> . the mixed mating system in r. communis provides alternate options for reproduction, which suggests that pollen flow, and hence gene flow could be extensive among geographically proximal populations. indeed, our assessment of genetic variation in florida populations indicates that most accessions are a mixture of genotypes. however, these patterns are again consistent with those observed in germplasm accessions, suggesting multiple introductions rather than extensive gene flow among established populations. the fact that castor bean is capable of self-pollination, together with the observed high coefficient of inbreeding also suggests that selfing may be a common reproductive strategy. however, a more extensive study of levels of inbreeding within natural populations needs to be conducted to determine the degree to which castor bean preferentially self-pollinates versus outcrosses.

our study represents one of the most extensive genomic studies of worldwide snp variation in an agricultural plant. with rapidly increasing capabilities in genome sequencing, this work provides a template for assessing population structure in non-model organisms and applying them to plants that have escaped cultivation. although chloroplast markers have been effectively used in studying plant distributions, low effective population size in chloroplast dna and reduced genetic diversity as compared with nuclear dna makes these markers less suitable for studying recently established populations. despite sequencing of eight chloroplast genomes for castor bean, few clade-specific snps were identified and only five haplotypes occurred in our worldwide collection . nuclear snps, on the other hand, are more variable, amenable to high throughput genotyping and will likely be the marker of choice for population-level analyses of species with sequenced genomes  <cit> . although microsatellites, which can also be derived from sequenced genomes, provide better resolution with fewer markers, high homoplasy associated with these markers can be an issue  <cit> . snps, which typically exhibit little to no homoplasy, can also be used for mapping important phenotypic traits such as adaptation, oil production, or disease resistance by targeting and screening mutations in important genes. indeed, connecting genotypic to phenotypic variation is an important next step in r. communis research.

the interplay among natural and artificial selection, invasion success, and biotic conditions are poorly known for most crops that have become naturalized. agro-economic and horticultural selection for particular phenotypes has a strong potential to affect adaptation and traits associated with becoming naturalized. furthermore, population genetic assessment of introduced populations typically involves comparison between plants in native and introduced ranges  <cit> . given the suggested origin of r. communis in ethiopia  <cit> , extensive sampling of plants from wild populations throughout this region would be necessary to trace the roots of this species and to compare population genetic structure before and after introduction. given its limited dispersal ability, agronomic utility and ornamental value it is highly likely that castor bean has become widespread due to anthropogenic activities, with plantings being restricted to relatively few cultivar accessions. human-assisted dispersal has and will likely remain the primary mode of range expansion for castor bean, but it remains to be determined whether naturalized populations will maintain sufficient genetic variation for retaining the viability and longevity of this agro-economically important species.

CONCLUSIONS
our study demonstrates the utility of a snp-based approach for assessing the population genetics of an agricultural crop as well as for naturalized populations  <cit> . as new sequencing technologies emerge and more genomes become more available, our approach promises to be particularly useful for plant population studies due to the resolving power of snps and the ability to rapidly assess diversity in a large number of samples. however, plant species with limited genetic diversity such as r. communis pose particular problems for genotyping efforts regardless of increases in sequencing capabilities. furthermore, the recent and global spread of only a few r. communis cultivars without any apparent geographical basis suggests that this species does not follow typical genetic patterns in plant distributions.

