BACKGROUND
the 'genomics revolution' has provided the information needed to analyze how a genome responds to the environment in the formation of the "transcriptome", the portion of the genome that is transcribed. microarrays, which offer the ability to analyze the expression ratios  of thousands of genes simultaneously, represent one of many new tools produced by this effort. however, not all biological disciplines have benefited equally from this technology, and array technology has not been widely adopted by the ecological community for a number of reasons. the large genome-wide arrays are only available for select model organisms, which may not be appropriate for many ecological questions. moreover, the complexity of their analysis and the costs of the available commercial software solutions prohibit their adoption by small research groups and constrain the number of biological experiments that can be conducted even by large, better-funded groups. 'boutique' arrays – on which a smaller fraction of the transcriptome, typically representing a selection  of genes specific to a class of genetic elements or response types – are readily created for a non-model organism at costs that are affordable for small research groups. however, the problems remain of how best to normalize and analyze array data. a large number of software solutions are available but no clear best solution has emerged  <cit> .

a recent review has examined the types of arrays as well as the ecological and evolutionary questions that can be addressed with microarrays  <cit> . here we present a cdna microarray designed to analyze plant-herbivore interactions in a native plant. a cdna microarray is a comparative tool, providing relative ers for multiple genes from two differentially labeled fluorescent cdna samples prepared by reverse transcription of mrna extracted from matched plant samples. hence the procedure is particularly useful for the analysis of plant responses elicited by herbivore attack: the induced defense and tolerance responses of plants  <cit> . we examine a number of practical challenges facing the adoption of boutique arrays for ecological research with tools familiar to ecologists, including signal normalization, the use of arbitrary expression thresholds to determine the significance of expression, the use of within-and between-array signal variance in evaluating the effect of probe quality and quantity and array age, as well as data analysis and visualization by cluster and principal component analysis .

the microarray was designed to examine herbivore-induced gene expression in the model ecological expression system, nicotiana attenuata  <cit> . the genes for the microarrays were derived from a series of display  experiments that compared the transcriptome of plants attacked by the larvae of its specialist herbivore, manduca sexta, with that of unattacked plants  <cit> . two independent and differentially end-labeled cdna probes of each of  <dig> genes were spotted in quadruplicate on each array. hence each gene was represented by  <dig> replicate probes, which were used to analyze within-array er variance . since the array was composed of genes that were both down-or up-regulated in response to m. sexta attack, an array-specific normalization factor could be readily calculated. the effects of microarray age and cdna quality on the measures of array cv were estimated. we present a 2-step criterion for determining significant expression based on t-tests of replicate ers and arbitrary thresholds. we re-examine the use of arbitrary expression thresholds with a 'norm of reaction' analysis of  <dig> genes derived from the  <dig> hybridization experiments. the data from microarrays are frequently analyzed with cluster analysis procedures  <cit> , which deliver a limited analysis of the statistical associations. pca is frequently used in ecological studies but is not commonly used in the analysis of array data. we present a pca of  <dig> hybridized arrays, which visualizes the contribution of ers from particular genes to the associations among arrays in the pca.

RESULTS
array cvs, array age and probe quality
the array cv for each of the  <dig> arrays was strongly correlated with the number of gene ers that showed higher values than the defined threshold for the variance . this demonstrates that the array cv corresponds to the number of gene ers that are outliers and therefore reflects the "quality" of the information derived from the array. we used array cvs to test if array age could explain some of the variance and found no detectable effect .

the spectrum of the cdna was recorded between  <dig> and  <dig> nm. shape and maxima of the curves for the particular compounds  allowed the evaluation of cdna quantity and quality. the quantity of the cdna that was hybridized was estimated by its od at  <dig> nm. the quality of the fluorescently labeled probe derived from this cdna was estimated by the relation of the quantity of the two dyes at  <dig> nm  and  <dig> nm  and the cdna quantity. these linear regressions revealed that for cdna quantity , neither cy <dig> nor cy <dig> values were significantly correlated with array cvs . there was a negative correlation between array cv and od  <dig> values for cy <dig>  and od  <dig> values for cy <dig>  with slopes of - <dig>  and - <dig> , respectively. however, only the cy <dig> regression was significant  whereas cy <dig> was not . a similar pattern was apparent for the probe quality: cy <dig> and cy <dig> quality parameters were negatively correlated with array cv, but only the regression for cy <dig>  was significant  whereas the regression for cy <dig>  was not . from this analysis, we conclude that the quality of the labeled cdna sample to be hybridized to an array predicts the quality of the signals produced from the array.

pcr product quality
the  <dig> different pcr products  that were spotted on the arrays had the following distribution in the  <dig> quality categories :  <dig> = single band :  <dig> = single band with slight background ;  <dig> = single band with strong background ;  <dig> = multiple bands with background or only background . multiple bands were only spotted to determine how low quality pcr products effect the results. to evaluate the association of pcr product quality on the variance of ers, gene cvs were plotted against the pcr quality class. gene cvs were found to be significantly different among the  <dig> pcr categories . while post hoc tests revealed that pcr quality did not have a directional effect on gene cv, it was lowest for genes with intermediate cvs and increased in genes with high and low cvs. we conclude that the quality of the pcr product spotted on arrays does not have a strong effect on gene cv.

expression patterns
all arrays
a cluster analysis of  <dig> arrays  reflected the similarities of the transcriptional patterns observed in arrays hybridized with similar treatments. arrays hybridized with probes derived from mrna from n. clevelandii  and n. longiflora  were separated from those hybridized with material from n. quadrivalis  and n. attenuata that had been attacked by aphids or leaf hoppers . these arrays were separated from those hybridized with samples from antisense-transformed n. attenuata plants that had been attacked by manduca caterpillars , and the cluster they formed was separated from all other arrays that had been hybridized with n. attenuata material elicited by methyl jasmonate treatments  or attacked by manduca, mirid, heliothis or spodoptera herbivores . the  <dig> replicated arrays hybridized with the same mrna clustered together . the details of these similarities will not be treated here, as they are discussed in separate publications. the similarity of the elicited transcriptional signatures observed on the arrays hybridized with the n. longiflora and n. attenuata  <cit>  probes demonstrates the utility of the array in the analysis of samples from congenerics.

a pca of the same  <dig> arrays  showed a similar pattern of associations but provided the additional information of which genes contributed most to the patterns observed in the pca. the vector of the gene coding for proteinase inhibitors  was correlated with the first canonical axis that explained 40% of the total variance in the dataset. moreover, transcripts for pi were up-regulated in the n. attenuata arrays elicited with meja or attacked by manduca, mirid, heliothis or spodoptera herbivores. expression of xyloglucan endo-transglycosylases  and wrky transcription factor transcripts was also correlated with the first axis and correlated with the location of arrays  <dig> –  <dig> in the pca. these  <dig> genes were plotted relatively close together in the pca, reflecting their similar patterns of regulation across all arrays. the vector of allene oxide synthase  transcript expression reveals a correlation with arrays hybridized with mrna from meja-elicited plants. aos catalyzes a later stage in the biosynthesis of jasmonic acid and is known to be elicited by meja treatments  <cit> . the response of two unknown genes  exemplifies genes whose pattern of expression is opposite to that discussed for the genes of known function. the ers of gene  <dig> reacted in the opposite direction as those of wrky and xth, and the responses were larger in antisense n. attenuata plants. the response of gene  <dig> was opposite to that of aos and larger in n. clevelandii and n. attenuata plants attacked by leaf hoppers.

individual genes
the expression patterns of  <dig> genes , as the mean of  <dig> pcr fragments with differently modified primers across  <dig> experiments, illustrate the 'norm of reactions' of the transcriptional responses of these genes . the transcriptional responses of these genes were in opposite directions and within various ranges of expression to the different treatments. genes such as pi and xth exhibit strong up-regulation  in response to herbivore attack and jasmonate elicitation, and are similarly strongly down-regulated  when plants transformed to silence endogenous jasmonate biosynthetic enzymes  are elicited and compared with untransformed plants on the same array. the inset of the xth norm of reaction depicts the variance in ers from a selection of individual arrays to illustrate that treatments  eliciting very similar mean ers  can have very different gene standard errors of the mean er  . shaded areas represent the arbitrary er thresholds of ±  <dig>  for log2-transformed values. all  <dig> genes had numerous treatments in which these thresholds were exceeded, but the genes differed in the magnitude and direction in which the threshold ers were exceeded. in contrast to the pi and xth genes, the unknown gene  <dig> and the wrky transcription factor had more attenuated 'norm of reactions', being maximally up-and down-regulated by only  <dig> -and 5-fold across all  <dig> arrays. in a majority of the experiments, the aos gene was up-regulated, while down-regulation was more common for unknown gene  <dig>  in many experiments, however, ers did not exceed threshold values.

ecologists are frequently interested in the processes that "fit" organisms to their environment. adaptation to a particular environment results in part from the phenotypic consequences of hundreds of coordinated changes in gene expression, but because many levels of organization exist between an organism's transcriptome and its phenotype, it is often unclear how best to study the process of adaptation. array technology has the potential to identify genes relevant to the process of adaptation, regardless of the time scale involved . however, a number of technical issues remain to be solved before the technology can be fully incorporated into ecological research: the normalization of signals, the within-and between-array variability of ers, and the general problem of coping with the large amount of data that array studies produce. many techniques have been discussed but a consensus for a standard solution  <cit>  has not yet emerged.

normalization
since mrna samples are labeled with different efficiencies and the different fluorescent dyes have different optical properties, signals from an array require normalization before ers can be calculated. the literature addressing the problems of normalization has been reviewed  <cit> , with the consensus conclusion that there is no single best way to normalize array data and that specific solutions were required for the particularities of each array. when arrays are created with cdnas that are typically both up-and down-regulated, a total intensity normalization can be used. by adapting a total intensity procedure  <cit>  we normalized the signals from only the middle 75% of the distribution from a given array which produced values that were highly comparable among arrays, as demonstrated by the similarity of the clustering of the  <dig> replicate arrays .

variance
ers from microarrays are derived from two differently labeled but mixed samples that competitively hybridize to immobilized gene-specific probes. the outcome of this hybridization can vary substantially within an array, as measured by the variance in ers measured across replicate spots. the strong positive correlation between the number of genes above the specified er-threshold and the array cvs highlights the utility of array cvs to summarize the quality of a given hybridization. little is known about the factors that influence within-array hybridization or the amount of spot replication that is required to cope with the variance typically found in environmental samples  <cit> . however, the  <dig> replicate spots for each gene distributed across the array provided valuable data on gene and array cvs. from these cvs we were able to determine the quality of er patterns from single arrays and single genes.

most of the technical parameters tested were not correlated with the variance structure in our dataset. our measures of pcr product quality did not explain the variance of gene cvs. similarly, array age did not account for a significant amount of variation in array cvs. in contrast, probe quality was negatively correlated with array cv and explains a part  of the variance in array cvs. in our data set, a 15-fold increase in od was associated with a halving of array cv. therefore the monitoring of this measure of probe quality could save the costly use of arrays for samples that will likely produce low-quality results. since none of the measured parameters unambiguously explained the pattern of within-array variance in our dataset, we conclude that a combination of several factors including the probe quality determines array variance.

data analysis
cluster analysis revealed groups of treatment that resulted in similar patterns of expression and, in doing so, provided a visual demonstration that the results obtained were reproducible. the pca proved to be more useful for exploratory data analysis than did cluster analysis, because it provided information on the single gene vectors that contributed to similarities and differences among arrays. pca allows researchers to quickly visualize similarities in expression patterns between known and unknown genes, and thereby generates hypotheses about the function and regulation of genes of unknown function. for example, in our analysis, a group of unknown genes – from which we chose two  as proxies – explained a relatively large part of the variance  and was positively correlated to specific treatments and negatively correlated to vectors of genes of known function. gene  <dig> was up-regulated in antisense lox plants and had the opposite pattern of expression compared to that of the wrky and xth genes, both of which are strongly up-regulated by herbivore attack and jasmonate elicitation. gene  <dig> had the opposite pattern of regulation as did aos with higher ers in plants attacked by leaf hoppers, suggesting a role in the plants' response to this herbivore. the pca of fig.  <dig> is a 2-dimensional presentation of a multidimensional analysis and analyses that allow for multidimensional presentations of the associations, provide more accurate information on the contribution of single gene vectors to associations among arrays.

quantitative geneticists have coined the term 'norm of reaction' for the variation in phenotypic expression of a given genotype across a number of different environments. we apply this term to characterize the range of ers observed for a given gene across a number of different expression experiments. the information provided in a norm of reaction provides a biologically informed alternative to the use of arbitrary thresholds for the determination of significant expression. this would allow researchers to use lower thresholds for genes  that are known to show low dynamic ranges of expression and higher thresholds for genes with likely larger dynamic ranges, such as those directly involved in defense metabolite production . additionally, when comparing many arrays, a norm of reactions provides information that allows researchers to determine if a given array is providing ers within the normal range of variance found in prior experiments.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that the data produced by 'boutique' microarrays can be readily analyzed with inexpensive home-grown procedures that are commonly used in ecological studies. arrays with sufficient within-array replication allow for the calculation of gene and array cvs that are useful in estimating the quality of the information gathered from a given array. furthermore, multivariate statistical techniques, such as pca, can be used to visualize global expression patterns and identify the individual genes that make large contributions to the transcriptional signatures of particular treatments. the costs of boutique arrays are approaching those of many standard ecological procedures, and the information they provide will allow ecological researchers the ability to characterize early stages in an organisms' response to environmental changes.

