BACKGROUND
heterodera glycines, the soybean cyst nematode, is a devastating pathogen of soybean production. upon hatching as second-stage juveniles , these nematodes migrate through the soil as infective j <dig>  invade roots of soybean plants to become parasitic j <dig>  and move intracellulary through the root tissue until they reach the vicinity of the vascular system, where they become sedentary and induce the formation of a feeding site, the syncytium  <cit> . h. glycines completely depends on syncytia for nutrition. following the development through two more juvenile stages , the nematodes reach adulthood. while adult females remain sedentary, adult males regain motility and leave the root to fertilize females, whose posterior bodies have broken out of the root into the rhizosphere during the course of growth and development. ultimately, the females die and their body walls harden to protect the eggs, which are mostly retained in utero, until the environment is favorable again for a new generation of nematodes to hatch  <cit> .

secreted proteins are key molecular interfaces between parasite and host and enable h. glycines to infect soybean plants, which results in an estimated annual damage of $ <dig> million to soybean production in the usa alone  <cit> . more specifically, secretory proteins that are produced in three large esophageal gland cells  and that are injected into host plant cells through the nematode's hollow mouth spear, the stylet, are thought to allow h. glycines to migrate through plant tissue by softening and degrading cell walls and to induce and maintain a feeding site, the syncytium, which consists of modified fused host plant root cells. many genes are involved in adapting cyst nematodes to a parasitic life style. however, only genes whose products are expressed in the nematode secretory glands and are injected into the host cells through the stylet  are called parasitism genes, which in turn have been termed parasitome in their entirety  <cit> . previous studies in cyst nematodes  identified genes encoding cell wall-degrading and -softening enzymes like beta- <dig> -endoglucanase  <cit> , pectate lyase  <cit> , a putative arabinogalactan endo- <dig> -beta-galactosidase  <cit>  and an expansin  <cit>  as members of the parasitome. apart from genes related to cell wall modifications, other genes whose products likely alter the normal host cell physiology to establish and maintain a syncytium belong to the parasitome, e.g., chorismate mutases  <cit> , ubiquitin extension proteins  <cit> , as well as s phase kinetochore-associated protein  <dig>  and ring-like proteins  <cit> . while a few more parasitism proteins have similarity to known proteins, like the venom allergen-like proteins  <cit>  or a chitinase  <cit> , for most h. glycines parasitism proteins no clear function can be ascribed  <cit> , although it has been shown that some are imported into plant cell nuclei  <cit> . to date, more than sixty parasitism genes have been identified in h. glycines. most likely, however, the h. glycines parasitome is even larger. furthermore, there may be proteins produced in organs/tissues other than the esophageal glands or proteins released by means other than the signal peptide-dependent secretory pathway that play critical roles in mediating cyst nematode parasitism. while secretory parasitism proteins that are released into plant host tissue are key factors to understand host-parasite interactions, many secretory proteins exist that do not leave the body of the nematode. these secretory proteins are involved in a vast array of non-parasitic signaling events within the nematode and can be found for example in the extracellular matrix, intestinal lumen, cuticle or neuronal synapse.

previous studies leading to the identification of parasitism genes in cyst nematodes were based on cloning approaches of single genes  <cit>  or exploited smaller scale cdna libraries constructed from microaspirated gland cell contents  <cit> . however, larger scale genomic approaches offer an additional avenue to identify more genes with putative functions in parasitism. while studies to characterize the overall gene expression of parasitic nematodes based on expressed sequence tags  have become relatively common in recent years , very few reports dealt specifically with ests of genes that code for secretory proteins  <cit> , and none combined expression analyses of all genes with detailed sequence mining approaches.

we previously reported the expression profiling of all  <dig>  h. glycines probesets on the affymetrix soybean genome array genechip representing up to  <dig>  unique cyst nematode genes throughout the major life stages from embryonated eggs to the adult female stage  <cit> . the same affymetrix genechip was used recently to study the expression patterns of a small subset of parasitism genes in a few juvenile life stages of h. glycines as well as of soybean genes during the infection process  <cit>  and to survey the development of feeding cells in soybean plants  <cit> . we generated the necessary cdna libraries and ests that allowed the design of these  <dig>  h. glycines probesets from stage-specific soybean cyst nematode libraries including not only eggs and infective j <dig>  but also the hard-to-isolate parasitic stages  that only form inside the soybean root. this latter aspect is particularly important for the research reported here because sedentary endoparasitic nematodes like the cyst nematodes do not produce and/or secrete the vast number of parasitism proteins until they have invaded their host plants. consequently, previous approaches that are based on preparasitic juvenile worms and that do not include the parasitic stages are liable to miss the truly interesting proteins that the nematode only releases when in contact with its host cell deep inside the plant root. in this current paper, we have analyzed our previously deposited microarray data set  <cit>  with a distinct focus on parasitism and host-parasite interactions. the primary goal of the research presented here was to use critical high throughput criteria discernable from gene sequence and expression characteristics to identify additional proteins that can reasonably be expected to function during parasitism. this pre-selection is an enabling discovery for further, more in-depth functional work to unravel cyst nematode parasitism. to this end, a rigorous examination of all  <dig>  h. glycines probesets represented on the affymetrix soybean genome array genechip allowed us to identify a pool of  <dig> h. glycines genes that encode putative secretory proteins and of  <dig> h. glycines genes that are conserved in microbes or plants but that have significantly less similarity to sequences from the non-parasitic nematodes caenorhabditis elegans and caenorhabditis briggsae. we provide here for the first time an analysis of the expression profiles of these genes, as well as of all previously described parasitism genes, in all major life stages of h. glycines excluding adult males. together, the gene pool identified here represents a promising starting point to search for previously uncharacterized genes with functions in parasitism and for h. glycines genes that potentially were acquired by horizontal gene transfer, a mechanism by which parasitic nematodes are believed to have obtained a subset of parasitism genes  <cit> . in summary, this project represents a functional genomic analysis of available cyst nematode data targeting phytonematode parasitism.

RESULTS
known h. glycines parasitism genes show two different developmental expression patterns
during the generation of the affymetrix soybean genome array genechip the previously identified  <dig> h. glycines parasitism genes  <cit>  were grouped by the manufacturer into  <dig> contigs, which are represented by  <dig> probesets on the genechip  . using our previously described affymetrix microarray data set, which encompasses all life stages of h. glycines except adult males  <cit> , we determined the developmental expression patterns of all  <dig> probesets representing these  <dig> contigs. all of the parasitism gene probesets displayed significant expression changes during the h. glycines life cycle at a false discovery rate  of 5%. we performed statistical analyses as described in methods for all parasitism gene probesets, which identified two clusters based on gene expression patterns . h. glycines parasitism genes either reached a maximum mrna abundance in infective j <dig>  remained steady until parasitic j <dig> and dropped off steeply thereafter  or they reached a maximum in their mrna expression levels in parasitic j <dig> and then fell steadily after the j <dig> stage . the gland-specific expression patterns of these genes have been determined in previous studies  <cit> . apart from very few exceptions, parasitism genes expressed in the subventral glands of the nematode fell into cluster  <dig>  whereas parasitism genes from the dorsal gland could be grouped into cluster  <dig> or cluster  <dig> . the majority of h. glycines parasitism genes, particularly those expressed in the dorsal esophageal gland, were novel and did not share similarities with any known sequences. therefore, the expression profiles obtained here are important tools to infer putative protein functions judging from the time points at which these genes are upregulated. genes that are important during host invasion and early sedentary phases, which includes the early events of syncytium induction , should be represented in cluster  <dig>  because this cluster showed an expression maximum in these two stages . genes that are relevant during later stages of parasitism like the later stages of syncytial development, syncytium maintenance and feeding, are expected in cluster  <dig>  whose members were expressed at a relatively high level also in late stages . however, it was remarkable that such diverse proteins as secreted cellulases and pectate lyases with an obvious role in plant cell wall degradation  had a strikingly similar expression pattern to genes encoding secretory proteins that are believed to influence the host cell's physiology  or for which no function during parasitism can be ascribed yet . the expression profiles of these genes showed a clear downregulation after the parasitic j <dig> stage, which is the beginning of the sedentary phase of the nematode and of feeding site development. furthermore, those parasitism genes that were upregulated in later life stages did not match any other known sequences, apart from two exceptions: annexin and a cellulose-binding protein . annexins bind to calcium-dependent phospholipid membranes, and while their role during parasitism remains unknown, the cellulose-binding protein binds to a plant pectin methylesterase and functions in cell wall modifications during syncytium development  <cit> .

in addition to analyses of gene expression changes throughout the whole life cycle, in which each life stage was compared to all others, we also performed statistical analyses to identify gene expression changes in consecutive life stages to isolate specific shifts in gene expression. the results of these studies showed that most parasitism genes were differentially expressed when eggs were compared with infective j <dig> as well as when infective j <dig> were compared with parasitic j <dig>  all of these differentially expressed genes were upregulated . this pattern drastically changed from parasitic j <dig> to j <dig>  where only a smaller subset of genes was differentially expressed and, interestingly, these were all down-rather than upregulated.

*as defined in methods

**fdr 5%

h. glycines genes for secretory proteins frequently are novel sequences and change expression with the onset of parasitism
to identify new h. glycines genes that are potentially involved in host-parasite interactions we identified all genes that encode secretory proteins. specifically, we searched for signal peptide-coding regions in the consensus sequences of all  <dig>  h. glycines probesets on the affymetrix soybean genome array genechip as described in methods. this analysis identified  <dig> unique h. glycines genes that encode proteins with a putative signal peptide but lack a transmembrane helix and have an open reading frame  of at least thirty amino acids after the predicted signal peptide cleavage site . however, it can be assumed that h. glycines possesses more gene products with signal peptides than we could detect here because a significant portion of ests lacks a complete 5'-end so that no signal peptide-coding region could possibly be identified. all known parasitism genes are included in these  <dig>  probesets, and our detection protocol for secretory protein coding genes re-identified all but seven of the known sixty-six parasitism genes analyzed here, giving a re-discovery rate of 89%. the probesets of genes that were missing did not meet all of our stringent selection criteria.

because most parasitism proteins have no database hits to known proteins, we determined whether the signal peptide-encoding genes identified here differ in their likelihood of having database matches compared to other genes. for this purpose, we conducted blastx searches of all  <dig>  unique h. glycines genes underlying the  <dig>  probesets of the affymetrix genechip against the non-redundant genbank database. we found that  <dig> %  of the gene products predicted to be secreted had matches when using a cutoff value of 1e- <dig> . similarly,  <dig> %  of the gene products not thought to be secreted had matches. even though this difference of  <dig> % is relatively small, we found a significant difference when the relative blastx scores were compared. out of all  <dig>  unique genes,  <dig>  had matches, and resulted in a median blastx score of  <dig> . using only the  <dig> gene products of secreted candidates, the median blastx score was reduced to  <dig> , which suggests that as was the case for previously reported parasitism genes, our newly identified cohort of secretory proteins containing potential parasitism proteins evolved more rapidly than non-secreted sequences.

to analyze with which organisms h. glycines signal peptide-bearing proteins share conservation, we sorted the top blastx hits meeting a cutoff of 1e- <dig> by organism . approximately 26%  of the  <dig> h. glycines genes with putative signal peptide-coding regions matched caenorhabditis elegans or caenorhabditis briggsae sequences, followed by 12% that matched other h. glycines genes and 7% that aligned best with sequences from animals other than nematodes. however,  <dig> out of the total  <dig> caenorhabditis matches represented unknown or hypothetical proteins and, similarly,  <dig> out of  <dig> h. glycines sequences were novel, i.e., they did not share similarity with other known sequences.

using statistical analyses, all affymetrix probeset expression profiles obtained for the  <dig> signal peptide-encoding genes separated into nine expression clusters  as described in methods. when all experimental data, i.e., expression data throughout all life cycle stages, were taken into consideration, 94% of these probesets were differentially expressed  during the life cycle. when conducting statistical analyses of expression data for consecutive life stages in pairwise comparisons, we determined that 49% of the affymetrix probesets representing the  <dig> secretory protein genes were differentially expressed  during the transition from eggs to infective j <dig>  similarly, 48% of these affymetrix probesets were differentially expressed from infective j <dig> to parasitic j <dig> and 33% from parasitic j <dig> to j <dig>  the fewest significant changes  occurred between j <dig> and j <dig>  followed by the comparison between j <dig> and adult females  . taken together, the clusters for overall differentially expressed probesets as well as the stage by stage comparisons showed that the strongest expression changes in genes that code for secretory proteins took place at the transitions into and out of the infective j <dig> stage, which marks the preparations for host invasion and a parasitic lifestyle.

identification and expression profiling of h. glycines genes that are conserved in microbes or plants
previous studies showed that a substantial proportion of the known cyst nematode parasitism proteins share a high degree of similarity with bacterial  <cit>  and fungal  <cit>  proteins and not to the non-pathogenic caenorhabditis spp. these observations led to the suggestion that certain nematode genes that are important for a parasitic relationship with the host might have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer from microbes  <cit> . further studies demonstrated that other cyst nematode secretory proteins with potential involvement in parasitism have a striking similarity to plant proteins  <cit> , which could hint at mimicry of plant regulatory proteins by cyst nematodes to alter the physiology of the host. therefore, we identified h. glycines proteins that showed significant sequence similarity with microbe or plant proteins by manually sorting the results of the blastx searches of all  <dig>  h. glycines genes against the non-redundant genbank database mentioned above. we isolated all matches to proteins from plants, microbial phytopathogens/phytosymbionts , soil-living microbes and other microbes. a counter-selection protocol ensured that highly conserved sequences that are present in diverse organisms  were removed in order to discard sequences that are unlikely to be involved in parasitic relationships . these analyses revealed that, using our criteria,  <dig> h. glycines protein sequences were conserved in plants,  <dig> in microbial phytomicrobes,  <dig> in soil-living microbes, and  <dig> in other microbes, resulting in a total of  <dig> such proteins . for example, we identified a plant-like h. glycines gene whose translated product had similarity to beta-amylase from arabidopsis , which is interesting because genes encoding beta-amylases have so far only been found in microbe and plant genomes, but not in animals. furthermore, we found h. glycines genes whose products were similar to a potato protein induced in the feeding site  of the root-knot nematode  , or were involved in rna interference  like a zwille/pinhead-like protein from rice . phytomicrobe-like h. glycines sequences matched sugar metabolizing enzymes from agrobacterium tumefaciens, e.g., mannitol-2-dehydrogenase  and sucrose hydrolase , as well as enzymes like glutamine synthetase  and phosphoribosyltransferase  or aldose-1-epimerase  from mesorhizobium to name just a few.

it is particularly interesting to discern if these h. glycines genes potentially are secreted from the nematode. therefore, we examined how many of these h. glycines genes were part of the secretome identified in this study. of the  <dig> plant-conserved h. glycines genes, three encoded a putative signal peptide. similarly, four of those conserved in phytomicrobes, four of those conserved in soilmicrobes and four in other microbes  contained signal peptide sequences. however, these predicted proteins did not necessarily meet all our other, more stringent criteria. e.g., some proteins did have a putative transmembrane helix or did have less than  <dig> amino acids after the predicted signal peptide cleavage site . also in these analyses, one needs to remember that a significant portion of the ests lacks a complete 5'-end so that no signal peptide-coding region could possibly be detected. additional file  <dig> shows the overlap between h. glycines contigs identified as parasitism genes, secretory protein-encoding or plant/microbe-like. interestingly, some of those h. glycines genes that did fulfill all our criteria for secreted plant-like proteins matched for example plant genes encoding histone deacetylase  <dig> from arabidopsis  or the meloidogyne-induced giant-cell protein-like protein from potato . h. glycines proteins with similarity to microbial gene products that passed our signal peptide selection process matched among others a flavin adenine dinucleotide -linked oxidase from arthrobacter , histidine triad nucleotide-binding family protein  <dig>  from chaetomium globosum  or a hypothetical protein from gibberella zeae . to our knowledge, none of these genes encode proteins with signal peptides in the respective plant or microbe species to which the h. glycines sequences matched.

we further grouped all identified plant- and microbe-like h. glycines genes represented by their respective probesets into distinct expression clusters . in order to identify specific shifts in gene expression, we performed pairwise comparisons of consecutive life stages of h. glycines for genes that were conserved in plants, phytopathogens/phytosymbionts, soilmicrobes and other microbes regardless of whether we could find a signal peptide-encoding sequence or not. the results of these analyses are summarized in table  <dig>  it is evident that the vast majority of these probesets was differentially expressed when eggs were compared with infective j <dig> and infective j <dig> with parasitic j <dig> and that up- and downregulated probesets were represented in about equal proportions in these two stage-wise comparisons. this means that these plant and microbe-like h. glycines genes are strongly regulated at the onset of parasitism.

h. glycines encodes signal peptide-bearing gene products with similarity to plant histone deacetylase
histone modifications are an important regulatory element in gene expression  <cit> . we found here a h. glycines histone deacetylase- <dig>  probeset  with an arabidopsis hda <dig>  as best blastx match for its consensus sequence, rather than a homologous gene in nematode species, including the fully sequenced c. elegans or c. briggsae genomes. interestingly, this h. glycines hda <dig> has a putative signal peptide and lacks a transmembrane helix, which makes it a putatively secreted protein. to our knowledge, there are no prior reports of signal-peptide-containing histone deacetylases. cyst nematodes like h. glycines are known to possess plant-like proteins with signal peptides that are normally not secreted in plants or other organisms, e.g., skp <dig> or chorismate mutases  <cit> . hence, a secreted arabidopsis-like histone deacetylase would be an exciting new example of how cyst nematodes could modify gene expression of plants by altering the epigenome of their host cells.

to analyze this h. glycines gene product further, we constructed a multiple alignment and a phylogenetic tree for the translated affymetrix consensus sequence of this probeset  and hda <dig> homologs of selected plant and nematode species using clustal w  <cit> . it can be clearly seen that the h. glycines hda <dig> is not only more similar to arabidopsis hda <dig>  but to other plant hda2s as well, and that the respective homologs of other nematode species are very different from plant hda2s .

h. glycines probes cross-hybridize with phytophthora sojae or glycine max probesets
in addition to the  <dig>  probesets corresponding to h. glycines mrnas, the affymetrix soybean genome array genechip contains  <dig>  probesets for soybean  mrnas and  <dig>  probesets for mrnas of phytophthora sojae, an oomycete pathogen of soybean plants. we found  <dig> g. max and  <dig> p. sojae probesets that hybridized strongly and repeatedly to h. glycines probes in three independent experiments  and that showed differential expression . a variety of blast searches of cross-hybridizing probesets  detected only a negligible number of caenorhabditis hits and did not lead to matches for cyst nematode sequences, but primarily soybean and oomycete or fungus sequences as best hits . these results indicate that the cross-hybridizing probesets in all likelihood originated from soybean plants and p. sojae and were not h. glycines contaminations in cdna libraries of these two organisms because we did not find a single hit with a bona fide h. glycines database entry, which otherwise would have to have occurred. the possibility of falsely annotated h. glycines ests can be ruled out based on the same results. to determine whether in fact there are highly conserved cyst nematode sequences that could cross-hybridize with gene sequences of soybean or p. sojae, we conducted blastn searches of the cross-hybridizing soybean and p. sojae probesets against an in-house database of all cyst nematode  sequences. of  <dig> soybean probesets,  <dig>  indeed matched known cyst nematode genes and of  <dig> p. sojae probesets  <dig>  in fact had matches with known heterodera spp. or globodera spp. genes . in other words, in all likelihood, sequence conservation was responsible for the observed cross-hybridization results.

to complement the blast searches of the cross-hybridizing soybean and p. sojae probesets, we used interproscan  <cit>  to identify known protein domains. we found  <dig> soybean probesets that aligned to  <dig> unique interpro domains and  <dig> p. sojae probesets that aligned to  <dig> unique interpro domains, respectively. a summary of the  <dig> most abundant interpro domains for both organisms can be viewed in table  <dig> 

*as defined in methods

**fdr 5%

taken together, the soybean and p. sojae probesets that surprisingly cross-hybridized with h. glycines probes potentially provide a lead to an additional set of nematode genes from which novel parasitism-associated genes can be isolated and confirmed. ultimately, this aspect can be advanced further only with a future release of a complete h. glycines genome sequence, because the recent deposition of a large number of genome fragments did not allow an exhaustive and conclusive analysis .

discussion
here we have presented the results of an extensive in silico study aiming at the identification of a group of h. glycines genes that is enriched in genes with potential functions during host-parasite interactions. this is the first study combining microarray data of all major life stages  and exhaustive sequence analyses for the identification of parasitism-associated proteins in any parasitic nematode. our findings now enable more detailed studies to identify true parasitism genes among the individual candidate genes identified here, which would not have been feasible for larger data sets.

it has been widely assumed that cyst nematode parasitism genes have well-defined roles in early and late stages of the infection process, and our findings of two distinct expression clusters representing early or late upregulation for all known parasitism genes support this. when comparing the temporal expression patterns of h. glycines gene groups identified here, it became evident that certain expression clusters showed profiles that were similar to those of known parasitism genes. specifically, cluster  <dig> of the currently known parasitome   was strikingly similar to cluster  <dig> of the secretome identified by us here , while cluster  <dig> of the parasitome  was mirrored by cluster  <dig> of the secretome, cluster  <dig> of plant-like h. glycines genes  and cluster  <dig> of soilmicrobe-like h. glycines genes . the h. glycines genes represented in these clusters might be particularly promising candidates for future studies aiming at the verification of their roles in parasitism. alternatively, clusters  <dig> and  <dig> of the secretome might be of interest because the genes in these groups were strongly upregulated in very late parasitic stages . these clusters might harbor novel parasitism-associated genes that are very different from the currently known parasitome, which is biased towards early stages of parasitism.

it has been suggested that nematode proteins that enter the secretory pathway evolve more rapidly than those that do not and hence are less likely to match sequences of other organisms  <cit> . even though the difference we found in the number of genes with blastx hits between all h. glycines genes represented on the affymetrix microarray and those with a predicted signal peptide was relatively low, we identified a significant difference in the relative distribution of blastx scores. this means that our results support previous findings and a model in which nematode secretory proteins evolve more rapidly than other gene products. none of the libraries used here was based on splice leader  <dig>  sequences, which tend to be skewed towards shorter sequences  <cit> , such that no bias towards complete 5'-ends  was possible in the data analyzed here.

some of the known parasitism proteins showed similarities to plant or microbe sequences  <cit> , and in a closely related nematode species additional genes with similarity to nitrogen-fixing soil bacteria, collectively called rhizobia, could be identified  <cit> . it has been suggested that microbial genes might have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer  <cit>  and that plant-like genes might have evolved in the nematode for mimicry of plant proteins and interference with plant signaling pathways  <cit> . for all of these genes to have any effect in a parasitic relationship between host and parasite, they need to be secreted. hence, we were interested in analyzing whether h. glycines genes represented on the affymetrix soybean genome array genechip with similarity to microbes or plants might encode signal peptide-bearing proteins. if so, these genes would be interesting candidates for further studies as they might be involved in parasitism. particularly intriguing examples were genes encoding proteins for which secretion would not be expected in plants or microbes, but for which homologous sequences in h. glycines possessed a signal peptide-encoding region. for example, we found two h. glycines genes  with similarity to arabidopsis histone deacetylase  <dig>  and arabidopsis rna polymerase ii transcription factor , none of which are secreted in arabidopsis, but both contained a signal peptide in h. glycines . given the fact that these proteins had higher similarity with plant proteins than with homologs in the fully sequenced c. elegans or c. briggsae genomes, secretion of these proteins into host plants and a role in parasitism seems very likely and warrants further experiments. it has been demonstrated that histone modifications are involved in gene regulation  <cit>  so that a secreted arabidopsis-like histone deacetylase would be an exciting example of how cyst nematodes could modify gene expression of their host plants and mimic plant proteins to interfere with the physiology of the host. it has been shown that in arabidopsis, histone acetylation is involved in vernalization  <cit> , is responsive to light  <cit> , and that histone deacetylase  <dig>  can be induced by wounding, pathogen attack and plant hormones  <cit> . furthermore, overexpression of hda <dig> resulted in increased pathogen resistance  <cit> . what role a secreted h. glycines histone deacetylase might have during the infection process remains elusive at this point.

as stated earlier, the sequences upon which the affymetrix genechip is based are mostly ests, which frequently are incomplete at their 5'-ends, which is the location of the signal peptide-encoding sequence. consequently, we expect that more of the plant and microbe-like h. glycines genes encode secretory proteins than we were able to identify. on the other hand, not all of the h. glycines proteins that matched plant or microbe sequences and that did have a signal peptide are necessarily secreted into the environment  but are rather involved in processes within the nematode. further experimental studies are needed to localize the putative secretory proteins identified here in the nematode either by in situ hybridizations or immune localizations. also, it needs to be noted that certain proteins can be secreted even without a canonical n-terminal signal peptide  <cit> , which adds an additional layer of complexity to the study of cyst nematode parasitism.

our findings of h. glycines genes with similarity to plant or microbe sequences identified here do not imply that all these genes have been acquired by horizontal gene transfer or have evolved to mimic host proteins. the set of genes identified here is rather meant as a first step to identify a pool of candidates from which true parasitism-related genes can be isolated from highly conserved, but not parasitism-related ones, in the future. interestingly, recent studies have demonstrated that cellulase genes must have been present in an ancient ancestor of bilaterian animals  <cit>  and, therefore, may not have been acquired by nematodes through horizontal gene transfer.

a direct demonstration of h. glycines genes that are conserved in microbes and plants could be seen in the p. sojae and soybean probesets of the affymetrix soybean genome array genechip to which h. glycines probes cross-hybridized in our experiments. while many of the genes had highly conserved functions like dna-binding domains, sodium symporters or zinc fingers, others could possibly be involved in parasitic relationships between h. glycines and soybean plants. interestingly, cross-hybridizing g. max probesets matched ten distinct h. glycines sequences that were derived from esophageal gland cell cdna libraries, and p. sojae matched two, respectively . the respective h. glycines genes are of unknown function, such that a putative role in parasitism is speculative at this point. it is extremely unlikely that the cross-hybridizing probesets are caused by contaminating soybean or oomycete nucleic acids. for one, even if there were plant material left after our nematode isolations, the amounts would be so minute that repeatedly strong signals at about the same level and same developmental stage of the nematode in the different experiments performed by us are highly unlikely. even more compellingly, we harvested h. glycines eggs in a very pure state and infective j <dig> stages from hatch chambers, a plant-free environment. both stages show strong expression signals for many soybean probesets. since our blast searches described in results ruled out the possibility of falsely annotated nematode sequences in p. sojae or soybean cdna libraries, we believe that the strong expression signals for cross-hybridizing soybean and p. sojae probesets must originate from homologous genes in h. glycines.

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we have identified a novel pool of putative parasitism-associated genes, a significant proportion of which, we hypothesize, will turn out to have parasitic functions after functional assays have been performed. we also raise the possibility that h. glycines might have acquired many more genes through horizontal gene transfer and might mimic many more plant proteins, all of which could be involved in parasitism, than previously thought. using powerful genomic tools, this study has reduced the total number of  <dig>  currently known h. glycines genes to a pool of  <dig> candidate genes, from which additional true parasitism genes can be identified in future studies. the identification of these candidate genes is a very significant advance for the field, but also of broad interest for pathogen-host research in general because this new pool of genes will help unravel sophisticated plant-animal interactions leading to a successful parasitic relationship and deliver knowledge that can be transferred to other pathogen-host systems. ultimately, the verification of true parasitism genes from the pool of candidate genes isolated here and their subsequent functional characterization will identify weaknesses in the nematode life cycle that can be targeted in novel anti-nematode efforts.

