BACKGROUND
alzheimer’s disease  is an age-related neurodegenerative disorder, histologically characterized by the extracellular deposition of amyloid β peptides  and the intracellular accumulation of hyperphosphorylated tau. numerous in vitro and in vivo studies have provided evidence for a key role of aβ in ad
 <cit> . aβ-associated neurodegeneration involves cerebral cell death, but the underlying mechanisms remain largely unknown. animal models of ad offer a unique opportunity to study the mechanisms involved in ad-related neurodegeneration, particularly the contribution of specific types of cell death during neuronal demise. although neuronal death cannot be reproduced in all mouse models of ad, brain regions of some transgenic mice  have been reported to demonstrate an age-dependent vulnerability, with the cortex and hippocampus being affected the earliest
 <cit> .

neurodegeneration in age-associated dementia of the ad type is thought to involve neuronal cell loss by programmed cell death 
 <cit> . various caspases have been recognized as important mediators of neuronal pcd in ad
 <cit>  by classical caspase-dependent apoptosis. several studies have shown the presence of activated caspases and the resulting caspase-cleaved substrates, including tau and amyloid precursor protein  in post-mortem human ad brains and animal models
 <cit> . however, accumulating evidence also points to the involvement of caspase-independent mechanisms in neuronal pcd
 <cit> . in particular, apoptosis-inducing factor  is considered to play a central role among key effectors involved in caspase-independent neuronal cell death
 <cit> . consistently, we have recently reported the increased nuclear translocation of aif in the hippocampus and cortex of post-mortem human tissues derived from ad patients
 <cit> ; this being indicative of caspase-independent pcd via aif.

the mitochondrial flavoprotein aif is synthesised in the cytoplasm as a ~ 67 kda precursor. its maturation involves a proteolytical cleavage of the precursor to a ubiquitously expressed ~ 62 kda form
 <cit> . mature aif is imbedded into the inner mitochondrial membrane where it is involved in organizing and/or maintaining the structural integrity of the respiratory chain complex-i
 <cit> . indeed, deficiency in aif expression is associated with reduced complex-i activity and decreased atp production
 <cit> . upon pathological mitochondrial permeabilization, aif is further processed to a ~ 57 kda truncated form 
 <cit> , then released from mitochondria and translocated to the nucleus where it participates in the induction of caspase-independent pcd
 <cit> .

interestingly, harlequin  mutant mice with reduced expression of aif display decreased oxidative phosphorylation in specific neuronal populations
 <cit> . the reduced expression of aif in hq mice is correlated with a lowered expression of mitochondrial complex-i, together with signs of oxidative stress linked to increased reactive oxygen species  production in dying neurons
 <cit> . thus, mitochondrial dysfunction, seen in the course of rodent brain aging, is strikingly similar to that observed in aif-deficient neurons, suggesting a possible relationship between age-related decreases in aif expression, mitochondrial impairment and neuronal death. this hypothesis is in line with the fact that mitochondrial injury in hq mice, due to low aif expression, precedes the onset of neurodegeneration
 <cit> .

moreover, although aif is ubiquitously expressed in the rodent brain, we observed a brain region-specific gradient of distribution in the normal rat brain
 <cit> . such contrasting levels of aif expression indicated that aif-induced pcd may be region specific. to explore this possibility, we investigated aif-related cell death in brain regions vulnerable to ad-like pathology in the transgenic mouse model, tgcrnd <dig> , at  <dig>   <dig>  6– <dig> and 9 months of age. these selected ages correspond to pre-plaque, plaque burden, overt ad-like pathology and advanced ad-like pathology stage, respectively
 <cit> . the cortex and hippocampus were compared because they are the most affected regions in tg mice
 <cit> , whereas the cerebellum was chosen as a relatively spared control region. overall, our data suggest that among the vulnerable brain regions, aif is involved in ad-associated pcd in the cortex but not in the hippocampus.

RESULTS
accumulation of aβ in the cortex and hippocampus of tg mice is accompanied by signs of oxidative stress
we examined the aβ load as a function of age in the cortex, hippocampus and cerebellum of tg mice. using brain region and age as between-subject factors, a two-way anova analysis of total aβ levels showed significant brain region and age interaction . multiple comparisons showed significant regional differences in total aβ levels, with higher levels in the cortex compared to hippocampus  and cerebellum .

we next investigated the levels of both aβ1– <dig> and aβ1– <dig> as a function of age and brain region. in all three brain regions of 2- and 4-month-old mice, the level of aβ1– <dig>  and aβ1– <dig>  was low, only reaching the limit of detection at 2 months while remaining relatively low at 4 months. the difference in the level of expression of either peptide was not significant between these two ages in any of the brain regions . in contrast, aβ1– <dig>  and aβ1– <dig>  were significantly increased in older  animals. for aβ1– <dig>  the observed difference in the cortex and hippocampus was significant for 6-7-month-old animals in comparison to younger  mice. the level of aβ1– <dig> in the hippocampus  was significantly different between 6-7-month-old mice and 2- or 4-month-old groups . in all brain regions, including the cerebellum, the difference was significant for the comparison between 9-month-old animals and all other ages for both aβ1– <dig> and aβ1– <dig> .oxidative stress has been proposed to increase with aβ peptide accumulation. we therefore undertook a parallel assessment of oxidative stress, via the quantification of ros. the alterations seen in the cortex indicated the establishment of oxidative stress in the course of brain aging . interestingly in this region, ros production was significantly higher in tg than in non-tg mice as early as 2 months of age. moreover, the difference in ros production between the two genotypes was significant in all age groups, except for the 4-month old mice . comparison between cortical ros levels among transgenic animals indicated a significant increase in the course of aging  when 2-month-old tg mice were taken as a reference value .in the hippocampus of tg and non-tg mice a significant difference in ros levels was seen between 4- and 6-month-old groups . in contrast, in 2- and 9-month-old groups, the difference between tg and non-tg mice was not significant . however, comparing the level of ros between the ages in transgenic animals revealed that it was significantly higher in all ages when compared to 2-month-old tg mice . no significant difference was observed between either genotype or age in the cerebellum , confirming this brain region as a negative control.to further explore the establishment of oxidative stress in the course of aging in the three brain regions, we studied the level of expression of neuronal nitric oxide synthase . a moderate increase in expression of nnos was observed between 2- and 9-month-old mice in both cortex and hippocampus but the difference was only statistically significant in the hippocampus . in contrast to the cortex and hippocampus but in agreement with ros levels, no difference was found in the cerebellum .as mitochondria are known to be causally involved in the establishment of oxidative stress and a target of aβ toxicity, we aimed to further investigate function by comparing the level of atp production between tg and non-tg mice. these experiments revealed a slightly decreased production of atp in vulnerable areas  of most age groups of tg mice versus age-matched non-tg. however, the difference was greater at the younger stages and was only significant in the cortex of the 2-month-old group . all other comparisons, and specifically those for the cerebellum, indicated a similar level of atp production between the two genotypes and age groups .

expression of cell death markers in the cortex and hippocampus of aging tg mice
to assess neuronal death, we focused on indirect markers of cell death because it is extremely difficult to directly quantify the number of dead neurons in ad mouse models
 <cit> . in agreement, our attempts to quantify neuronal death by tunel assay didn’t reveal significant differences between genotypes  in spite of the fact that loss of specific sub-types of neurons has been reported by 6 months of age in tgcrnd8
 <cit> . in order to assess the extent of cell death in the brain of tg mice, we determined the levels of the universal pro-apoptotic protein, bax, and the induction of cyclin d <dig>  the latter is considered to be an early commitment step in neuronal cell death.

the universal involvement of this bcl <dig> family member, bax, in cell death has been largely demonstrated
 <cit> . moreover, bax has recently been shown to be directly involved in aβ toxicity to neurons
 <cit> . in our experiments, the cortical expression of bax is significantly increased in 4- and 6-7-month-old tg animals when compared to the 2-month-old group . since it has been reported that gender may impact the expression of bcl <dig> family members and because we used sex-balanced groups of mice in our study, we investigated whether the level of bax expression differed between males and females. we found no significant difference for either genotype . because the death-inducing activity of bax relies on its translocation from cytoplasm to mitochondria
 <cit> , we assessed the distribution of bax between these two cellular compartments by performing the sub-cellular fractionation experiments. our data show increased mitochondrial bax translocation in 4- and 6 months aged tgcrnd <dig> mice , which is compatible with cell death induction. by contrast, there was no significant difference between the level of active bax expression in cerebellum and hippocampus . however, in contrast to cerebellum, hippocampus displayed an increasing, age-dependent trend of active bax expression where only the difference between the youngest  and oldest  groups was significant .

the induction of cyclin d <dig> is considered to precede neuronal death in some pathological paradigms. for example, cyclin d <dig> induction is related to excitotoxicity, which is known to be tightly associated with oxidative stress and is correlated with increasing aβ levels
 <cit> . moreover, cyclin d <dig> induction has been involved in neuronal death, as shown in hippocampal
 <cit>  and cortical
 <cit>  neurons, in vitro, as well as animal and human ad post-mortem tissues
 <cit> . in the current study, no difference was noted with age in any of the regions studied . these results indicate that the strength of the cell death-inducing capacity of aβ, as reflected by increased bax levels of expression and mitochondrial translocation, which irreversibly direct cells to pcd, may be non-permissive for cyclin d <dig> induction. consistently, cyclin d <dig> induction is generally considered as a part of the cell defence response to initially mild  dna damage related to oxidative stress
 <cit> .

cell death in the cortex, but not in the hippocampus, is associated with aif in aging tg mice
the cortical expression of taif  was similar at 4- and 6-months-of-age and significantly higher than in the youngest and the oldest groups studied . the expression of taif was not different between the age groups in either hippocampus or cerebellum . interestingly, the level of expression of the mitochondrial form  was significantly higher in the hippocampus of 6-month-old tg mice compared with the other ages studied  . the 62 kda form was not altered with age in either cortex or cerebellum relative to non-tg littermate levels . however, independently of the genotype, the level of expression of the 62 kda form appears higher in the cerebellum  compared to the other two regions , which is in agreement with a general view that this brain region displays lower vulnerability to ad compared to the cortex and hippocampus.

to confirm the biochemical data pointing to the involvement of aif in cell death in the cortex of 4- and 6-month-old tg mice, we assessed the histological signature of aif nuclear translocation and cell death induction
 <cit>  using immunohistochemistry. we examined the population of cells in which nuclear exclusion from aif staining is no longer visible. in agreement with the biochemical data, a low number of cells without nuclear exclusion from aif staining was seen in the cortex of 2-month-old mice , with similar low numbers in 9-month-old mice  irrespective of their genotype . in contrast, at  <dig> and 6– <dig> months of age, more cells with nuclear exclusion from aif staining were apparent in tg  than in non-tg  mice. the occurrence of nuclear translocation of aif has been further confirmed with higher resolution by using confocal microscopy . moreover, the analysis of the co-localization profiles of aif  and dapi-stained nuclei  clearly indicate the presence of aif in the nuclear compartment of cells in which aif has translocated to the nucleus .

discussion
the main finding of this study showed that the cleavage of aif into cell death-inducing taif increased in the course of aging and aβ accumulation selectively in the cortex of the tg mouse model of ad studied. moreover, the age-dependent increase in taif was not found in other vulnerable  or relatively spared  brain areas further pointing to the specificity of the observed alterations in the cortex. these results are the first to indicate the contribution of the key mediator of caspase-independent programmed cell death, aif, to the cell loss associated with age-related progression in a model of ad-like pathology.

furthermore in our study, cortical oxidative stress in tg mice was found to occur as early as the pre-plaque stage , thus greatly preceding the onset of plaque burden 
 <cit>  and cell loss 
 <cit> . these findings validate our methodological approaches, as they are in agreement with previously published data in other ad mouse models demonstrating the relationship between oxidative stress, aβ and aβ plaque accumulation
 <cit> . interestingly, the first signs of mitochondrial dysfunction, including signs of oxidative stress such as increased ros production, coincide with the intracellular accumulation of aβ and continue to accumulate with further increases in aβ and its deposition into plaques in thy- <dig> app mice
 <cit> . in addition, our results point to a higher aβ load in the cortex than in the hippocampus and cerebellum of tgcrnd <dig> mice. moreover, despite a general trend towards the up-regulated production of ros in both hippocampus and cortex of the youngest  mice, this increase was only significant in the cortex. these results are in line with the recently published data in app/ps <dig> mice where oxidative stress is specifically increased in the cortex before evidence of plaque burden
 <cit> .

besides, the increase in the level of ros was accompanied by decreased atp production only in the cortex of the youngest  age group studied, further suggesting early mitochondrial dysfunction in this brain region. these results may not be surprising since creatine levels have been reported to rise with age, and this might function to buffer atp production
 <cit> . remarkably, the study of the mitochondrial proteome has recently identified an early alteration in expression of more than  <dig> proteins, among others involved in oxidative stress and apoptosis, specifically in the cortex of another mouse model of alzheimer’s disease
 <cit> .

the signs of mitochondrial dysfunction observed in our study preceded the increased production of taif and its nuclear translocation, both of which were augmented in cortices of mid-aged  tg mice. taken together, these data may suggest a causal relationship between mitochondrial impairment/oxidative stress and aif-mediated caspase-independent pcd in this transgenic ad mouse model. in addition, these findings confirm and extend previous reports on the causal relationship between early mitochondrial dysfunction and multiple ad-associated cell death pathways including caspase-dependent apoptosis and autophagic pathways
 <cit> .

despite the observed genotypic differences in ros levels, the production of atp was similar between transgenic and non-tg mice during aging . previous studies have described differences in distinct ros scavenging capacity as well as metabolic and intracellular signalling between the cortex and hippocampus
 <cit> . therefore, the differential sensitivity of mitochondrial atp production and increased ros between these two regions reported herein may be associated with their respective level of expression of aif. in agreement with this hypothesis, our previous study revealed significant differences in the level of aif expression between brain regions of the rodent brain
 <cit> . furthermore, low level of aif expression in harlequin mice has been linked to mitochondrial respiratory chain dysfunction
 <cit>  and aif has been implicated in ros production
 <cit> . therefore, it is plausible that the tissue level of aif may be related to the degree of aβ-induced oxidative stress and subsequent aif-mediated cell death.

age-related cell death in tg mice was demonstrated in this study by increased levels of cortical taif and bax in the mid-aged groups . however, in the oldest group  aif-mediated cell death was not evident, as indicated by the absence of increased taif and bax. this apparent paradoxical observation may be related to the limited, yet still significant, neuronal loss observed in our model, starting by 6– <dig> months of age
 <cit> .

cell death in the hippocampus has been documented at 6 months of age in tgcrnd <dig> mice
 <cit> . interestingly in this study, the hippocampal level of bax was not increased before 9 months and no significant age-dependent increase was seen in the level of taif, suggesting that cell death does not involve aif and is bax-independent, at least up to 9 months of age. in the hippocampus of the two mid-aged groups, the absence of deleterious effects  is suggested to be the result of compensated production of atp, which may be related to the increased expression of the mitochondrial, 62 kda, form of aif. an increased expression of this form of aif may provide more efficient respiratory chain function due to, at least in part, more efficient complex i and iii function
 <cit> .

cyclin d <dig> expression, used here as an early marker of neuronal cell death, was similarly expressed between different age groups in all brain regions. although cyclin d <dig> induction has been associated with aβ-induced cell death, in vitro and in human post-morten ad brain tissues
 <cit> , the data are much less conclusive regarding the relationship of cyclin d1/aβ in ad mouse models
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
overall, our data suggest that in the course of aging, aif may play a different role in ad-related caspase-independent pcd, depending on the brain region and relative contribution of multiple pcd pathways to neurodegeneration. since caspase-dependent apoptosis has been reported to occur both in the cortex and in the hippocampus
 <cit> , future therapeutic strategies should take into the account a multi-therapeutic approach targeting both caspase-dependent and caspase-independent pcd.

