BACKGROUND
the local microenvironment influences the growth and morphogenesis of developing cells in vivo  <cit> . similarly, cultured cells respond to their local environment by regulating their adhesion, proliferation and differentiation. classical cell culture conditions typically consist of a culturing surface like a cover slip, coated with an adhesive substrate, such as poly-l-lysine . this, however, discards important structural properties that may have been present in the original microenvironment, which can affect cell growth and further impact the regulation of intracellular mechanisms.

to improve our understanding of how patterned substrates influence adhesion and growth of cells, we have examined neural cell adhesion and differentiation on micropatterned substrates composed of pll, a common artificial permissive substrate  <cit>  as well as growth inhibition on a substrate made from central nervous system  myelin, known to impair axon regeneration  <cit> . while we and others have previously used microcontact printing to print pll, it has not yet to our knowledge been applied to growth inhibitory molecules such as cns myelin. myelin, which forms a protective sheath surrounding axons, is composed of many proteins and lipids  <cit> . some myelin-associated proteins exhibit inhibitory properties that restrict axonal regeneration when nerves are damaged. the study of these molecules in vitro has become a useful tool for investigating axonal regeneration in response to injury as well as numerous neurodegenerative diseases like multiple sclerosis  <cit> . we therefore have developed a protocol for patterning myelin on coverglass using microcontact printing in order to advance our understanding of process outgrowth inhibition in vitro.

we demonstrate, using primary neuronal culture and microcontact printing that neurons adhere to and polarize on diverse patterned environments. while neural lineage cells preferentially adhere to high concentration micropatterned pll lines, cos <dig> cells exhibit a concentration-dependent response, favoring low over high concentrations of pll. furthermore, we demonstrate that microcontact printing can be used to print coverglass with myelin to study myelin-mediated inhibition of process outgrowth.

RESULTS
control of neuronal morphology by microcontact printed pll
we first reproduced demonstrations that pdms stamps can be reliably used to print peptides onto glass surfaces  <cit> . for this, we used fluorescein-conjugated-pll  to confirm that microcontact printing is an efficient method for protein transfer to the glass surface . we used different patterns , lines and grids, to examine if cells would adhere to and follow a range of patterned substrates. primary hippocampal and cortical neurons firmly adhered to patterned pll  and their neurites, visualized using cytoskeletal markers, closely followed the patterns printed in pll . an octagonal grid pattern , with nodes of 20 μm diameter was designed to allow a single neuronal cell body to adhere to each node . in figure 1e and f neurons can be seen with their cell bodies positioned within the nodes and the outgrowth of their long processes appears to have been guided by the patterned substrate. thus, microcontact printing of pll can be used to control the distribution and morphology of cultured neurons.

micropatterned pll does not prevent neuronal polarization
we next examined whether this morphological constraint would impair the polarization of neurites into axons and dendrites. for this, we plated neurons onto micropatterned pll and cultured them for five days. despite the strict morphological shaping imposed by patterned pll, tau- <dig> and map- <dig> immunostaining to distinguish axons and dendrites respectively revealed no apparent impairment in polarization . interestingly, the axons can be seen to more closely follow the patterned pll whereas many map-2-positive dendrites are observed to extend outside the defined zones beyond the patterned substrate, suggesting that dendrites may be less strictly guided by adhesive interactions or may be able to secrete extracellular matrix proteins that permit their adhesion to non-printed areas of the glass.

microcontact printed pll regulates the growth of cells with diverse morphologies
we next investigated how patterned pll might influence the morphologies of cell types with different inherent tendencies to exhibit complex morphological elaboration. for this, we used oli-neu cells, an immortalized cell line capable of differentiating into immature oligodendrocyte-like cells in vitro  <cit> , and cos <dig> cells, an immortalized fibroblast line. we used a stamp consisting of parallel lines to print high-concentration  fitc-pll lines on to a background of unconjugated pll at low-concentration    <cit> . we found that, similar to neurons, the smaller cell bodies of oli-neu cells appeared to prefer sites of high concentration pll and their elaborate processes were aligned with the patterned substrate . by contrast, the larger cos <dig> cells adhered to areas containing lower concentrations of pll, avoiding the intervening high concentration lines . moreover, the preferential distribution of cos <dig> cells to the areas with low concentration of pll is independent of the fluorophore used, as a similar preference was observed when fitc was replaced with dylight549-conjugated pll   <cit> .

in our patterned substrates with 10 μm wide lines printed at 60 μm intervals,  <dig> % of the total area of the coverslip is printed with high-concentration pll. consistent with their avoidance of high-concentration lines, we found that only  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of the total area of the cos <dig> somata and processes grew on the printed lines, significantly less than chance .

the avoidance of the high concentration pll stripes by cos <dig> cells reflects either a negative signal from the high concentration stripes or a relative preference for the lower concentration zones. one potential negative aspect of the stripes we used might be that they were simply too narrow to accommodate growth of these large cells. alternatively it is possible that at these high concentrations pll may serve as an effective repulsive substrate for cos <dig> cells. to investigate this, we attempted to grow cos <dig> cells on high concentration pll stripes without a carpet of low concentration pll in the intervening gaps . under these conditions, cos <dig> cells adhered to and extended upon the high concentration pll stripes , showing a strong inclination for growing on these stripes rather than the gaps in between the stripes despite the space constraints of the narrow stripes which covered only  <dig> % of the coverslip surface area.

this demonstrates that high concentration pll, far from inhibiting growth, is actually able to serve as a permissive substrate capable of guiding the adhesion and growth of cos <dig> cells. the narrow dimensions of the pll stripes are also not an impediment to healthy growth of the cells. furthermore, when cos <dig> cells were plated on a simple lawn of low concentration pll, adsorbed at 1 pg/ml, they also adhered and grew, indicating that this very low concentration was adequate to support growth on its own and the ability of the cos <dig> cells to grow on this substrate did not require the presence of the high concentration stripes . therefore, cos <dig> cells are able to adhere and thrive on either high-  or low-  concentration pll substrates but that they distinguish between these concentrations and select the low-concentration pll microenvironment when given a choice between the two . this finding underscores the complex influences that the local molecular landscape can exert on growing cells.

microcontact-printed myelin inhibits process outgrowth
recent work has demonstrated that oligodendrocyte differentiation may be tightly regulated by signals produced by other glial cells present in the cns  <cit> , however this can be a challenge to study under mixed co-culture conditions due to the possibility of reciprocal signaling  <cit> . we therefore used microcontact printing to quantify the efficacy of myelin in inhibiting process outgrowth in oli-neu oligodendrocyte progenitor cell lines  <cit> . oli-neu cells labeled with cell tracker green cmfda were plated on coverslips micropatterned with pll, which forced them to extend their processes in a straight line along the printed stripes . maximum process extension length was then compared between cells in myelin treated and control cultures. figure 5c shows that myelin significantly impaired oli-neu cell process outgrowth .

we next chose to print the protein-enriched fraction of cns myelin  <cit>  to study myelin inhibition of oli-neu outgrowth. the crisp pattern of myelin basic protein  immunoreactivity on stamped coverslips demonstrates that myelin proteins can be efficiently patterned by microcontact printing . oli-neu cells plated on a carpet of pll stamped with lines of myelin tend to avoid adhering to or extending upon the myelin stripes, providing further evidence for an inhibitory action of myelin on this oligodendrocyte progenitor cell line .

myelin-mediated growth inhibition is believed to involve signaling through the rho-associated protein kinase . y- <dig> is an inhibitor of the rock family of protein kinases  <cit> . treatment with y- <dig>  enhanced oligodendrocyte extension despite the presence of the myelin lines . similar induction of oli-neu differentiation through the blockade of rock has been demonstrated previously  <cit> . taken together, we demonstrate that microcontact printing can be reliably used to print proteins and protein mixtures onto glass surfaces. we also show that these printed proteins are biologically active and can be used to direct cell morphology and process outgrowth.

discussion
our data demonstrate that microcontact printing is a reliable method for printing growth-permissive and inhibitory proteins on cell culture surfaces. using pdms wafers with different geometries, we show that micropatterning of the pll substrate is an effective way to control the morphologies of neurons in culture. this can be particularly useful in experiments where it is necessary to separate axonal and dendritic compartments of neurons for immunocytochemical or biochemical analyses. we also demonstrated that other cell types such as oli-neu and cos <dig> cells exhibit different preferences for pll substrates. our discovery that cos <dig> cells have an unanticipated preference for low concentration over high concentration pll substrates when provided with the choice in vitro, provides an important insight into how pll interacts with cells and lays the groundwork for future investigation into the underlying signaling mechanism.

the disparate responses to micropatterned pll of the various cell types used in the current study provide important insights into the role of the local microenvironment in regulating cell morphogenesis. similar to neurons, smaller oli-neu cells adhered and extended their processes along patterned pll. larger diameter cos <dig> cells, however, only chose to grow along high concentration pll when a low concentration pll alternative was not provided. this signifies that small differences in local cues are able to tune cell outgrowth in a manner that differs by cell type. thus such parameters must be considered in designing biomaterials compatible for nerve repair. similar local control of morphogenesis has been shown to promote precursor cell differentiation in vitro  <cit> . in that report, the authors showed that populating cell cultures with 10 μm microspheres, a size comparable to the opc cell body, promoted opc differentiation into myelin forming cells. we and others have also shown that artificial substrates can be engineered and rationally designed to trigger functional hemisynapse formation by neurons onto biocompatible surfaces  <cit> .

in addition, we show for the first time, that a cns oligodendrocyte cell-derived extract, enriched for myelin proteins can be reliably contact microprinted and used as a functional substrate to study how the microenvironment regulates process outgrowth. this promising approach offers a straightforward in vitro model system in which to examine cellular responses to local growth-inhibitory molecules and to test candidate therapeutic interventions by which to overcome this inhibition. since myelin growth inhibition is considered a major hurdle to nerve repair following cns injury, our in vitro model for process outgrowth could be useful in drug screens to identify potential therapeutics that could help mitigate barriers to nervous system regeneration.

CONCLUSIONS
microcontact printing of growth promoting substrates can be used to examine substrate preferences exhibited by various cultured cells and to guide the morphological elaboration of complex cells like neurons and oligodendrocyte precursors. in addition, micropatterning of growth inhibitory factors such as cns myelin is useful for examining at a subcellular level how specific cell types respond to such cues and how pharmacological treatments may alter this inhibitory response.

