BACKGROUND
monoclonal antibodies have been approved as therapeutic agents for indications including viral infections, immunological disorders, transplant rejection and cancer  <cit> . they often act by blocking the function of their target molecule. more demanding is the therapy of cancer by antibodies requiring the specific recognition and subsequent elimination of tumor cells.

several mechanisms have been described how therapeutic antibodies elicit cell death, including the triggering of apoptosis and the recruitment of the immune system. while therapeutic antibodies have been approved working by these mechanisms  their cytotoxic potential is generally not sufficient to completely eliminate the malignant cells. higher efficacies have been observed if the antibody is coupled to toxic agents like radioisotopes  or chemical drugs   <cit> . several of these conjugates have been approved for cancer  or are in clinical development .

coupling of toxic agents to therapeutic antibodies also paves the way for new tumor associated antigens as these are not required to be present on the surface of the malignant cells. an example is the extra domain b  of fibronectin, a protein of the extracellular matrix. ed-b-containing fibronectin is a splice variant associated with angiogenesis and tissue remodeling  <cit> . high levels of ed-b expression have been detected in most solid tumors and in vivo studies with ed-b specific monoclonal antibody formats show the selective accumulation in tumors and metastases. accordingly, ed-b is a promising target for antibody-based cancer treatment  <cit>  and the results of first clinical trials with ed-b specific antibody fragment conjugates are encouraging  <cit> .

current methods for the preparation of immunoconjugates rely on the chemical coupling to lysine, cysteine or tyrosine side chains  <cit> . these methods are rather unspecific and result in heterogeneous products. as the drug load - number of toxophore per antibody - is a key parameter for the antitumor activity of immunoconjugates  <cit>  more site-specific coupling reactions are desired. approaches employing the carbohydrate moieties  <cit> , the n- and the c-terminus  <cit>  of full-length igg antibodies have been described. however, the carbohydrates are important for the effector functions of the fc domain  <cit>  and the n-terminus of antibodies is close to their antigen binding site which may result in decreased affinity after modification. this leads to the c-terminus as a preferred site for specific drug attachment.

several enzymatic approaches have been described for the modification of protein c termini  <cit> . they have in common that the target protein is expressed in fusion with a c-terminal tag containing the modification site. a common drawback of these methods is an incomplete conversion. without the possibility for separation, this would result in heterogeneous preparations of low averaged drug loads. interestingly, the intein tag is cleaved off from the target protein during modification, facilitating preparative separation of modified from non-modified protein. inteins encompass catalytic domains which lead to the formation of a thioester bond at their junction to the target protein. this thioester bond can be employed to exchange the intein for a c-terminal probe. the probe is eventually connected via a native peptide bond  <cit> .

methods for intein-mediated c-terminal protein modification encompass expressed protein ligation  and protein trans-splicing . in epl, the target protein is fused to a modified full-length intein. the intein is cleaved off by the addition of a thiol reagent, leaving a thioester bond , and the target protein is ligated to a probe functionalized with an n-terminal cysteine residue   <cit> . in pts, inteins are used which are split into two parts with high affinity to each other. the large n-terminal part is fused to the target protein. the probe is functionalized with the small c-terminal part of the intein. their combination results in a functional intein, which splices itself out and concomitantly fuses the target protein to the probe  <cit> .

intein-fusion technologies have already been used for several applications, including the derivatization of small single-chain and single-domain antibody formats with fluorophores and micelles, respectively  <cit> . here we explored the use of two distinct inteins for c-terminal modification of a full-length antibody. the first is the gyra intein from mycobacterium xenopi  which is a 'minimal' intein of  <dig> residues  <cit> . it can be used for protein modification by epl  <cit> . the second is the split dnae intein from nostoc punctiforme   <cit> . it consists of an n-terminal part of  <dig> residues and a c-terminal of  <dig> residues. npu dnae was employed for protein modification by pts. each intein was fused to the heavy chain of anti ed-b igg <dig>  resulting in two inteins per antibody . the fusion proteins were expressed by secretion from transfected human embryonic kidney  cells. after purification, in vitro cleavage by mxe gyra or trans-splicing by npu dnae yielded 60% or 80%, respectively, of completely processed antibody. the protocols described resulted in functional antibodies and were used to generate immunoconjugates containing two biotin moieties per protein molecule, attached site-specifically to the c-termini of the heavy chains.

RESULTS
production of l <dig> igg antibodies with c-terminal intein domains
antibodies require an oxidizing environment for their expression as they contain several disulfide bonds important for proper folding. in addition, glycosylation has been shown to be important for the effector functions of antibodies  <cit> . they are therefore usually produced by mammalian expression systems. we chose transiently transfected hek293-6e cells for the expression of l <dig> igg antibody which is specific for the ed-b domain of fibronectin. endogenous signal sequences ensure the secretion into the extracellular medium and therefore the proper folding of the immunoglobulin domains. connected via an  <dig> residue linker, the heavy chain was fused to an intein domain. we tested two distinct inteins, gyra from mycobacterium xenopi  <cit>  and the split intein dnae from nostoc punctiforme  <cit> . in case of dnae, l <dig> igg was fused to the n-terminal domain dnaen . both inteins were extended c-terminally by a decahistidine tag for purification purposes.

antibody-intein fusion proteins were obtained in good yields . they were purified by his tag affinity chromatography and subsequent gel filtration. a common problem with gyra fusion proteins is the occurence of intein cleavage during expression. this in vivo cleavage decreases the product yield and is detectable by the co-purification of the separated intein domain after his tag affinity chromatography . however, judged by the subsequent gel filtration elution profile , only 10-15% in vivo cleavage was observed for gyra. dnaen showed no in vivo cleavage as expected for a split intein.

preparation of immunoconjugates by mxe gyra intein mediated epl
in vitro cleavage of l <dig> igg-gyra fusion protein was induced by the addition of  <dig> mm mesna which has been reported to form a long-living thioester at the c-terminus. this thioester can be employed to link to the igg a probe that is functionalized with an n-terminal cysteine residue. it is added concomitantly with mesna but in lower concentration . the cysteine replaces the mesna-thioester, resulting in a stable peptide bond between the igg and the probe .

to study the cleavage efficiency of the l <dig> igg-gyra fusion protein and to test the antibody integrity after epl, cysteine was used as 'probe'. after 22h, mesna and cysteine were removed by intensive dialysis to regenerate and stabilize the disulfide bonds of the antibody. l <dig> igg cleaved on both heavy chains could be separated from non- or partly-cleaved antibody by his tag affinity chromatography . the yield of completely cleaved antibody was about 60%. to test if its functionality had been damaged by the reducing conditions used during epl it was intensively analyzed. sds-page under non-reducing conditions resulted in a single band at  <dig> kda , showing that interchain disulfide bonds were intact . analytical gel filtration confirmed the integrity of the antibody, eluting in a single peak very similar to unmodified l <dig> igg  . finally, interaction studies by surface plasmon resonance  were employed to evaluate antibody functionality after epl. the antigen binding part was analyzed by investigation of the interaction with the ed-b domain. binding kinetics and the dissociation constant  were the same as for the l <dig> igg control antibody . to test the functionality of the fc part, the interaction with the high affinity fcγ ri/cd <dig> and with the low affinity fcγ riiia/cd16a was analyzed by spr. binding kinetics and the dissociation constants for both fcγ receptors  did not change significantly demonstrating preservation of full functionality . in summary, these results show that antigen binding as well as effector functions of l <dig> igg have not been affected by the epl process.

a side reaction of epl is the hydrolysis of the thioester instead of its derivatization with cysteine. to estimate the yield of l <dig> igg-cys, a pepsin digest assay was employed. pepsin can be used to prepare fab dimers from an igg <dig> as it cleaves c-terminal to the interchain disulfide bonds connecting the heavy chains  <cit> . the fc part of the antibody is cleaved into several fragments. mass spectrometry analysis of l <dig> igg control antibody after pepsin digest  revealed that the most c-terminal cleavage site is the linker between ch <dig> and ch <dig> domain, leaving the ch <dig> domain intact . this could be used for the observation of cysteine derivatization: if cysteines are attached c-terminal to the heavy chains they are expected to form an interchain disulfide bond, resulting in a  <dig> kda fragment under non-reducing conditions. however, if one or both cysteines are missing,  <dig> kda fragments are observed. non-reducing sds-page after pepsin digest of l <dig> igg-cys revealed the occurrence of a  <dig> kda band which was replaced by a  <dig> kda band after reduction . both bands were excised from the gel and analyzed after tryptic digest with hplc esi-q-tof. clearly, only peptides from the ch <dig> domain were found . also the c-terminal peptide was observed, carrying the cysteine. interestingly, the  <dig> kda band is hardly detectable on the non-reducing sds-page gel. mass spectrometry analysis of a non-reduced sample after pepsin digest confirmed this observation: we detected a  <dig> kda fragment but no  <dig> kda fragment . we conclude that the fraction of hydrolyzed protein is minor and that cysteine derivatized l <dig> igg was obtained in high yield. this would result in a homogeneous drug load of two. in addition, a c-terminal disulfide bond is readily formed. this may stabilize the immunoconjugate and hinders undesired side reactions of thiol groups in the oxidizing environment antibodies are held.

the aim of our work was to use gyra intein for the attachment of probes functionalized with an n-terminal cysteine residue. to show the usability of the protocol for this purpose, a cyslys-biotin peptide was added instead of cysteine. after sds-page and western blotting, the specific attachment of biotin to the heavy chain was verified by streptavidin-based staining . in summary, the described epl protocol is applicable for the site specific modification of full-length igg by probes attached to an n-terminal cysteine residue.

preparation of immunoconjugates by npu dnae intein catalyzed pts
l <dig> igg-dnaen contains an incomplete intein which was activated in vitro by the addition of a peptide comprising the missing c-terminal  <dig> residues, followed by the naturally occurring post-intein sequence cfn. this dnaec peptide can be employed to transfer a c-terminally attached probe to l <dig> igg by pts . importantly, trans-splicing was only observed under reducing conditions i.e. after the addition of  <dig> mm dtt. we propose that this is due to the requirement of a free cysteine in the reactive center of dnae intein.

to establish the pts protocol, dnaec peptide without a probe was used. after 24h trans-splicing reaction, dtt was removed by dialysis and completely spliced l <dig> igg was purified by his tag affinity chromatography . the yield of l <dig> igg processed on both heavy chains was about 80%. analysis were undertaken to test if the antibody had been damaged by the reducing conditions used during pts. sds-page under non-reducing conditions showed that interchain disulfide bonds were intact as a main band at  <dig> kda  was observed . however, a weak band corresponding to a protein species with an apparent molecular mass of  <dig> kda indicated the presence of a small amount of antibody dimers. these results were confirmed by analytical gel filtration . l <dig> igg-dnaen trans-splicing product eluted in a main peak very similar to unmodified l <dig> igg  but is accompanied by a small preceding peak typical for dimerization. we conclude that the integrity of l <dig> igg is retained after pts. the small percentage of dimerization could be due to some degree of hydrolysis during intein catalyzed trans-splicing . this would result in antibodies with single cysteine residues at the c-terminus which are prone to pairing by disulfide bond formation. to test the functionality of l <dig> igg after pts, its interaction with the ed-b domain was analyzed by spr. binding kinetics and the dissociation constant  were the same as for the l <dig> igg control antibody . in addition, the interaction with the high affinity fcγ ri/cd <dig> and with the low affinity fcγ riiia/cd16a was investigated by spr. binding kinetics and the dissociation constants for both fcγ receptors  were not compromised by pts, demonstrating the full functionality of the fc domain . in summary, our dnae pts protocol does neither affect the integrity nor the functionality of l <dig> igg.

in the next step we used the dnae intein to attach biotin probes to the antibody. a functionalized dnaec peptide  was applied according to our protocol and the l <dig> igg product was analyzed by sds-page and western blotting . biotin was specifically attached to the heavy chain.

the requirement to synthesize a  <dig> residue peptide  makes the described protocols for attachment of small probes more complicated with dnae than with gyra. however, as dnaec begins on a methionine residue, it can easily be expressed in vivo at the n-terminus of a fusion protein. proteins like exotoxins, rnases or cytokines have been described to be effective against tumor cells if fused to a targeting antibody  <cit> . in contrast to iggs, these effector proteins can usually be produced by bacterial expression systems. we suggest that dnae catalyzed pts could be used to combine a given antibody with a diversity of effector proteins. to test our protocol for this purpose, dnaec fused to glutathione-s-transferase  was purified from recombinant e. coli and incubated with l <dig> igg-dnaen. analysis by reducing sds-page showed that a main product of  <dig> kda had been formed . this corresponds to the heavy chain fused to gst . western blotting confirmed the presence of gst in the band . in summary, our dnae pts protocol is suitable to obtain l <dig> igg antibody functionalized with probes or effector proteins in good yield.

l <dig> igg heavy chain conjugated to gst  was the main product after pts with dnaec-gst as probe. however, also a side product of  <dig> kda was observed. it corresponded to the heavy chain of l <dig> igg produced by hydrolysis of the thioester intermediate formed during intein catalysis and allowed evaluation of its magnitude compared to probe conjugation. we estimate from the gel that about 25% of processed heavy chain was hydrolyzed while about 75% encompassed the desired conjugation product. due to this hydrolysis, the drug load of immunoconjugates prepared by our dnae pts protocol reached only about  <dig> . it is likely that hydrolysis was promoted by attack of the thiol reagent dtt on the intein-derived thioester  <cit> . dtt had to be added to ensure reducing conditions for optimal intein activity. alternative reducing agents like trisphosphine  could decrease hydrolysis and further optimize the pts protocol.

CONCLUSIONS
we have shown here for the first time that full-length iggs can be specifically functionalized at the c-terminus of their heavy chains by epl and pts. antibodies processed on both chains were obtained in good yields and purified from incompletely processed proteins. the attachment of two probes per antibody and in vicinity to each other yielded an additional disulfide bond, circumventing problems with free thiol groups introduced by intein-fusion technologies. these methods could be employed to generate immunoconjugates of high homogeneity and with a drug load of two. the modification at the c-termini of the heavy chains does not interfere with antigen binding and, judged by binding to fcγ ri and fcγ riiia, it does not compromise the effector functions of the fc domain. provided with an effective toxophore, this would result in therapeutic antibodies fully equipped for the elimination of malignant cells.

