BACKGROUND
the function of the mammalian heart depends essentially on the properties of individual heart muscle cells, i.e. cardiac myocytes. the complex chain of events that links action potential  with contraction, known as excitation-contraction  coupling , starts with myocyte membrane depolarization followed by opening of the voltage-gated l-type calcium channels  during the ap. this results in a ca2+ influx through the sarcolemma, which activates ca2+ release channels  located in the junctional face of the sarcoplasmic reticulum , and thereby induces calcium release from the sr . the resulting transient increase of the myoplasmic i allows calcium binding to proteins of the contractile element that generate force and movement by utilizing the energy stored in the high-energy phosphate bonds of atp. in order to avoid cumulative gain of ca2+ in the cytosol and for relaxation to occur, sr ca2+-atpase  pumps ca2+ ions back into the sr to be released upon the next excitation, while the electrogenic na+/ca2+-exchanger  transports part of the released ca2+ out of the cell.

the dynamic regulation of the calcium transport mechanisms is essential at varying heart beating rates. to fulfil this task, the same cellular calcium signals that control the contraction are also decoded by calcium-dependent enzymes, like the ca2+-calmodulin dependent kinases and phosphatases. these enzymes regulate the proteins involved in e-c coupling, providing physiologically important feedback mechanisms  <cit> . since the same enzymes regulate nuclear gene expression during long term alterations in the calcium signals, they thus regulate differentiation, growth, metabolic and functional specializations, and eventually shape the phenotype of the muscle cells during development and pathogenesis  <cit> . a line of evidence suggests that the causes of heart failure involve defects in the regulation of cellular calcium and a concomitant reduction in cardiomyocyte contraction  <cit> . to elucidate the e-c coupling processes involved in these pathological developments, a number of genetically engineered mouse models have been generated and studied experimentally. these models include, among others, genetic ablation or overexpression of the e-c coupling machinery proteins  <cit>  as well as transgenic overexpression of the regulative calcium activated enzymes  <cit> . the effects genetic interventions have on the function of the mouse e-c coupling machinery have been evaluated on the basis of the analysis of the phenotypes of the animals bearing the genetic modifications. these analyses have included measurements of morphological, histological and biochemical variables from mice hearts, and also biophysical and physiological analysis of the e-c coupling at the level of individual myocytes. this approach delivers precise data about the physiology at the endpoint, but in order to elucidate the processes that have lead to the endpoint phenotype it might be beneficial to use complementary tools, such as mathematical modelling.

to gain more mechanistic information from the signalling networks involved in cardiac e-c coupling and from the sophisticated genetically engineered mouse models, we have built a mathematical model of mouse cardiomyocyte function. in addition to the fundamental components of e-c coupling, contraction and membrane excitability, this integrated model also includes the ca2+-calmodulin-dependent kinase ii  cascade and its modulatory effects on the proteins involved in e-c coupling. camk regulates the activity of ryanodine receptors  <cit> , serca  <cit>  and its regulative protein plb  <cit>  and l-type ca2+-channels  <cit> . because camk is activated by an increase in the cytosolic i and, specifically, by the frequency of intracellular calcium transients  <cit> , it constitutes a physiological feedback mechanism adjusting calcium signals to the current heart rate  <cit> . importantly, although the presented model is highly simplified, it is complex enough to be robust and to have features that arise from the signalling networks rather than from the properties of individual components.

the developed model simulates the dynamic behaviour of cardiomyocytes with beating frequency-dependent adaptations in function of the e-c coupling proteins as one of the fundamental physiological features. it can be argued that the model is thus an applicable and powerful tool for the reproduction of genetic cardiomyocyte modifications and analysis of the resulting cellular signalling changes in silico. to establish this, we have used the model to mathematically produce three different genetically modified mouse cardiac myocytes: 1) cardiomyocytes with deleted serca inhibitory protein phospholamban   <cit> , 2) disruption of the camk-dependent regulation of lcc, and 3) heart failure model induced by overexpression of camk  <cit> . our results not only reveal unexpected changes in cardiomyocyte function upon changes of the functions of single proteins, but also demonstrate that mathematical modelling is an essential tool in designing genetically modified mice models as well as exploring the cellular signalling cascades of the existing models.

RESULTS
features and validation of the model
our goal was to develop  a modelling tool with which we could simulate the key physiological aspects of the cardiac myocytes . the signals that the model produces are in line with the parameters from the experiments from mouse cardiac myocytes. action potential features as well as resting potential values correspond to those reported previously . also, the model has accurate relative contributions of different calcium transport mechanisms that cooperatively generate calcium signals with parameters like diastolic and systolic i as well as decays of calcium transients corresponding to the measured average values from various sources . the variation among the published experimental results is surprisingly large , probably due to differences in the experimentation and treatment of the cardiomyocytes. therefore, it is not reasonable to tune the model parameters exactly to any single set of experimental results. more importantly, in order to verify the model we focused on the physiological behaviour of the variables and their trends during the intervention experiments. as an example of this, the model could successfully predict the behaviour of the experimentally observed diastolic  <cit>  and systolic i around 1- <dig> hz . in the experiments, a commonly used intervention to study the capacity of the intracellular calcium stores is the caffeine pulse experiment, where rapid application of caffeine empties the sr abruptly and produces a cytosolic calcium rise, the height of which corresponds to the amount of calcium stored in the sr. during the caffeine pulse, the calcium extrusion depends mainly on the ncx, and therefore the decay of the i can be used to estimate the amount and activity of ncx in the given cell. we simulated a caffeine pulse experiment and compared the results to the in vivo data of maier et al.  <cit>  and li et al.  <cit> . the amplitude of the simulated caffeine-induced intracellular calcium transient agreed well with the measurements. also the decay constants of i are of the same magnitude,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s,  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s, and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  s for  <cit>  and the model simulations, respectively. therefore, the model fulfilled the criteria of being capable of reproducing real physiological phenomena, like the i-frequency curve, and could robustly simulate the caffeine pulse experiment.

simulation results are shown for  <dig> hz pacing steady-state. all concentrations are in cytosol volume.

to further evaluate the model features, we did a series of simulations aimed to characterize the frequency-dependent changes in the model outputs . simulations were started from a steady-state  and the pacing frequency was increased with six second intervals to  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>  and  <dig> hz. these simulations demonstrate a fundamental feature of the e-c coupling regulation. while the frequency-dependent changes at the level of activity of individual proteins are small, like the change in the l-type calcium current , the sum of these effects is manifested as an order of greater changes in the calcium signals. the calcium transients became smaller as a function of pacing frequency at the same time when the diastolic i rose. this shows that even though camk increases the activity of the serca, it cannot fully compensate for the frequent sr calcium releases with such a short timescale of adaptation . therefore, both the stored  and releasable  pools of calcium in the sr are partially depleted, which reduces the sr calcium release while the extra calcium builds up the cytosolic i, just like in isolated mouse ventricular myocytes  <cit> . the rise in the diastolic i, on the other hand increases the diastolic outward ncx current , which causes a small hyperpolarisation of the resting potential from - <dig>  mv at  <dig>  hz to - <dig>  mv at  <dig> hz.

as expected, the activity of both camk and can increases with the pacing frequency from  <dig>  hz to  <dig> hz. according to the activation characteristics of can, its activity increases the most at pacing frequencies from  <dig>  to  <dig> hz and starts to saturate at higher frequencies . camk, on the other hand, is activated predominantly at frequencies higher than  <dig> hz. this feature is identical to the biphasic synaptic plasticity in neurons explained by a model including inhibition of calcium activated camk upon co-activated calcineurin  <cit> . the divergent frequency dependence of camk and can is highlighted in comparison of the pacing steady-state activities . the difference in the ranges of can and camk activation is even more evident, when the pacing-dependent enzyme levels are scaled to the theoretical upper limit that can be induced with a maximal calcium stimulus .

phospholamban knockout model
the elegant cardiac plb knockout  mouse model has been used extensively to study the role of the sr in e-c coupling  <cit> . one of the rare features of the plb-ko model among the genetically engineered cardiac mouse models is that the plb-ko mice do not develop cardiac hypertrophy or failure  <cit> . plb-ko can therefore be used in the physiological elucidation of the role of sr calcium uptake modulation via serca-plb interactions as well as the role of sr calcium uptake and release in e-c coupling  <cit> . we wanted to test whether our simulations could reproduce the experimental results of this comprehensive mouse model and reveal possible signalling mechanisms that cannot be observed in experiments.

total relief of plb inhibition of serca has a great impact on the ca2+ dynamics of the myocyte as demonstrated in figure  <dig>  the simulated results of wt and plb-ko ca2+ transients correspond well with the wild-type and knockout measurements of huser et al.  <cit> . the comparison of ca2+ transients in figure 5a and 5b shows that the amplitude ratio of plb-ko vs. wt is  <dig>  in both the in vivo and the in silico experiments. it was previously reported that in the plb-ko mouse, the ventricular cardiomyocytes have a decreased expression level of ryr  <cit> . we therefore implemented this modification into the model . with ryr downregulation in the model, the amplitude of the ca2+ transient is 12% smaller compared to pure phospholamban knock-out due to a reduced amount of calcium release units . this might indicate that the general mechanism of the compensations is to attenuate the effect of initial modifications, i.e. to reduce the change in myocyte function.

as expected, the increased systolic ca2+ concentration in plb-ko causes a substantial rise in the activity of camk and can . compared to wt the mean activities of camk and can increase by 35% and 102% for plb-ko, and by 44% and 122% for plb-ko*  at  <dig>  hz pacing. upon an increase in the pacing frequency, this difference becomes smaller. increased amplitude of the ca2+ transient increases the activity of serca both directly  and indirectly . as a result the decay time constants of the calcium transients decrease by 26%  and 28%  compared to wt , while the ca2+ concentration in the sr  increases by ~100% in both plb-ko versions , which is in line with experimental findings  <cit> .

the increased camk activity in the plb knockout naturally affects the function of lcc as well. surprisingly, in the simulations the peak value of ica, l is actually reduced by 3% in plb-ko vs. wt simulations for  <dig>  hz pacing. this results from the fact that plb-ko myocytes have enhanced calcium release due to higher sr and increased camk phosphorylation of ryr. this ≈ 2-fold increase in jrel brings more calcium to the vicinity of the lccs, thus causing a faster inactivation of the channels. this mechanism has been observed also in experiments  <cit>  and explains elegantly how the complex system controls itself to cope with the changed functional environment.

the overall change in the in silico plb-ko phenotype corresponds very well with in vivo results and is rather straightforward, i.e. due to the increased serca activity the relaxation of the myocyte is accelerated significantly . this advantage, however, falls short compared to the physiologically more relevant phenomena. the force-frequency relation  is reversed: Δ value is +43% and -20% in wt and plb-ko simulations, respectively. frequency-dependent acceleration of relaxation  is also blunted in the plb knockout myocytes: the τ <dig>  hz /τ <dig> hz ratio of calcium transient decay is reduced from  <dig>  to  <dig>  for wt vs. plb-ko. however, while the physiological adaptation to increased pacing is impaired, the function of the myocytes is in fact improved; the plb-ko just recruits the contractile reserve at lower frequencies.

transgenic model of camk-dependent regulation of l-type calcium channel
in order to find out how the function of the cardiac myocyte would change when the camk-dependent regulation is switched off, we implemented a transgenic version of the model, in which the modulation of lcc is disrupted either by blocking the phosphorylation  or setting the phosphorylation site constitutively active ; see methods section for details of implementation. the experimental results indicate that the activation of camk promotes longer openings of the l-type calcium channels  <cit> . at the level of the whole cardiomyocyte, this manifests as slower inactivation and increased peak of the ica, l current  <cit> ; a phenomenon referred to as "facilitation".

according to simulations, the disrupted camk-dependent modulation of lcc changes the frequency-dependence of ica, l . the maximum deviation of the amplitude of ica, l from wt is - <dig> %  and + <dig> %  for blcc and clcc, respectively. the contractile force, which can be considered as a characteristic output of the end-point phenotype, is affected only to a very small extent . the inset of figure 6c further indicates that the dynamics of the force are not drastically affected. that is, the main changing variable is the amplitude of the force, whereas, the baseline tension, time-to-peak-force and relaxation time remain practically constant compared to wt. as one could expect for a short action potential animal such as the mouse, the ap duration  is virtually unaltered between the transgenic and wild-type models .

the increased  and decreased  ica, l should lead to accumulation and depletion of intracellular calcium, respectively. in the simulation results, this is seen as altered sr calcium content  and consequent changes in the integral of jrel . these two parameters behave differently in function of the pacing frequency. while the deviation of blcc from wt is parallel to the changes of ica, l , the difference between clcc and wt is more pronounced in the integral of jrel. this is due to the fact that calcium release from the sr is affected not only by the increased sr calcium content but also by the enhanced trigger, i.e. ica, l.

intuitively, the changes in the calcium current should perhaps lead to more significant changes in the e-c coupling, since lcc is one of the main components of cellular calcium transport machinery. furthermore, the strong coupling of i and camk activation, decreased in blcc and increased in clcc, should work to enhance those alterations due to consequent changes in the phosphorylation of the other camk targets ryr and serca. this scenario is, however, affected by another regulatory loop. in the blcc case, decreased ica, l leads to decreased jrel, which reduces the calcium-dependent inactivation of lcc; a chain of events that affects the intracellular calcium dynamics in the opposite direction in clcc. thus, in both cases this autoregulation would tend to reduce the original effect of altered ica, l. to demonstrate this, we calculated what the inactivation of lcc would be in the transgenic models if all the other parameters were identical to wt ; see methods section for details of this acute tg. this shows that with the feedback systems present, the autoregulation mechanisms bring the system closer to wt behaviour. thus, a change in one physiological regulatory event, in this case the disrupted modulation of the lcc, cannot easily induce drastic changes to the overall function of the myocyte.

camk overexpression model
camk has a substantial role in the e-c coupling of both the normal and the failing heart  <cit> . cardiac overexpression of the cytosolic isoform of camk results in cardiac hypertrophy and a unique phenotype of the myocytes  <cit> . the phenotype resulted from the initial modification , but also from a variety of significant changes in the expressions of e-c coupling proteins, like serca, ryr and ncx  <cit> ; see methods for details. to elucidate the relative contribution of these two mechanisms, i.e., the camk overexpression and the compensatory changes, we implemented two versions of the in silico model. the first one  simulates the experimentally observed phenotype and the second one  a theoretical situation, where there are no compensations at the level of gene expression .

when the total amount of camk was increased 3× corresponding to the level of the camk in the camk-tg cardiomyocytes, the amount of active camk was changed dramatically at any given pacing frequency in the model . at  <dig> hz pacing, camk activities were  <dig>  and  <dig>  times higher than wt in the camk3x and the camk3x*, respectively. when camk activity is forced to such a high level, increased phosphorylation of camk targets should increase the calcium influx , and increase sr calcium uptake  and release , which together should increase the calcium signals dramatically. therefore the reported camk-tg mouse cardiomyocyte phenotype seems counterintuitive, because tg myocytes have dramatically decreased ca2+ transient amplitudes . contrary to this, the model predicts that camk overexpression alone  increases the calcium transient amplitude by 117%, and contraction force by 126% , while the calcium transient decay  decreases simultaneously by 41% compared to wt at  <dig> hz .

at the level of cytosolic calcium signals and contraction, these changes are qualitatively almost identical to those induced by deletion of plb . however, while the compensations in plb-ko myocytes are minute and the phenotype is mainly due to ablation of plb, the camk-tg phenotype seems to be induced mostly by secondary changes in gene expression. that is, when the documented changes in the protein levels of camk-tg myocytes were implemented into the model, the amplitude of the simulated calcium transients decreased by 62% and the contraction force by 90% at  <dig> hz pacing compared to the wt model. quite naturally the smaller calcium signals also affect the amount of calcium activated camk, which is reduced by 41% compared to the camk3x*. again this demonstrates a general feature of biological feedback loops, where secondary modifications tend to reduce the strength of the initial stimulus. despite the dramatically increased camk phosphorylation, which promotes activation of ryr, the amount of calcium released from the sr is significantly smaller  in the camk3x . thus, the reduction in the sr prevents an increase in calcium release . this conclusion is supported by the fact that the fractional release is reduced by 40% from  <dig>  to  <dig>  in silico.

in the model with camk overexpression and the reported changes in the protein levels, sr calcium content is reduced by 25% . however, it was reported earlier that in vivo the reduction was 44%  <cit> . to explain the prominent reduction of the sr calcium content, it was reported that the diastolic ca2+ leak was increased 4-fold in the tg vs. wt mice  <cit> . to account for this mechanism, we updated the model with a putative camk-dependent ryr leak , which produced a ≈ 3-fold increase in the resting ca2+ leak for camk3x vs. wt . when simulated together with the camk3x model version, the ryr leak did not induce a significant effect on the already depressed e-c coupling. we found that the sr ca2+ content was reduced by 17% in the leaky camk3x compared to the non-leaky version, but the ca2+ transient amplitude and contraction force were decreased only slightly . according to the simulations, the wt in silico myocyte was not affected to a large extent by the leakiness either.

when leaky ryrs were simulated together with the acute effect of camk overexpression , calcium signalling was drastically changed. as expected, upon an increase in the ryr leak, the sr calcium content was decreased by 38% , leading to reduced sr calcium release and subsequently smaller calcium transients . however, it is quite unexpected that according to simulations the ryr leak might have some beneficial effects on the function of cardiomyocytes facing an acute increase in camk activity. while limiting the increase in the calcium transient amplitude, the ryr leak enhances the calcium transient decay  and, more importantly, restores the positive trend of the force-frequency-relationship . the physiological adaptation to an increase in the contraction rate is thus re-established. this data is qualitatively in line with the results from a robust acute overexpression of camk in rabbit cardiomyocytes  <cit> . it was reported that despite a 5- to 6-fold increase in the amount of active camk, the contractility was unaltered because the camk-dependent ryr phosphorylation was increased and consequently sr ca2+ leak was greatly augmented  <cit> . our modelling implies that in the acute overexpression state the camk-dependent the ryr leak might work as a compensatory mechanism to restore some features of e-c coupling by limiting the effects of overly enhanced camk activity on the calcium signals.

camk overexpression simulations also give predictions of how the altered calcium signalling affects the activity of other calcium-activated enzymes. for example, calcineurin activity, which is a master regulator of the expression of cardiac genes  <cit>  and can promote cardiac hypertrophy and failure  <cit> , is indirectly modulated by camk activity. the augmented calcium signals in camk3x* simulations increase the can activity by 69% and conversely the blunted calcium signals in camk3x simulations reduce the can activity by 90% at  <dig> hz pacing compared to wt. interestingly, when the normal pacing induced calcium changes are impaired in the camk3x model, the pacing induced increase in the can activity  is decreased by 32% . consequently, the can activity is lower even at high pacing frequencies  compared to wt. another interesting observation is that the putative camk-induced ryr leak tends to normalize the can activity in the camk3x* test case, i.e. the pacing induced changes are more similar to wt. this is again an example of a mechanism that could help a complex biological system maintain its physiological function in spite of genetic interventions.

discussion
our results highlight the intrinsic complexity of cardiomyocyte e-c-coupling, which originates from the interdependencies of regulatory mechanisms involving calcium and the components regulating the membrane excitability. facing this complexity, experimental observations, even clever and ingenious ones, may not be enough to reveal the causal connection of the cellular signalling pathways, where networks operating in parallel form feedback loops that control the dynamic physiological features of the cells. these complex networks give some fundamental and unanticipated properties to the cell function. for example, they make the system more robust, i.e., tolerant to change in the single part of a signalling network  <cit> . even more challenging task is faced when the networks are interfered like in studies of genetically engineered models. when some cellular function is disrupted by genetic intervention, the resulting phenotype is not necessarily exactly what was expected. instead, homeostatic regulatory mechanisms in cells tend to minimize the effects of the mutation on the phenotype.

the presented model is the first mathematical model of mouse ventricular myocyte e-c coupling that also includes the regulation of the calcium transport machinery through the activation of camk. the model has properties common to complex biological systems, which explain the basic features of cardiomyocyte function: 1) pacing-induced changes in calcium dynamics via camk-dependent regulation, as well as 2) robustness against experimental interventions  and genetic modifications . the simulations with the model give fundamental information on interrelations between different signalling pathways in cardiomyocyte e-c coupling and clarify the role of parallel feedback loops in maintaining the operation of cardiomyocyte e-c coupling. we showed that through the feedback loops cardiomyocytes are surprisingly resistant to alterations in the activity of single endpoint components in the signalling networks, whereas interventions disrupting the feedback loops will compromise the function. according to our simulations, these inherited properties of cardiomyocyte e-c coupling are likely to define the impact of genetic manipulations on the end-phenotype of the cardiomyocytes.

limitations of the study
the fundamental challenge in developing an e-c coupling model is the rather large variability of experimental data. therefore, it would be an irrelevant and futile effort to try to fit the behaviour of the model perfectly to one single set of in vivo data. instead, it is more essential that the outputs of the model agree qualitatively with the majority of the measured results, as is the case with the three fundamental outputs  in our model. furthermore, the model was also able to simulate faithfully such multivariable cellular phenomena as the force-frequency relationships and the caffeine pulse experiments. this kind of high-level validation is crucial for a model that is comprised of multitude of submodels, because for most of the model parameters there is no corresponding measurement data, to which the parameter values could be directly fitted; a second fundamental challenge in this modelling field.

the isoform-specific differences of the camk reaction chain in the neuronal vs. cardiac tissue warrant further studies. however, a fair assumption, one that we have made, is that these isoforms of the kinase behave in a rather similar manner, since they share 89-93% sequence similarity in their catalytic and autoregulatory domains  <cit> . this issue was recently studied by chiba et al. with a mathematical model that included the camk-cam interaction dynamics specific to neurons and cardiomyocytes  <cit> . our approach to describe this isoform divergence is, albeit non-mechanistic, a coherent one . the results of chiba et al.  <cit>  and saucerman et al.  <cit>  also underline the significant role of pp <dig> activity in camk dynamics. in addition to pp <dig>  the enzyme reaction network of bhalla and iyengar  <cit>  includes also the other two main phosphatases, can and pp2a, found in cardiac myocytes. thus, it is a comprehensive description of enzyme kinetics with notable application potential in future studies as well.

despite the limitations mentioned above, our model reproduces faithfully the main features e-c coupling of mouse ventricular myocytes. simulation results also suggest that, despite or because of the complexity of the model, it behaves robustly enough to be a suitable and valid platform to study the physiological and pathophysiological phenomena in mouse cardiac myocytes. especially interesting issue that can be targeted with our model is the role of camk in various heart failure conditions.

physiological role of camk in cardiomyocytes
camk is a multifunctional holoenzyme that has modulates e-c coupling by phosphorylating serca, plb, ryr and lcc  <cit> . camk goes through a process of autophosphorylation, i.e. the phosphorylated state continues even after the ca2+-cam complex has been removed, which leads to prolonged activation of camk  <cit> . it has been shown that the enzyme can decode the frequency and the amplitude of ca2+ spikes into distinct levels of kinase activity  <cit> . with this unique combination of features camk mediates the beating frequency-dependent regulation in cardiac myocytes and establishes a feedback signalling network that controls cardiomyocyte ca2+ signals and excitability. apart from this physiological function, camk has been verified as a proarrhythmic signalling molecule and may therefore offer novel solutions for antiarrhythmic therapy  <cit> . in this study, we focused on the camk-dependent regulation of e-c coupling. the presented mathematical model was validated both in wt and transgenic test cases. thus, it forms a good base for further studies of the role of camk, and can, e.g. in arrhythmia and excitation-transcription coupling.

phospholamban knockout model
the phospholamban knockout model is one of the few reported mouse models, where genetic manipulation produces enhancement of the cardiac function instead of pathological developments and failure. in theory, the absence of plb-dependent inhibition of serca should increase the sr calcium uptake, which would result in faster decay of calcium transients, elevated sr and a subsequent increases in the amplitudes of the calcium transients. the analysis of the plb-ko mice showed that all of the expected changes were present in the plb-ko cardiac myocytes and that the plb ablation had induced only very mild phenotypical compensations  <cit> . in our model, the experimental results from the plb-ko mouse were mostly reproduced by ablation of the plb, and the reported compensatory reduction of the ryr expression did not significantly change the e-c coupling.

the enhanced systolic i also activates both of the calcium-dependent enzymes in the model. because camk is predominantly activated at relatively high frequencies , increase of the amplitude of calcium transient at low frequencies elevates camk activity only modestly  compared to calcineurin activity, which is doubled at low frequency . since calcineurin regulates cardiac gene expression  <cit>  and promotes cardiac hypertrophy and even failure  <cit> , enhanced calcineurin activity should have a great impact on the cardiac phenotype. however, according to the simulations presented here, at higher frequencies both the camk and can activities of plb-ko myocytes are normalized. at  <dig> hz, the enzyme activities of plb-ko and wt myocytes are identical, suggesting that at normal mouse heart rates  camk and can are not changed in plb-ko hearts.

from the physiological point of view, ablation of plb causes the myocyte to recruit more calcium-activated force than would be required at low pacing frequencies. this change alone increases the energy consumption of the myocyte, since the contractile element and serca are the main energy consuming components of the system. therefore it is a surprise that the cardiac phenotype of the plb-ko mouse is so close to the wt and without pathological changes; a finding that has been shown to endure even in the long-term  <cit> .

transgenic model of camk-dependent regulation of l-type calcium channel
considering the fundamental role that ica, l has in e-c coupling as the initiator of the cicr process, the enzymatic regulation of lccs is an extremely interesting subject for in silico studies. the camk-dependent facilitation of ica, l is considered to be an important part of the physiological regulation of e-c coupling  but it may also be involved in arrhythmias  <cit> .

despite the crucial role of ica, l, its camk-dependent regulation appears to be less essential for the regulation of e-c coupling in mouse ventricular myocytes. in both cases, blcc and clcc, with disrupted camk-dependent modulation the autoregulatory link between ica, l and jrel tends to reduce the original effect of altered ica, l, thus bringing the tg system closer to wt behaviour. this is a good example of how difficult it is to combine a holistic point of view based on the data from experimental findings. for example, it has been reported that the super-maximal change of ica, l induced by the 5- <dig> fold overexpression of camk is 22% of the calcium current  <cit> . if we accept that this effect is significantly higher than the modulation induced by maximally activated endogenous camk, which would occur at the highest cardiomyocyte beating rates , then the camk-induced modulation of ica, l at pacing rates applicable to isolated mouse cardiomyocytes  would be minute. in addition, in experiments all other normal cellular feedback systems controlling ica, l will be excluded, which further biases evaluation of the potential impact of the camk modulation on the ica, l and especially on the function of the whole cell. this was well demonstrated by the model, where the large camk facilitation could be expected to produce a large modification of e-c coupling, but in silico the effect turned out to be rather small.

camk overexpression model
to study the possible role of camk activity in the development of hypertrophy and failure, a mouse model overexpressing cytosolic camk was generated by maier et al.  <cit> . this genetic intervention results in unique changes in cardiomyocyte calcium signalling, cardiac hypertrophy and dilated heart failure  <cit> , suggesting that chronic camk overexpression triggers drastic alteration in cardiomyocyte gene expression.

in our model, an increase in the amount of camk has dramatic effects on myocyte function through an increase in the camk activity and subsequent activation of camk targets. this leads to greatly augmented calcium release and uptake resulting in enhanced calcium signals. these are quite the opposite to the reported phenotype of the camk overexpression mouse, suggesting that the compensatory changes in the gene expression have more impact on the camk-tg phenotype than the camk-dependent regulative mechanisms per se. supporting this, when the protein expression changes of the camk-tg myocytes reported in  <cit>  were incorporated into the model, our simulations produced blunted calcium signals, impaired force-frequency and calcium-frequency relations, just like in the experiments with camk-tg myocytes  <cit> .

in order to understand the sequence of events leading to the endpoint phenotype, the acute effect of the genetic modification should be explored. acute effects of camk were studied recently by adenoviral overexpression  of camk in isolated rabbit cardiomyocytes  <cit> . surprisingly, camk overexpressing myocytes had normal calcium transient amplitudes and reduced sr calcium content  <cit> . to explain this it was suggested that the camk-induced ryr phosphorylation would increase the sr calcium leak, which in turn would reduce sr calcium load despite the camk-dependent increase in the sr calcium uptake  <cit> . in our simulations, the camk-induced ryr leak during camk overexpression  reduced the sr calcium content and release, in line with the experimental findings  <cit> . this leads to secondary effects: 1) due to smaller calcium transients compared to camk overexpression without the ryr leak, the amount of active camk and can are reduced and 2) the negative trend of the force-frequency relation is almost reversed. thus, it would seem that in the acute phase of the overexpression state the camk-dependent ryr leak might be beneficial for the myocyte function, since it acts to limit the overly enhanced calcium signals. due to the camk-induced ryr calcium leak, the initial change of the camk overexpression in the calcium signals is modest.

why then does camk overexpression induce such extensive compensations at the level of transcription? camk overexpression differs fundamentally from plb-ko in that it switches off the whole physiological feedback system between the cytosolic calcium signals and the camk. therefore, it is likely that these sorts of manipulations, which destroy the ability of the cell to adapt to the functional demands, will trigger profound transcriptional compensations.

CONCLUSIONS
mathematical modelling can be exploited as an integrative tool to dissect the underlying processes of cellular function in both physiological and pathophysiological situations. the potential of in silico studies lays in the ability to simultaneously observe multiple variables and to estimate such outputs that cannot be measured in the experiments. our simulations show that modelling enables conclusions about the causalities between myocyte signalling cascades, which would be challenging to reach solely by interpretation and analysis of in vivo measurements. thus, it is possible to gain more information of the 'autoregulatory' phenomenon in the cardiac myocyte. in the present study, we have demonstrated this for normal and three transgenic cell types.

