BACKGROUND
troglomorphic forms of animals have fascinated humans ever since the first cave-dwelling animals were discovered  <cit> . the most striking features of many troglobionts are the reduction of eyes and of surficial pigmentation  <cit> . the discussion about the forces driving convergent evolution of reduced eyes and loss of pigmentation in typical cave-living animals was initiated very early in the history of evolutionary theory  <cit> . in general, two competing hypotheses have been proposed  <cit> : i) the lack of selective constraints leads to degeneration due to accumulation of mutations which are fixed by genetic drift. ii) the troglomorphic traits provide selective advantages. the latter explanation includes speculations on how reduced eyes would be advantageous, e.g., no infectious diseases of the eyes or energetic economy  <cit> . pleiotropic effects have also been discussed, i.e. that the same genes are involved in eye development and in the formation of other constructive traits .

to date about  <dig> troglomorphic fish species from  <dig> different families have been described  <cit> , displaying various degrees of troglomorphism. there are, however, also some cave-living fishes without troglomorphic phenotype  <cit> . most studies conducted on cave fishes were carried out on species of the genus astyanax, which became model organisms for investigating many different aspects of the development of troglomorphic characters . the data suggest that eye loss in astyanax is mainly driven by natural selection; the loss of pigmentation seems more likely to be due to the accumulation of neutral mutations  <cit> . nevertheless, convergent evolution of various troglomorphic species might be driven by different evolutionary mechanisms. thus, investigating other species groups is important.

here, we introduce another interesting system to study the evolution of troglomorphic populations. garra barreimiae fowler & steinitz,  <dig> is a fish species endemic in the southeastern arabian peninsula; it is listed as vulnerable by the iucn  <dig> . surface populations of this species with well developed eyes and proper pigmentation are common in ponds and rivulets of the hajar mountains  <cit> . in  <dig>  however, a. dunsire and m. gallagher discovered one hypogean, troglomorphic population  <cit> . these eyeless and unpigmented fish were assigned to the same species as the surface populations, because besides the troglomorphic traits no further striking morphological differences were detected  <cit> . the juveniles of the eyeless form display eyes which become reduced during the growth to the adult stage  <cit> . hence, the adults have no externally visible eyes, and the optic lobes are not fully developed  <cit> . furthermore they have a weak squamation  <cit> , a trait that is defined by a reduced number and size of scales  <cit> .

the geographic coordinates of dunsire's finding  coincide with the al hoota cave system near al hamra. thus, this locality represents the only hitherto known troglomorphic population of g. barreimiae  <cit> . al hoota cave system has connected subterraneous lakes and is situated in the ad dakhliyyah region in the western al hajar mountains  northwest of the town nizwa and east of al hamra . the al hoota population of blind fish lives very close to a surface population in the same natural drainage system. it is unknown to what degree the development of functional eyes in g. barreimiae is genetically determined or whether it might be induced by environmental factors. an indication of a potential influence of light was reported by  <cit> : individuals originating from the cave population, which were raised in aquaria and exposed to light, showed a somewhat increased level of melanin production and development of the optic lobes .

when trying to understand the evolution of troglomorphic forms it is crucial to consider the time frames in which these populations separate from surface populations. in some of the populations of astyanax and sinocyclocheilus the split between the troglomorphic and the adjacent surface populations occurred quite recently  <cit> , while in others the lineages apparently diverged long ago  <cit> .

as a first approach we want to assess the genetic differentiation between the two morphotypes of g. barreimiae and determine whether gene flow presently occurs. lack of gene flow would favour the hypothesis that the developmental differences are mainly genetically determined. the aim of the study was to analyse the phylogenetic relationships of cave and surface fish populations, particularly from al hoota cave and from adjacent areas. furthermore, the comprehensive phylogeographic analysis of the species required inclusion more distant localities in the sultanate of oman .

RESULTS
sequence analysis of the control region 
to determine the part of the cr with the highest amount of variability we analysed a  <dig> bp section of the mitochondrial dna including the whole cr from five individuals. this analysis revealed an unexpected gene order upstream of the cr. in most fish species analysed so far the trna genes for threonine and proline  are located between the cytochrome b gene and the cr. thus, both genes usually provide good primer binding sites for the amplification of the cr . in g. barreimiae, however, the cr starts immediately after the trna-thr, while trna-pro is missing at this genomic location. interestingly, a putative trna-pro  sequence is found within the cr,  <dig> bp upstream of the 3'-end. this sequence contains the anticodon  and complementary sections stabilizing the cloverleaf structure as expected for a functional trna-pro. the putative trna-pro gene has an antiparallel orientation as has been described for other vertebrates and the sequence identity to the trna-pro gene of cyprinus carpio  <cit>  is about 80%. exchange of the positions of trna genes has been reported for many animal species  and seems to be the most common form of rearrangements of mitochondrial genomes. in fish the first report of trna rearrangements was for gonostoma gracile  followed by similar observations in numerous fish species . to date, however, translocation of a trna gene into the non-coding cr has not been reported.

due to the low quality of the dna from some specimens we had to use a rather short fragment to obtain the dna sequence of as many individuals as possible. the comparison of the five complete cr sequences showed that the variation in the 5'-section was similar to that in the 3'-section. for the 5'-part of the cr the primer binding was more efficient, and this fragment  was therefore chosen for the population analyses . dna was extracted from  <dig> specimens of the genus garra and the cr <dig> was successfully amplified from  <dig> individuals . from each of the resulting haplogroups we chose several specimens to sequence an additional overlapping  <dig> bp fragment  to obtain information from a longer sequence . the sequence of cr <dig> and cr <dig> was determined from a total of  <dig> individuals .

phylogenetic analyses
the analyses of the cr <dig> region resulted in the bi and nj trees shown in figure 2a and 2b. the two trees do not differ in their topology with one exception: one clade in the nj tree  decays in the bi analyses and appears in a ladderized manner. this may be an artefact of the bi analysis due to the short length of the sequences. the other two main clades are highly supported in both trees. in the following we refer to these three groups as clades. clade  <dig> comprises three subclades,  nine individuals from wadi bani awf ,  six individuals from wadi hat which is located in al hajar al gharbi, and  three individuals from wadi mansah located in the region between al hajar al gharbi and al hajar ash sharqi . the latter subclade is the sister group of the former two. all individuals from wadi bani awf share the same haplotype, which is very similar to the single haplotype of the wadi hat individuals. all populations of clade  <dig> are located at the northern side of the al jabal al akhdar mountain range. clade  <dig> comprises the individuals from wadi bani khalid, the geographically most remote population about  <dig> km to the east of al hoota area. clade  <dig> comprises all other localities from the southern side of al hajar al gharbi. the internal structure of clade  <dig> is rather bush-like. only two highly supported haplogroups are found: one comprises all individuals from wadi bani habib , the other one all individuals from al hoota cave and ten from the adjacent wadi al falahi. the remaining haplotypes from wadi al falahi are also included in clade  <dig> 

the analyses of the cr1+cr <dig> data set were performed to obtain a better resolution of the relationships between the three major lineages. they are based on  <dig> g. barreimiae individuals representing the three major clades . in the resulting bi tree all three clades are highly supported. also the sister group relationship of clades  <dig> and  <dig> obtained strong support. there is no statistical support for clade  <dig> grouping together with the two other g. barreimiae clades. moreover, the distances  between clade  <dig> and the other two g. barreimiae clades are even higher  than those between g. rufa and clade  <dig> . the distances of clade  <dig> and  <dig> to g. rufa are smaller . therefore, more distantly related outgroup species  were included to root the tree. this tree  illustrates the separated position of clade  <dig>  which is genetically very distinct from the other g. barreimiae, even tough the localities wadi bani awf and wadi hat are geographically rather close to those represented in clade  <dig> . the fact that g. rufa has smaller distances to each of the g. barreimiae clades than those found within g. barreimiae suggests that the species g. barreimiae as currently defined might not be monophyletic.

a network of the complete g. barreimiae cr <dig> data set is shown in additional file  <dig>  the different clades and g. rufa are depicted in different colours. this network shows that the position of clade  <dig> with respect to the other g. barreimiae clades is quite distant. clade  <dig> is found outside of g. rufa, this node is  <dig> substitutions away from the nearest node connecting g. rufa with clade  <dig>  clade  <dig> is separated by nine substitutions from clade  <dig> and clearly separated from g. rufa . details of clade  <dig> are shown in figure  <dig> 

phylogenetic relationships within clade 3
a tcs network based on cr <dig> sequences is shown in figure  <dig>  to enable a detailed display it includes only individuals from the populations comprising clade  <dig> . the individuals from the other five localities are genetically too distinct to be connected within the 95% connection limit  and form separate groups, which are not shown. in the  <dig> individuals  <dig> different haplotypes were found. four haplotypes  are rather frequent occurring in more than  <dig> individuals, six haplotypes occur in two to six individuals, and the remaining  <dig> haplotypes occur only once. the most interesting finding is that all individuals from al hoota cave are found within one haplogroup . it consists of one main haplotype, whereas the remaining haplotypes differ by one  or two  substitutions. this haplogroup not only contains the specimens from al hoota cave but also includes  <dig> individuals from wadi al falahi. the main haplotype of this group differs by four substitutions from another main haplotype that occurs in  <dig> individuals from five different localities. the network clearly shows that wadi bani habib is the only locality that does not share any haplotype with individuals from other localities. like al hoota cave it is restricted to one haplogroup, while all other localities are genetically mixed with haplotypes shared between the different localities. the central haplotype  <dig> is separated by only one substitution from two other common haplotypes .

the haplotype diversities in al hoota cave  and the adjacent localities wadi al falahi  and ain al msalla  are similar, while the nucleotide diversity in al hoota cave  is much lower than in the other two localities . this is because the variation within al hoota cave population consists mainly of single substitutions.

in a mismatch distribution analysis the al hoota cave population showed a unimodal distribution indicating recent population expansion after a bottleneck  <cit> . in contrast the population consisting of the remaining localities from clade  <dig> showed a more ragged distribution generally fitting a distribution expected under a growth/decline model. in the al hoota cave population the fu's fs test statistic  <cit>  and r <dig> statistic  <cit>  were both significant  rejecting the hypothesis of constant population size. clade  <dig>  was significant for fu's fs test statistic , but not for the r <dig> statistic . it has been shown that for small sample sizes r <dig> statistic performs better, whereas for larger sample sizes fu's fs test statistic performs better  <cit> .

troglomorphic state of the investigated individuals
troglomorphic features are fully developed only in later stages. for juvenile fish  this prevents unambiguously evaluating, whether a particular individual would have developed to a troglomorphic phenotype or not. the sampled fishes were of different developmental stages. the largest individuals collected in the surface waters measured  <dig> mm sl , the largest from the al hoota cave were  <dig> mm in length. our measurements confirm the finding of  <cit>  that the troglomorphic phenotype is not yet well displayed in individuals smaller than  <dig> mm. of the  <dig> individuals from the cave, only one specimen with  <dig> mm sl had well-developed eyes. individuals between  <dig>  and  <dig> mm  had partly reduced eyes. in the larger individuals of this group the eyes were sunken but still visible. all the other fishes that derived from al hoota cave  had troglobiotic morphology. in six individuals of this group, faint remnants of eyes were visible, whereas the remaining specimens showed completely reduced eyes and no pigmentation. the distributions of haplotypes of troglomorphic and intermediate individuals are indicated in figure  <dig> 

troglomorphic characters were missing in nearly all individuals from surface populations. one exception was an adult individual collected from a different drainage system , an irrigation channel near the town al hamra. this specimen was clearly troglomorphic , suggesting that other troglomorphic populations might exist beside al hoota cave. the haplotype  of this specimen is genetically only distantly related  to the blind specimens from al hoota cave. other exceptions included some individuals collected in the ponds close to the cave exit in the wadi al falahi on the 2nd of december  <dig> after a flood which brought big amounts of water from the cave to the surface. all  <dig> individuals showed a very weak pigmentation and the eyes were of variable size or not visible at all . nine of them had clearly reduced eyes , while eight had eyes that appeared to be functional ; we did not, however, perform any anatomical analysis. in addition, four individuals collected on the 24th and the 26th of january  <dig> in wadi al falahi were also microphthalmic . all other fish collected from surface waters  had well-developed eyes and full pigmentation.

discussion
genetic differentiation between troglomorphic fish of al hoota cave and surface-dwelling fish of wadi al falahi
what do the results reveal with respect to the origin of the troglomorphic forms? the main question of the study was whether the two morphotypes of g. barreimiae are genetically differentiated and whether gene flow occurs.

in the network  all individuals from al hoota cave belong to one haplogroup , but this group contains also a few individuals from adjoining wadi al falahi. hence there is no strict correspondence between haplogroups and the two ecological environments. the "cave haplogroup" shows a pattern which suggests a founder effect caused by a single invasion into the cave followed by fast expansion; this is also supported by the mismatch distribution analyses. the presence of surface-dwelling individuals in this haplogroup might be explained by incomplete lineage sorting, which we consider unlikely for the following reasons: all al hoota specimens belong to one haplogroup. this "cave haplogroup" is not found in any other locality except in a few individuals collected in wadi al falahi at the exit of al hoota cave. moreover, the vast majority of wadi al falahi samples belong to several different lineages  and only a single haplogroup is shared with individuals in the cave. none of the other various haplotypes found in wadi al falahi was detected in al hoota specimens. finally, most of the individuals of wadi al falahi possessing cave haplotypes show troglomorphic characters. in summary these facts indicate that the extant populations of al hoota and wadi al falahi are not completely separated. two potential scenarios explain how the populations might get into contact.  although most of the water bodies in the wadi dry out frequently, fishes with eyes appear within a few days after rainfalls in the surface water . hence, fish might retreat into the groundwater, where they might get into contact with individuals of the cave population. for the surface dwelling fish, however, these environmental conditions might not be suitable for breeding.  during floods, fishes might be sometimes washed out from the cave into wadi al falahi. up to  <dig> m3/sec  <cit>  can flow out from the al hoota cave into the wadi al falahi after heavy rain. concerning the direction of gene flow, our data support a sporadic translocation of individuals from al hoota cave into the wadi al falahi. from the ten individuals of the "cave haplogroup" caught in wadi al falahi, six had reduced eyes. if gene flow was acting in both directions, some individuals with intermediate phenotypes or with "surface" wadi falahi haplotypes would be expected in al hoota cave. neither of these cases was detected and thus the most likely explanation is that occasional gene flow occurs from the cave to the surface, only. this could explain both the presence of samples with "cave haplotypes" and the occurrence of intermediate phenotypes in wadi falahi. the question, however, is whether the blind individuals can reproduce in surface water bodies. one would assume that blind fish have a low probability of surviving long and reproducing in surface populations because of impairment by radiation or by high predator pressure . gene flow is therefore expected to be quite low between surface- and cave-dwelling fish.

besides the various intermediate forms, four individuals of the "cave haplogroup" from the wadi al falahi possessed eyes that resembled the surface phenotype . it remains unknown whether the eyes of the latter individuals are functional: to date no systematic morphological investigation has been performed, whether there is a plastic response of eye development in the presence or absence of light. a single report by banister  <cit>  notes that the development of the optic lobes was influenced by light. behavioural changes due to light exposure during development have been documented by  <cit> : light reared juvenile fish showed significantly higher photophilic behaviour than dark reared juvenile individuals. should the eyes in the four above mentioned individuals be functional, then the most plausible explanation is that these individuals are hybrids between the two populations  that retained the cave haplotype but are able to develop functional eyes. in summary, our data indicates that the troglomorphic individuals of g. barreimiae living in al hoota cave sporadically interbreed with individuals of the adjacent wadis.

another question concerns the age of the cave population. an answer would provide indirect hints about the underlying mechanisms for the development of troglomorphic features. surface and cave forms were crossbred in the laboratory , suggesting that the two genomes are still compatible. if the eyeless condition was a genetic trait that became fixed due to relaxed selection pressure for maintenance of vision-related traits in the cave, then this would require some time. in this context the divergence time of lineages is of interest and dating of the split of the "cave haplogroup" based on genetic distances would be desirable. this is problematic because there is no reliable calibration for a molecular clock of g. barreimiae. the cave is of plio-pleistocene age, roughly one to three million years old. this might be set as the earliest date for the origin of the cave population. nonetheless, the "cave" and the "surface" haplogroups may already have split some time before the intrusion into the cave. it is also possible that the cave population originated much later, and/or from a surface population with a different  haplotype, which we either did not sample or which does no longer exist.

despite these uncertainties, the observed genetic differentiation between sequences of the "cave haplogroup" and those from the surface populations is low . p distances are in the range of those found within several surface populations of g. barreimiae. attempts have been made to calibrate a substitution rate for the cytochrome b  gene in cyprinids:  <dig> % per million years  <cit>  and  <dig> % per million years  <cit> . for the mitochondrial cr no calibration exists, but it can be assumed that this section, due to less selective constraints, has a higher substitution rate compared to cytb. applying the rates for the cytb gene for our cr <dig> data set would most probably result in an overestimate of the actual divergence time of epigean and hypogean g. barreimiae. anyway, a rough calculation based on the distance of  <dig> % and the two above mentioned rates yields a split below  <dig> mya . this would disagree with the results of colli et al.  <cit> , who estimated the divergence time between epigean and hypogean g. barreimiae between  <dig>  -  <dig>  mya based on a  <dig> bp sequence of cytb. this calculation remains dubious because it is unclear whether those sequences  <cit>  represent the functional cytb gene or nuclear pseudogenes  or chimeras of both. in the study of  <cit>  the cytb sequences were composed of two independently generated pcr-products. our preliminary experiments revealed the presence of cytb numts in this genus. we used primers that bind in the flanking t-rna genes to amplify the whole gene  in one fragment . comparing the complete cytb sequences obtained in our study with those of  <cit>  shows that in the 3'-section they are almost identical; while in the 5'-section they are quite different . the most plausible explanation is that  <cit>  presented a sequence chimera. an extensive investigation of cytb in this genus would be necessary to draw final conclusions and to disentangle authentic mtdna sequences and numts. in any case, it is currently impossible to use cytb data for any attempt to date splits in g. barreimiae.

the very low genetic distances between cave and surface populations  suggests that the al hoota population is quite young. this indicates an evolutionary mechanism for troglomorphic characters that differs from the simple accumulation and fixation of neutral mutations. the results favour a selection-driven hypothesis as was suggested for astyanax, where increased shh expression proved to cause eye degeneration and enhanced forebrain and taste bud development  <cit> . in the evolution of troglomorphic phenotypes, however, the same genes are not necessarily always have to be involved, and selective pressures influencing different cave species may not be the same all over the world. factors affecting a cave population can vary widely . differences in physiology or the presence of preadaptations to cave life must also be considered, along with phenotypic plasticity and epigenetic effects. the effect of different environmental pressures can be particularly strong if the development of troglomorphic traits is due to epigenetic modifications or other changes in gene regulation. the plasticity of the depigmentation in g. barreimiae, which is reversible to some extent in the presence of light , is in accordance with the presumed recent origin of the cave population.

a very remarkable finding is that the single blind fish from al hamra falaj surface locality had a haplotype  which is highly divergent from the al hoota cave haplogroup. it did not occur in any other individual and is closely related to a haplogroup comprising individuals from various surface populations . we assume that this adult individual, which was caught in an irrigation channel, originally derived from a yet unknown cave population where the troglomorphic phenotype has developed independently. convergent evolution of cave fish populations from different surface populations has also been documented for astyanax species  <cit> . alternatively, the phenotype of this specimen could be ascribed to a recent mutation with pleiotropic effects, and the individual by chance survived until maturity. the latter scenario, however, seems highly unlikely because, as far as it is known from other cave fish, aborted eye development is a multifactorial trait in which at least six genes are involved and, in addition, the lack of pigmentation is caused by different genes  <cit> .

phylogeography and taxonomic considerations
within clade  <dig>  the populations wadi al falahi, ain al msalla, al hamra falaj, wadi misfat, wadi an nakhar and wadi dhum are genetically closely related and do not show any geographic structure. within most of the localities, we found various haplotypes which are shared between different localities. this suggests frequent gene flow between localities. the wadis are usually not connected on the surface, but underground water bodies might exist which enable migration between the wadis. flooding may also connect wadis. another explanation would be that a former variable panmictic population was split only very recently through the separation of the wadis. the age of the youngest dripstone activity in al hoota cave dates back  <dig>  -  <dig>  years  <cit> . this date corresponds with the last more humid period, in which the contact of different populations in permanent rivers within the same river system appears likely. although water bodies are currently separated and thus gene flow is interrupted, lineage sorting in the current populations may not be completed. the geographically more distant locality wadi bani habib  is genetically homogeneous, comprising three connected haplotypes not found elsewhere. this group is separated from the next main haplotypes by a minimum of  <dig> % sequence divergence , suggesting longer isolation of this population.

the population of wadi bani khalid , besides wadi mansah, the only sample from al hajar ash sharqi , is not only geographically the most distant one , it is also genetically rather distant . the individuals from this population were described as a separate subspecies, g. barreimiae gallagheri, which is morphologically close to the nominate subspecies but differs in shorter fins and a higher number of dorsal fin rays  <cit> . our results  are in accordance with this classification. note, however, that many regions have not been sampled so far, for example we have no samples of the surrounding populations of wadi bani khalid. it cannot be excluded that continuous geographic sampling would also reveal more continuous genetic relationships. the fact that neither this study nor any previous molecular study included fish from the type locality of g. barreimiae  makes it difficult to address the intraspecific taxonomy of g. barreimiae based on the current state of knowledge.

the situation is different concerning the remarkably high genetic distances that were found between clade  <dig>  and the other clades. in fact, the genetic analyses question whether the individuals of clade  <dig> belong to g. barreimiae because the distances between this clade and the other lineages of g. barreimiae are in the same range as those between clade  <dig> and g. rufa. our data do not resolve the phylogenetic relationships with a high statistical support. although the specimens from these localities resemble g. barreimiae at first sight, no morphological analyses have been performed that definitely support this assignment. thus, we cannot exclude the possibility that the populations of clade  <dig> represent a different species. any taxonomic revision of garra in southeast arabia should include phylogenetic analyses of samples from the topotypic locality or at least of a population close to the type locality. nonetheless, the high genetic distances can be explained by the fact that these populations underwent long-term isolation because the water bodies they inhabit are separated by a watershed.

CONCLUSIONS
our data indicate that the troglomorphic cave population is of quite recent origin, supporting the hypothesis that selection drives the evolution of troglomorphic traits. in this context pleiotropic effects might play an important role as has been shown for astyanax. there seems to be some gene flow from the cave population into the adjacent surface populations. nuclear markers need to be employed to corroborate this result and to assess the amount of gene flow in more detail. the single blind individual found at a geographically distinct surface locality is genetically differentiated from al hoota cave, indicating the probable existence of another cave population of g. barreimiae. the population at wadi bani khalid is genetically separated, while the other surface populations from separated wadis seem to be sporadically in contact or have been in contact until recently. certain populations belong to a very distant lineage. based on the genetic marker used, the monophyly of g. barreimiae cannot be confirmed.

