BACKGROUND
microtubules  are linear polymers which self-assemble from α-β tubulin heterodimers in the presence of gtp  <cit> . they participate in a number of functions within cells including chromosome movements in mitosis, vesicle and organelle motility, cell polarity, and flagellar-based motility  <cit> . during interphase, mts are organized in astral arrays that radiate from the centrosome, and function as a scaffold to direct organelle and vesicle trafficking. during mitosis, the centrosome mediates the assembly and organization of the mitotic spindle that is required for correct chromosome segregation.

this variety of roles is made possible by the dynamic nature of the mt cytoskeleton, modulated by multiple accessory proteins  <cit> . a delicate balance between mt stabilizing and destabilizing proteins is believed to generate the mt dynamics observed in cells  <cit> . molecules regulating mt dynamics have been identified, and their effects on the assembly of purified tubulin into mt determined. several spindle proteins, including xkcm <dig> and xmap <dig> family members have been identified that either stabilize or destabilize mts by mediating the rapid changes between polymerization and depolymerization  <cit> . these proteins play an important role in spindle formation. another important group of spindle proteins comprise motors of the kinesin and dynein families essential for mitotic progression  <cit> , and the small gtpase ran  <cit> .

mts are especially abundant in testis and neurons. cell-type specific mts, such as the sertoli cell mts and the manchette and flagellum mts of the spermatids, play essential roles in spermatogenesis. others are important for flagellar-based motility. in neurons, their integrity is essential to maintaining normal neuron morphology and in the transport of materials between cell body and synaptic terminals. the mt network undergoes drastic changes in neural cells at different developmental stages. for instance, during neural proliferation, mts assemble into the highly organized mitotic spindle on entering mitosis. in order to transmit signals, neurons stop dividing early in development and direct their efforts towards the elaboration of elongated cellular processes. neurons are thus terminally post-mitotic cells that no longer form mitotic spindles. after the post-mitotic neurons are generated, they extend a directional process and migrate towards their destination, during which another mt network takes place. maps have been shown to directly regulates mt dynamics during many of these developmental processes.

we have recently characterized a novel human map named asap   <cit>  that was renamed map <dig> in the nomenclature. asap localizes to mts in interphase, associates with the mitotic spindle during mitosis, localizes to the central body during cytokinesis and directly binds to purified mts by its cooh-terminal domain. overexpression of asap induces profound bundling of cytoplasmic mts in interphase cells and aberrant multipolar or monopolar spindles in mitosis. depletion of asap by rna interference results in severe mitotic defects, inducing the formation of aberrant mitotic spindle, delays in mitotic progression, defects in chromosome congression and segregation, defective cytokinesis and cell death. we have also shown that asap is a substrate of the oncogenic mitotic kinase aurora-a  <cit> . the phosphorylated form of asap localizes to centrosomes from late g <dig> to telophase and to the midbody during cytokinesis. aurora-a depletion induces a proteasome-dependent degradation of asap. asap depletion provokes spindle-defects that are specifically rescued by expression of a phosphorylation-mimetic asap mutant indicating the need for asap phosphorylation by aurora-a for bipolar spindle assembly and mitotic progression. these previous results suggest a crucial role of asap in the organization of the bipolar mitotic spindle, mitosis progression and cytokinesis and highlight asap as a putative target for cancer treatment.

mice knock-out studies and xenopus egg extracts have allowed detailed studies providing valuable information about the involvement of genes in regulatory pathways in the first model, and mt, mitotic spindle formation and cell cycle in the latter. in this report, we characterized the structure of the asap gene in human and mouse. we identified the asap orthologs in different species in order to perform phylogenetic and molecular evolution analyses and cloned and characterized the murine and xenopus orthologs. we also show that asap is predominantly expressed in testis and brain, especially in the germ cell line and in the growing neurites, opening up new perspectives on asap functions.

all together, these results shed light on new putative functions of asap, in its role both in mitosis and post-mitotic neurons, and provide new tools for the scientific community.

RESULTS
asap orthologs
asap has been identified as a new map. by comparing the asap cdna and its deduced protein sequence with the human genome and the putative transcripts of the ensembl database, we assigned the asap gene to chromosome 4q <dig> . the asap gene is transcribed on the minus strand, spans ~ <dig>  kb and contains  <dig> exons . blast searches identified a conserved potential homolog in mouse  and partial xenopus laevis  ests . comparison of human asap with the published genomes of dog , chicken , chimpanzee  and zebrafish  allowed us to identify asap homologs in these species. blast searches in translated est databases using the tblastn option, identified asap transcripts in all mammal species including primates, cow, pig, mouse, rat, bat, squirrel, rabbit, cat, dog and elephant, as well as in shrew, opossum, hedgehog, armadillo and platypus. asap is also present in birds , fish  and frog . we were able to identify the complete protein sequence in mouse, dog , chimpanzee , frog  and zebrafish , and partial sequences in chicken . invertebrate homologs were more difficult to identify. nevertheless, a distantly related 512-amino acid protein, c34d <dig>  , that shares ~ <dig> % amino acid sequence identity and about 35% sequence similarity with asap, was identified in the nematode c. elegans . the highest degree of sequence identity  between asap and c34d <dig>  is found in the region spanning amino-acids 426– <dig> of asap. another distant but potential ortholog was found in sea urchin , a hypothetical protein sharing 17% psi and 38% sequence similarity with asap .

accession numbers of asap orthologs of selected species used in phylogenetic analyses . the numbers corresponding to the sequences used in these analyses are underlined. numerous references correspond to predicted transcripts and proteins. different databases were searched: genbank , ensembl , xdb , i.e., on chromosome 3f <dig> in mouse , chromosome  <dig> in dog  and chromosome  <dig> in chicken . the x. laevis cdna  was assembled using clones aw <dig> and aw <dig> . the zebrafish gene is located on chromosome  <dig> at  <dig>  mb and has a similar intron-exon structure to that of human . using the asap protein sequences from selected species we performed a phylogenetic comparison using clustalw with a bootstrap method. as shown in fig.  <dig>  the human and dog proteins are very similar  whereas mouse asap is more divergent. although frog and fish asap are more distant than those from the other species, they do not constitute a separate family, since they have a similar topology and share >32–38% psi and >44–48% sequence similarity with the human protein. pairwise sequence comparisons confirmed these results .

in addition, the multiple alignment used for the phylogenetic analysis revealed two highly conserved regions , i.e. the n- and c-terminus ends , and a more divergent central region . the n-terminus region contains no known motifs or domains, whereas the c-terminus region corresponds to the map domain and contains three nuclear localization signal  motifs  .

to follow the evolution of the asap gene, we analyzed the mouse gene and compared it with the human ortholog. as shown in fig.  <dig>  the mouse gene is ~ <dig>  kb long, localizes on chromosome 3f <dig> at  <dig>  mb and is also composed of  <dig> exons encoding a mrna of ~ <dig>  kb. the predicted protein is also  <dig> amino-acids long and shares >71% psi with human asap. the coding exons have the same lengths in both species, except for exons  <dig>  and  <dig>  whose non-translated moieties vary . exon-intron junctions are identical  in both species . in contrast, the intron length may vary considerably. we next compared human and mouse asap using the pipmaker software. the dot plot of the percent identity plot  indicates the regions of similarity with the mouse sequence and the location of repetitive sequences . exons are conserved , whereas introns are more divergent with a nucleotide sequence identity as low as <50% as is the case for introns between exons 3– <dig> or 5– <dig>  mainly due to insertions or deletions of repetitive sequences in either species. interestingly, a ~ <dig> kb region upstream of the first codon is conserved in the two species and may therefore contain the promoter region. one weak cpg island  was identified in the region  <dig> kb upstream of the first exon corresponding to nucleotides - <dig> to - <dig> before the atg start codon . numerous transcription factor binding sites including sp <dig> sites, caat, tata and gc boxes were identified in the region  <dig> kb upstream of exon  <dig> using tfscan .

asap domains and motifs
we next compared the asap protein sequence with the databases using different programs. no obvious consensus or known motif was found, except discrete sequence similarities for the c-terminal part . the n-terminal part of the human protein  contains a conserved region , moderately conserved regions  and variable portions dispersed throughout the 99– <dig> region. the c-terminal moiety  is weakly homologous with various proteins involved in binding microtubules such as dynein , kinesin  and maps   . however, we found no obvious consensus sequence reminiscent of particular protein classes in the asap protein. the sequence similarity detected with the proteins described above is mainly due to the richness of the asap c-terminal region in lys , glu , arg , and ala  amino-acids.

in mammalian maps, the tubulin-binding domains are basic regions containing repeats of charged amino acids as is the case for map <dig>  map <dig> and tau with a pi of  <dig>  <cit> . map1b binds to microtubules via a basic domain close to its n terminus, containing  <dig> repeats of the motif kke  <cit>  and a pi of  <dig> . two regions of self-similarity, referred to as ss <dig> and ss <dig>  have been described in map1a, due to the presence of repeats  <cit> . although rich in charged residues, these two regions contain no highly conserved sequence motifs. the ss <dig> domain , close to the n-terminus, contains  <dig> kke motifs with a pi of ~ <dig>  whereas the ss <dig> domain  is acidic with a pi of  <dig> , an unusual feature for a mt-binding domain. the charged amino-acids are clustered in non-canonical groups of 3– <dig> residues separated by irregular intervals. we found a weak sequence similarity of the c-terminal end of asap , with a region corresponding to the acidic microtubule-binding region ss <dig> of map1a , due to the glu+lys richness of both regions but without significant conserved motifs . indeed, using a scrambled asap sequence generated using randseq , we found a significant similarity level in the same region, demonstrating a bias towards the amino acid composition of map1a and asap in this region rather than conserved motifs. however, given that the microtubule-binding nature of this asap region has also been experimentally demonstrated , we indicate it as a map region in figs  <dig> and  <dig>  a dotplot matrix comparison of asap with itself identified a region with self-similarity , revealed as sharing common features with ss <dig> with amino acid analysis . the two regions are about the same length, have the same charged amino acid composition and are basic , in contrast to ss <dig> which is acidic with a pi of  <dig> . they also share different motifs such as kee, ekke and ekkdkk.

comparison of the amino acid composition of map1a self-similarity microtubule-binding regions  with the self-similarity asap region .

in addition, psortii software identified three nls in the asap c-terminal domain corresponding to amino acids 483– <dig>  508– <dig>  and 621– <dig> , respectively .

the asap secondary structure was predicted using a hierarchical neural network  <cit> . asap is mainly composed of alpha helix . similar results were obtained using either the mouse or the frog ortholog. the smart program  <cit>  identified two coiled-coil regions spanning amino acids 297– <dig> and 477– <dig> . furthermore, a block of ~ <dig> amino acids  composed exclusively of alpha-helical structures was clearly identifiable from the predicted secondary structure in the ss domain. a search in the pdb database for similar structures, and eye inspection allowed us to identify the mit domain as possessing similar characteristics  <cit>  :  <dig> conserved positively charged residues , a unique conserved negatively charged residue and a succession of polar and hydrophobic areas . as shown in fig. 2c, this region is conserved during evolution, and the  and  amino acid positions are conserved in most orthologs. furthermore, in the scrambled asap sequence, we were unable to identify any mit-like domain, suggesting that the identification of this domain is not only due to a particular amino acid composition. therefore, although this region was not identified as an mit domain using conserved domain search programs, we suggest that this region of asap is an mit-like domain. although the function of mit domains remains unclear, one could reasonably assume that they convey the capability to interact with mts as also described with spastin  <cit> . another region of the asap map domain shares sequence similarity with the thy motif  with 28% sequence identity .

finally, as a very rich ser/thr protein, asap contains several putative phosphorylation sites, among which two are characterized and referenced on : the s <dig> determined by ourselves and necessary for spindle formation and mitosis completion  <cit>  is conserved only in mammals  and the s <dig> conserved in all vertebrate species as a sq motif whose activation is typical of the atm/atr pathway in response to dna damage  <cit> . other sq sites are found across the homologs but not significantly conserved.

overexpression of cter and nter asap deletion mutants
in order to gain insight into asap function and provide support to some sequence analysis data, we overexpressed the cter and nter asap truncation mutants in u2-os cell lines . as already described  <cit> , the eyfp-asap-nter fragment, deleted from its map domain led to a loss of the fiber-like distribution in interphase cells, confirming that the mt interaction occurs via this cter domain. however, when this map domain was overexpressed , the mt-bundling and co-localization could still be observed but the protein appeared also as distinct nuclear foci , suggesting that the nls localized in this domain became accessible. we were unable to determine whether these foci correspond to defined nuclear organelles . we performed nls mutations but since they are localized in the map domain, the mutants no longer co-localized with the mt network and showed a pattern similar to that observed with nter domain overexpression .

mouse asap characterization
in order to develop the murine model as a tool, we cloned the full-length mouse asap  cdna by rt-pcr using total testis rna and primers derived from the sequence available at the time in the database .

we first investigated if masap had the same endogenous and overexpression patterns as its human counterpart. we raised polyclonal antibodies against the full-length protein. affinity-purified antibodies recognized an endogenous single protein band of ~ <dig> kda in nih3t <dig> and u2-os cells, as observed with human asap . the specificity of the antibodies was assessed by comparing these profiles to that observed with the anti-gfp antibody against eyfp-masap transfected cells , and to asap-depleted u2-os cells by rna interference . the endogenous signal disappeared in sirna-transfected cells and the anti-masap recognized the highest molecular form of eyfp-masap  in the corresponding nih3t3-transfected cells. it is noteworthy that, as suspected by sequence comparison, the mouse antibody is able to recognize the human protein. unfortunately, as observed for the human antibodies, the two antibodies generated against masap gave a significant background in immunofluorescence studies. the same asap localization was observed using several fixation methods in u- <dig> os  and nih3t <dig> cell lines. we observed an identical subcellular localization between endogenous masap and human asap. mouse asap co-localizes with the mt network in interphase. during mitosis it first relocates to the poles at the astral mts and the spindle during prometaphase, metaphase and early anaphase, and then to centrosomal mt asters and the central spindle during anaphase and early telophase. during late cytokinesis masap colocalizes with the midzone mt bundles when it is also located on mts nucleated from centrosomes .

we then overexpressed the full-length eyfp-masap in u- <dig> os  and nih3t <dig> cells. as observed for human asap, the overexpressed masap induced bundles of stabilized microtubules in interphase cells and the same mitotic defects   <cit>  even in the fibroblast-derived nih3t <dig> cell line .

tissue expression
to investigate asap expression, human multiple-tissue northen blots were probed with an asap cdna probe. a single ~ <dig>  kb transcript was detected in testis and a ~ <dig> kb one in brain . no detectable signals were found in other tissues. to confirm these results, semi-quantitative rt-pcrs were performed on mouse total rna. asap was found to be strongly expressed in testis and brain and to a lesser extent in heart, lung and ovary . supporting these observations, the asap transcript is well represented among ests derived from different parts of the brain and in testis libraries.

we then investigated if the protein was expressed in brain and testis extracts. as shown in fig. 8c, asap protein is also strongly expressed as a  <dig> kda protein in both tissues as observed in nih3t <dig> and u2-os cell line extracts. no expression was found in spleen or colon tissues, or in the colon-derived ht- <dig> cell line. it is noteworthy that in brain no higher molecular weight protein was detected, suggesting that the  <dig> kb mrna probably corresponded to a partially spliced asap mrna.

since hasap is involved in mitotic spindle formation, we were not surprised to find the asap gene highly expressed in a proliferative tissue such as testis. to determine whether asap expression is indeed germ cell line specific, we used in situ hybridization. in mouse testis, each seminiferous tubule stage contains a number of spermatogenic cells at different stages of development. unfortunately, despite different trials of fixation, our antibodies proved not suitable for immunohistochemistry experiments. however, as shown in fig. 9a–b, we were able to confirm asap immunoreactivity observed in seminiferous tubules as a specific cytoplasmic filamentous staining when compared to the preimmune serum . we were unable to observe a real co-staining with α-tubulin . asap expression may be stage specific since the hybridization is somehow stronger in some tubules but an adequate antibody would be necessary to confirm this.

in contrast, normal adult brain is a tissue containing mainly non-proliferating cells. to analyze the expression of asap in the brain, we performed immunofluorescence on culture neural stem cells . in culture, these multipotent cells self-renew, and after mitogen withdrawal, differentiate into neurons, astrocytes and oligodendrocytes in predictable proportions. here, we addressed the question of whether asap is expressed during differentiation of nsc as a first step to studying the possible role of asap during brain development. mouse cortical neural stem cells were isolated from cd <dig> mouse embryos at  <dig>  embryonic days. nine days after differentiation, cells could be identified by immunocytochemistry as neurons  or astrocytes  . we also analyzed the pattern of expression of asap by immunocytochemistry. asap was clearly detected in neuronal cells as demonstrated by co-labeling of cells with β-iii tubulin and asap antibody . asap was not detected in gfap positive cells. therefore in this model, asap is specifically expressed in the cell body and growing neurites of post-mitotic neurons. further experiments are necessary to characterize the function of asap in brain.

xenopus asap characterization
in order to develop xenopus as a model system, we pcr-screened a xenopus tadpole stage  <dig> library using primers derived from est databases. only one partial cdna clone containing the n-terminal part of the sequence was isolated. the full-length clone was pcr-reconstructed using an overlapping cdna found in the database . given the sequence divergence between human asap and x-asap, we overexpressed the full-length eyfp-x-asap in xenopus xl <dig> cells to observe the subcellular localization. western blot analysis revealed an expression of eyfp constructs at ~ <dig> kda, a molecular weight slightly lower than that observed for hasap or masap . as observed for mammalian asap, overexpressed x-asap colocalized with interphasic and mitotic mts, showing the same localization as both masap and hasap . however, we observed neither bundles nor monopolar spindles. since the transfection level was very low, it was quite difficult to observe transfected mitosis. this may be accounted for by abnormal mitotic cells having undergone cell death.

discussion
in a previous report, we demonstrated that asap/map <dig> is a novel microtubule-associated protein required for a proper cell cycle progression  <cit> . in this paper, we detected homologs in all vertebrate species investigated and potential orthologs in different invertebrates, thus suggesting a requirement of asap in higher eukaryotes. the coding sequence and exon-intron structure have been conserved during vertebrate evolution, suggesting that selective constraints are exerted on this gene to maintain its function. these genes are also invariably located in regions syntenic to the human locus, demonstrating common ancestry. invertebrate and vertebrate asap also likely derive from a common ancestor but which evolved independently after the separation of the two clades. this would account for the low level of homology where events such as insertion/deletion or exon shuffling shaped the asap gene differently.

the highly n-terminal conserved region 1– <dig>  corresponds to no known conserved motif and its function remains to be elucidated.

importantly, the c-terminal map region is the most conserved not only within vertebrates, but also between invertebrates and vertebrates, suggesting that the conservation of the map function is essential. indeed, the sequence similarity with c34d <dig>   or with the sea urchin protein  is higher in the map region . c34d <dig>  could be involved in the regulation of microtubule dynamics since it contains stathmin domains  <cit>  that are known to be involved in the regulation of microtubule skeleton by acting on microtubule dynamics. in the vertebrate map region, other motifs such as nls or an mit-like domain are also conserved .

the sequence similarity of asap with different proteins/domains is concentrated in the c-terminal map domain and seems connected to microtubule binding/dynamics properties. for example, the character of asap as a microtubule binding protein is also found with the structural domains that asap shares with map1a. in particular there is a striking analogy with the self-similarity region ss <dig> that is involved in binding microtubules  <cit> . besides map1a, asap is also weakly homologous to dynein and kinesin, two motor proteins that bind to mts, although no motor activity was found in asap . on the other hand, thy has been shown to be involved in the cytoskeleton organization by binding actin monomers and thus inhibiting actin polymerization. we also identified a potential mit-like domain in the map domain of asap. this domain was first described in proteins involved in mt binding and in intracellular transport and named mit for it being "contained within microtubule-interacting and trafficking molecules". for example the mit domain has been identified in spastin   <cit> , spartin   <cit> , both proteins that interact with microtubules, or vsp <dig>  <cit>  which is involved in the intracellular protein transport machinery and the regulation of membrane association of several proteins. as with spastin, asap overexpression causes perturbations in the mt network. the identification of related mit domains in asap, spastin and spartin may therefore suggest the possible involvement of asap dysfunction in pathways leading to pathogenesis.

many maps regulated by aurora-a and involved in spindle assembly  are nuclear in interphase and recruited after reorganization of the different compartments . they are regulated via their nls by the small gtpase ran, that releases and activates them from bound importins  <cit> . the presence of these conserved nls may suggest the regulation of asap by this pathway. in our fixation conditions, we observed no asap in the nucleus accounted for either by a very weak signal or by the fact that our antibody did not recognize the nuclear epitopes. however, when we overexpressed the cter domain, we observed a localization of asap as nuclear foci, suggesting that the nls are functional and become accessibles in this mutant. however, these nuclear foci could also suggest that asap, under certain conditions that need to be determined, has a nuclear function. indeed, these foci are reminiscent of those observed after dna damage. although a putative brct-domain hit  found in the asap protein sequence could not be confirmed with confidence, it may nevertheless be indicative of a putative role of asap in dna damage, since brct domains are usually found in proteins involved in the checkpoint dna-damage response. on the other hand, the s <dig>  which is conserved in all vertebrates, corresponds to a sq motif and has been identified in a large-scale proteomic analysis of proteins phosphorylated in response to dna damage on consensus sites recognized by atm and atr  <cit> . these data hint towards asap playing a role in the dna damage response.

asap is very rich in ser and thr residues suggesting multiple putative phosphorylation sites. the s <dig> phosphorylated by aurora-a is necessary for spindle assembly and completion of mitosis, but is conserved only in mammals  as the emergence of a new feature.

we have cloned the murine ortholog of asap and confirm an intracellular pattern similar to its human counterpart. we also showed that deregulation of this protein leads to the same mitotic defects even in the fibroblast derived nih3t <dig> cell line, confirming that the phenotypes observed in u2-os cells were not due to the transformed status of these cells. we have also cloned the xenopus ortholog and demonstrated a similar localization when overexpressed. the identical subcellular asap localization within the mt network between these species suggests an evolutionary conservation of map function. however, the mitotic defects were not observed in the xenopus cell line because of a lack of transfected mitosis, due either to low transfection efficiency or to the lethal issue of these transfected mitotic cells.

tissue expression analyses have shown that asap is predominantly expressed in testis and brain. such a distribution pattern has already been described for different maps. for example, map <dig> is neural-specific but is also expressed as a lower molecular weight isoform in the testis  <cit> . the testis is one of the most abundant sources of mt networks. these include mitotic and meiotic spindles, the spermatid manchettes and axonemes, and the sertoli cell cytoskeleton. some maps, such as e-map- <dig>  are required for spermatogenesis. since asap is also expressed in the ovary and is involved in the mitotic spindle formation of cultured cells  <cit> , its strong expression in this proliferative tissue is not surprising and a role in the meiotic spindle could be possible. we have indeed confirmed in a preliminary experiment that asap is specifically expressed in the germ cell line during spermatogenesis, and its expression may be stage-specific. one might expect an expression in spermatogonia which undergo rapid successive divisions or in spermatocytes where meiosis takes place. spermatogenesis is an intricately regulated morphogenetic process during which many structural changes are necessary to produce mature spermatozoa. differentiation and polarization of the round spermatid are associated with new microtubular configuration, that resembles that of pachytene spermatocytes  <cit> . on the other hand, asap could be present in the perinuclear theca which is a rigid cytoskeleton that covers the entire nucleus of mammalian spermatozoa, and could coat the acrosomal vesicle of round spermatids before attachment to the anterior region of the nucleus. different maps, such as ndel <dig>  <cit> , e-map- <dig>  <cit> , map <dig>  <cit> , and tau  <cit> , are present in the spermatid. together with these proteins, asap could be involved in nuclear shaping and the process of spermatid elongation. deciphering the exact location of asap expression will require antibodies adapted for immunohistochemistry experiments.

microtubules are also essential for a number of cellular processes that include the transport of intracellular cargo or organelles across long distances. they are especially abundant in neurons, where they exhibit an extreme state of stability. they are involved in neuronal migration and positioning during cortical development. after the post-mitotic neurons are generated, they extend a directional process and migrate towards their destination, during which another mt network takes place. maps have been shown to be the direct regulators of mt dynamics during many of these developmental processes. in neurons, the major maps include tau, map1a, map1b and map <dig>  these maps are phosphoproteins and the level of phosphorylation has been shown to regulate their activities to stimulate mt assembly. tau has been associated with different neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer's disease, pick's disease and frontotemporal dementia associated with parkinson's disease  <cit> . however, several other proteins such as ndel <dig>  the partner of lis <dig> involved in lissencephaly  <cit> , aspm involved in microcephaly  <cit> , or spastin involved in hereditary spastic paraplegia  <cit> , are also neuronal maps. the identification of numerous maps and the progressive elucidation of the mechanisms of mt assembly and transport are beginning to have a profound impact on the study and treatment of human genetic diseases such as neurodegenerative diseases  . here we have demonstrated the specific expression of asap in neurons and growing neurites, suggesting an important role in the brain. it is noteworthy that neuronal maps described above such as ndel <dig>  spastin and aspm are also expressed at the mitotic spindles of cell cultures  <cit> . even though neurons are quite dissimilar from typical interphase cells with regards to mt distribution and organization, several observations suggest that axonal and dendritic arrays may be established by mechanisms very similar to those used for the formation and function of the mitotic spindle  <cit> .

adult cns neurons are considered as postmitotic but it appears that these cells must keep their cell cycle in check to avoid any reinitiation leading to an altered state. there is now growing evidence that neurons at risk of neurodegeneration are also at risk of reinitiating a cell cycle process  <cit> , and several neurodegenerative disorders are related to cell cycle failures. in human, cell cycle events  are associated with several neurodegenerative diseases such as alzheimer disease and ataxia telangiectasia  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
asap is a novel map whose expression defects provoke aberrant mitoses leading to cell phenotypes reminiscent to those observed in cancers. asap is phosphorylated by the oncogenic mitotic kinase aurora-a that plays a key role in mitotic spindle formation and the cell cycle, highlighting asap as a potential new target for anti-tumoral drugs  <cit> . in this work, evolutionary and expression studies have shed light on new putative functions of asap both as a germ cell line and neuronal map that could be involved in spermatogenesis and neuronal developmental processes. consequently, deregulation of asap expression in such tissues, as observed with other maps, may lead to spermatogenesis defects or neurodegenerative disease. although our analysis shows an evolutionary conservation of map function in asap, it also suggests also that this protein might be involved in other cell cycle processes such as dna damage response. our data also validate mouse and xenopus as models for further asap studies using either knock-out or mt in vitro experiments.

