BACKGROUND
the rapid growth of high-throughput rna-seq data enables thousands of novel transcripts discovered annually, with the long noncoding rnas  as the major repertoire  <cit> . rna expression profile provides important functional hints, which is particularly helpful for novel lncrnas due to their largely elusive mechanisms  <cit> . while several expression atlas databases  work well for known gene models, they cannot handle novel transcripts which were not pre-calculated . on the other hand, the ab initio analysis of raw rna-seq data , which can survey the transcriptome global picture with both known and novel gene models, is time consuming and hardly practical for bench biologists.

here we propose locexpress, a local context-oriented expression abundance estimation tool for novel transcripts. for a given gene model, locexpress estimates its abundance only based on its minimum spanning bundle  region instead of reanalyzing the whole transcriptome. such context-oriented strategy enables the nearly real-time expression profiling for a novel transcript in hundreds of samples, with the same accuracy of standard pipelines. to help bench biologists, we made locexpress publicly available as a web server at http://loc-express.cbi.pku.edu.cn. currently, the website supports instant abundance estimation across  <dig> human and mouse samples .table  <dig> locexpress supports expression estimation in common tissues/cells





implementation
as a wrapper for canonical rna-seq quantification algorithms, locexpress takes full advantage of the locality of rna-seq data, and makes the abundance calls increasingly .fig.  <dig> the workflow of locexpress. for an input novel transcript, locexpress infers msb for abundance estimation, and obtain fpkm accordingly




the basic idea of locexpress is straightforward: for a novel transcript, locexpress will first infer its minimum spanning bundle , and make the  expression call based on reads within the msb only. here, a bundle is defined as a continuous genomic region which is covered by overlapped reads  as well as known gene models. the msb is an independent unit in making an expression call . and a novel transcript’s msb can be inferred by merging the transcript’s spanning region with  reference bundles which was derived by running stringtie  <cit>  on the reference gene model . after that, reads and existing gene models within the msb are extracted and fed into the stringtie code. the resulting relative fpkm in each sample is further corrected for the fragment length by correctedfpkm=relativefpkm×localtotalfragmentlengthglobaltotalfragmentlength 


finally, these corrected fpkms are geometrically normalized across samples, and reported to users, with replicates for the same cell type are averaged before.

all core modules are implemented in python and linux shell, and the locexpress website is developed based on ruby on rails  with mysql database supported. locexpress is publicly available at http://loc-express.cbi.pku.edu.cn.

RESULTS
performance evaluation
to assess the performance of locexpress, we simulated multiple user submissions by randomly choosing  <dig> transcripts from gencode reference gene models as “novel” transcripts per sample each time, resulting in  <dig>  human transcripts and  <dig> mouse transcripts in total. the evaluation was conducted on  <dig> human samples and  <dig> mouse samples independently. in each run, the chosen “novel” transcripts were removed from the original reference gene models and feed into the locexpress one by one. meanwhile, the output of stringtie ran in quantification-only mode  with the full gencode gene models as reference annotation  was taken as the “gold standard” for validating the correctness of locexpress.

the evaluation shows that the locexpress can correctly estimate abundance  within only seconds: the median time for a novel transcript per sample is  <dig>  s in human and  <dig>  s in mouse . while there are also dozen of extreme cases  taking more than one minute per sample due to their complicated splicing structures as well as dense reads distribution in their msb regions, the majority of transcripts takes several seconds only .fig.  <dig> evaluation of locexpress. a locexpress arrives the same accuracy as the standard quantification algorithm. b the time cost per sample for a novel transcript. the median time cost is only  <dig>  s in human and  <dig>  s in mouse. the linux box is configured with two intel xeon processor e5- <dig> v <dig> 10c  <dig> ghz cpus, with 4*16gb ecc ddr <dig> 1866 mhz memory




to further verify the performance of the locexpress, we re-ran the evaluation on  <dig> newly added transcripts in human gencode , and  <dig> in mouse gencode . consistently, locexpress is able to estimate expression abundance correctly for these novel transcripts  in nearly real-time .

user interface
locexpress is designed to be intuitive. the most common operations  can be performed with just a few clicks . users can select cell types and submit novel transcripts in gtf format at the “home” page of locexpress website . then, users are led to the result page directly. run status is showed on this page. if the job is not finished, this page will self-refresh every 30 s . users can keep the page open and wait the job to be finished, or just record the result url and come back later. after the job is successfully finished, expression profiles of each transcript are rendered as bar plots . users can also download the calculation results in text format as a zip .fig.  <dig> the web interface of locexpress. locexpress web server is very convenient to use. a the “home” page. users can select cell types and submit transcript gtf in this page. b the “run status” page which shows the running status of current submission. c the “result” page. expression profiles of submitted transcripts are rendered as bar charts




CONCLUSIONS
to the best of our knowledge, locexpress is the only web server that can provide efficient real-time expression estimation for novel transcripts across multiple common human and mouse tissues and cell types. taking advantage of rna-seq locality, locexpress wraps canonical rna-seq quantification algorithm, archiving the same accuracy with overwhelming efficiency for novel transcripts. the median time cost is only about one second per submit per sample in human and half second in mouse. powered by the intuitive web interface, locexpress could be a useful tool for bench biologists to get the complete expression profile of their interested novel transcripts in just minutes with only a few clicks. in the future, we will continuously improve the locexpress with more samples and more friendly interface based on users’ feedback.

availability and requirements
project name: locexpress

project home page: http://loc-express.cbi.pku.edu.cn


operating system: locexpress can be accessed from any platform by using modern web browsers .

programming languages: python, shell and ruby

any restrictions to use by non-academics: for non-academic use, please contact loc-express@mail.cbi.pku.edu.cn.

additional files

additional file 1: this file includes the supplementary table and figures, as well as additional methods and discussion. 


additional file 2: this file lists human and mouse datasets used to build the locexpress web server, including reads mapping information. 


additional file 3: this file is figure s <dig>  a flowchart of detailed workflow of locexpress. 




abbreviations
fpkmfragments per kilobase of exon per million fragments mapped

msbminimum spanning bundle

