BACKGROUND
mycobacteriophages infect mycobacterium species such as the clinically important mycobacterium tuberculosis and the nonpathogenic m. smegmatis. mycobacteriophages are the most studied of all bacteriophages with  <dig>  mycobacteriophages isolated, more than  <dig> genomes fully sequenced  and approximately  <dig> full phage genome sequences available on genbank, making the analysis of these phages a model for bacteriophage research. the number of mycobacteriophages isolated and sequenced in recent years has led to the identification of genetic relationships and subsequent assignment of phages into  <dig> clusters and  <dig> subclusters based on whole genome comparison  <cit> . the genomes vary in size from between  <dig>  and  <dig>  bp  <cit> . comparison of phages within and between clusters has revealed genes in rapid genetic flux and regions that are more likely to have undergone horizontal exchange in relatively recent evolutionary time  <cit> . this genetic mosaicism contributes to the high level of diversity observed between phages and complicates phylogenetic analysis. thus, identifying viable genome comparison methods that reflect the multifaceted evolutionary history of phage is fraught with challenges  <cit> . for example, the differences phages exhibit in the number and location of genes and the variety of genomic length results in the inability to utilize maximum likelihood and other traditional methods that require positional homology for determining phylogenic relationships. for mycobacteriophage cluster and subcluster assignment, whole genomes are currently compared primarily by dotplot, but pairwise average nucleotide identities , pairwise genome maps, and gene content analysis are all considered  <cit> .

this study demonstrates that a single gene can group mycobacteriophages into the same clusters and subclusters proposed by whole genome dotplot analysis. the ability to predict phylogenetic assignment allows researchers to focus on particular phages during the initial isolation and amplification before whole genome sequencing and may facilitate analysis of complex samples  <cit> . the tape measure protein  which is typically encoded by the longest gene of a phage genome was selected, and the nucleotide and amino acid sequences of tmp were analyzed in  <dig> mycobacteriophages representing more than  <dig> subclusters. tmp is also used to identify mycobacteriophage cluster and subcluster by dotplot comparison and by maximum likelihood methods. in addition, pcr evidence suggests identification of cluster-specific sequence similarity in tmp is sufficient for cluster prediction. the gepard dotplot analysis of tmp is applied to a subset of known coliphages and demonstrates that the single-gene method identifies phage relationships whether the entire genome or the single tmp gene is used for the comparison. thus, single-gene analysis for phylogenetic prediction is feasible for the two most highly studied groups of phages, those that infect mycobacteria and those that infect escherichia coli. due to the highly mosaic nature of phages, subsequent full genome sequence analysis is appropriate to ensure proper taxonomic assignment reflecting the complex evolutionary history of the phages.

these data support that a single gene can predict phage cluster and subcluster specific classification when properly compared. more specifically, the clusters observed using a single gene maximum likelihood comparison or gepard dotplot alignment reflect the same clustering that is observed when whole genome comparison is used.

RESULTS
dotplot comparison of a single gene can identify clusters similar to whole genome dotplot
hatfull et al.  <cit>  demonstrated grouping patterns for mycobacteriophage clusters and subclusters a through o based on nucleotide sequence dotplots  <cit> . all fully sequenced mycobacteriophages available from genbank or the mycobacteriophage repository http://www.phagesdb.org have been previously assigned to a subcluster primarily by dotplot analysis of fully sequenced genomes  <cit> . dotplots are two-dimensional matrices with the sequences being compared along the horizontal and vertical axes. the matrix is shaded based on regions of homology, thus identical sequences appear as diagonal black lines across the regions where they are compared. the gepard dotplot in figure 1a includes  <dig> entire genome nucleotide sequences of representative phages from clusters a through o. it demonstrates the clustering pattern of the phages into their preassigned  <cit>  clusters and subclusters. to determine whether a single gene could be used to identify the same clusters, the tape measure protein  and the major capsid protein  nucleotide and amino acid sequences were used to produce dotplots for the same  <dig> phages  <cit>  . tmp and mcp were chosen due to the ubiquitous nature of these mycobacteriophage genes  <cit> , a necessity of single gene comparison. in addition, these genes are likely to have limited transfer to phages from diverse evolutionary origins due to their involvement in multiple protein-protein interactions within phages  <cit> . the dotplots illustrate that the same clustering of mycobacteriophages occurs when using tmp, mcp or whole genomes . all of the clusters and subclusters are recovered for each of the  <dig> phages whether using nucleotide or amino acid sequences for tmp or mcp, supporting the use of single-gene dotplots in recovering a known phylogeny. in addition to recovering clusters, single-gene dotplots also reveal similarities between phage clusters evident in the whole genome dotplots. for example, tmp of g cluster phages halo and hope is similar to the k1- <dig> subcluster phages adephagia, angelica, crimd, tm <dig>  pixie, macncheese, fionbharth and larva. in addition, mcp from f cluster phages rockyhorror and che <dig> is similar to the same k1- <dig> subcluster phages. these examples demonstrate that the k subcluster phage genomes are similar to part of the g phage genomes and part of the f phage genomes .

the tmp gene is approximately  <dig> bp , making it the longest and most easily recognized gene in siphoviridae mycobacteriophages. while this size is nearly  <dig> times smaller than the entire genome , the tmp plot reflects the same clustering as the entire genome. the mcp gene is approximately  <dig>  bp , much smaller than tmp, yet clustering is still evident. clustering by single gene amino acid sequences  is slightly stronger than the nucleotide plots , which reflects the conservation of protein structure when silent mutations occur in the nucleotide sequence. whole genome amino acid sequence comparisons are not feasible because genes exist in different frames and orientation across the genome.

the tmp method for cluster identification was then expanded to  <dig> complete mycobacteriophage genomes currently available in genbank and from http://phagesdb.org. all of these mycobacteriophages have been previously assigned to clusters through whole genome analysis  <cit>  and cluster assignment is available at http://phagesdb.org. remarkably, the majority of the  <dig> phage  are recovered to their assigned cluster by either tmp nucleotide or amino acid dotplot analysis as demonstrated in figure  <dig>  of the  <dig> phage, armid, benedict and rey were the only three phages where the subcluster assignment was not apparent using tmp gepard analysis. the genomes of armid and benedict are highly similar to one another sharing 90-95% identity and 75-80% with their assigned a <dig> subcluster. by tmp analysis, these phages would form their own new cluster because tmp shares no identity with other phages. the third phage, rey, appears as a singleton with tmp-only analysis. rey shares only 10% tmp similarity with other phages in its assigned cluster m, while 30% of its whole genome is similar to cluster m phages. of the  <dig> phages recovered to the correct cluster, three phages differ in their subcluster assignment with the tmp analysis namely anal <dig>  pukovnik, and squirt. anal <dig> is assigned as an a <dig> phage but its tmp is similar to a <dig> phage. pukovnik, is assigned as an a <dig> phage but whose tmp is similar to a <dig> phages. also, squirt is an f <dig> phage whose tmp is similar to f <dig> phages. interesting the tmp gene of dori, a singleton, shows significant identity to b <dig> cluster phages . these data indicate that mycobacteriophages can be correctly preassigned to clusters with an accuracy of  <dig> ± <dig> %, or subclusters with an accuracy of  <dig> ± <dig> %, by tmp sequence prior to whole genome sequencing. the low error rate of  <dig> ± <dig> % may be due to genetic exchange between mycobacteriophages. these data support the use of a single gene dotplot analysis to predict whole genome-based cluster relationships of phages.

use of a single gene allows global alignment and maximum likelihood comparisons
bacteriophage genomes pose unique challenges to determining phylogenetic relationships by whole genome analysis because of the mosaic nature of phage genomes. for instance, a common and powerful method of determining genetic relationships is to utilize a global alignment of sequences in question and perform a maximum likelihood comparison. this method is ineffective with entire phage genomes because global alignment cannot be made on entire genomes and sometimes not even reliably among coding sequences; they exhibit many differences in genome length, gene content and gene synteny  <cit> . since the tmp gene simulated the whole genome dotplot relationships of the phages, a global alignment and maximum likelihood comparison performed on tmp alone may demonstrate the appropriate phage clustering. figure  <dig> shows a phylogeny inferred from a tmp alignment using both maximum likelihood  and bayesian inference . the ml phylogenetic tree was constructed using clustalw alignment of tmp and the maximum composite likelihood of mega <dig> software  <cit> . using this method, tmp genes segregated phages into their pre-assigned clusters and subclusters  <cit>  with substantial fidelity. without exception, every subcluster is located within a clade . the phylogeny was also inferred using bi as the optimality criterion, which resulted in a nearly identical topology  and similar nodal support compared to ml . ml and bi phylogenies were compared quantitatively by estimating the matching splits metric, where both phylogenies differed only by  <dig> % . differences in topology were noted at deeper levels in the phylogenies but not at the subcluster level where clades were successfully recovered under both inference methods.

in figure  <dig>  all a subclusters extended from the same branch and form consistent and well supported clades. this relationship is also true for the b subclusters. by contrast, the phylogenetic tree reveals a larger distance between the f subclusters as they were not recovered as a monophyletic group. for instance, subcluster f <dig> branches with i, e, and n clusters, while the f <dig> subcluster branches with k and g clusters. the similarity between f <dig>  g and k was identified by dotplot analysis as discussed above . this difference suggests that the f <dig> and f <dig> subclusters may be their own distinct cluster if utilizing tmp for determining the cluster relationships. based on these data, single gene global alignment for cluster identification provides further evidence that a single gene can be used to predict phage clusters.

a single gene can distinguish subclusters
dotplots of mycobacteriophages from entire clusters are capable of determining subclusters and identifying the subcluster assignment of an individual phage. the tmp nucleotide and amino acid sequences were used to generate a gepard dotplot of the b cluster phages . the plots accurately reflect the b subclusters published previously  <cit> . the dotplot comparison of tmp from a single phage against phages of various subclusters should also allow for subcluster prediction. to demonstrate this, figure 4c and 4d plots were generated using the tmp sequence of the b <dig> subcluster phage klucky <dig> against phages in each of the b subclusters. klucky <dig> aligned with the b <dig> phages in the comparison, but the relationship became weaker when comparing the klucky <dig> sequence with the b <dig>  b <dig>  b <dig>  and b <dig> subclusters. these data support the use of a single gene, such as tmp, to predict mycobacteriophage phylogeny beyond cluster into a subcluster.

subcluster-conserved sequences within a single gene are identifiable
the relationship between the tmp sequence and phage clustering merited the search of short conserved sequences within the gene that were subcluster specific. figure  <dig> illustrates the sporadic regions of similarity among tmp genes from phages of all subclusters . however, alignment of the tmp gene sequence from phages in a single cluster identifies regions of unique similarity  not found in other clusters. consequently, we posited that a pcr primer set can be designed specifically for a single cluster or subcluster . table  <dig> demonstrates the overall degree of identity between tmp from phages within a single subcluster. short conserved sequences in tmp were found to occur at the level of subcluster and non-subdivided clusters, allowing for subcluster-specific pcr primers to be designed as listed in table  <dig>  in many cases, degenerate primers were selected to allow for silent mutation differences. it is notable that while all subclusters yielded regions of similarity, no conserved sequences were found between subclusters of a same cluster . these data are useful indicators of the robustness of tmp as a single gene to predict mycobacteriophage clustering.

tmp sequences were compared using clustalw  <cit>  within mega <dig> software  <cit> . some subclusters were combined. the % identical sites indicates the number of identical nucleotides aligned over the entire length of the gene. the % pairwise identity indicates the number of identical nucleotides of aligned and unaligned lengths within the gene and gives a more accurate indication of similarity.

primers sequences are 5′ to 3′ and the product length indicates the predicted basepair pcr product when using the primers on the indicated phage subcluster. primers were designed using genious software in regions of high subcluster sequence similarity with three or fewer degenerate bases.

pcr amplification of tmp verifies phage cluster identity
each subcluster primer set was tested on several phage samples from the appropriate subcluster and yielded accurate bands of expected amplicon size . primer sets were also tested against dna from phages of all other subclusters to verify their specificity and no cross-reactivity was observed. in addition, we tested the ability to use the primers on dna extracted via simplified methods, such as boiling a diluted sample from a spot test. the primers successfully amplified appropriate band size amplicons from dna samples extracted by three different methods including purified dna extracted with a commercial dna extraction kit, dna extracted from different concentrations of a diluted boiled spot test and dna extracted using a high titer lysate that was diluted and boiled . the pcr data confirm that subcluster-specific primer sets can amplify the target sequences and that tmp can be used to distinguish phage clusters. in addition, the pcr from diluted boiled spot tests worked remarkably well allowing subcluster identification in the initial stages of mycobacteriophage isolation with minimal effort.

alignment-free tmp phylogeny does not distinguish myobacteriophage clusters
as mentioned previously, gene content and genetic identity are highly heterogeneous between phages and thus prevent the application of traditional phylogenetic methods using whole genome sequences. new methods of phylogenetic comparisons have been developed that determine relationships based on the frequency of ‘words’ or ‘features’ so that there is no need to rely on positional homology  <cit> . these feature frequency profile  approaches allow for alignment-free phylogenetic inferences. when comparing long genome sequences, the small feature length of ffp allows for relationships to be determined regardless of variety in genome length or gene content in the comparative samples. recently, sousa et al. demonstrated the ability of alignment-free methods to uncover the known phylogeny of t <dig> phage variants, all of which were similar in that they were evolved from a parental t <dig> phage  <cit> . in contrast to the highly similar t <dig> phage variants, mycobacteriophages are highly diverse with low sequence identity and novel gene order and content. the diversity could potentially hamper alignment-free analysis; therefore, an ffp alignment-free method was applied to the  <dig> diverse mycobacteriophage genome dataset with a 20-base feature length.

since the alignment-free phylogeny using ffp is stronger when longer sequences are being compared, a whole genome should yield a more definitive relationship than a single gene. this method was applied to both whole phage genomes and tmp gene sequences and nearly all clusters and subclusters were identified using whole genomes but, as anticipated, it failed to identify clusters or subclusters using tmp only . using the genealogical sorting index  as a quantitative measure reflecting monophyly, the results indicated that only l1-l <dig>  j, and a <dig> remained in identifiable clades when tmp was used. no other clusters or subclusters were identifiable using tmp in this method . the matching splits  metric was used to address the distance between phylogenies. comparison between the genome and a completely unresolved phylogeny  yielded a ms value of  <dig> , compared to  <dig>  when comparing genome and tmp phylogenies.

altogether, these results reflected a loss of resolution and cluster structure between genome and tmp trees suggesting that the ffp method requires longer sequences  in the case of mycobacteriophages for reliable relationship determination by ffp. in summary, mycobacteriophage cluster relationships may be determined using either whole genomes in an alignment-free ffp analysis or predicted using single genes  in a global-alignment maximum likelihood analysis.

single gene comparison of coliphages also yields identifiable clusters
after investigating the analysis methods and abilities of a single gene to identify mycobacteriophage subclusters, we applied the single gene comparison method to siphophages of another highly studied and diverse group, those that infect e. coli . siphophages were chosen due to the presence of tmp. gepard dotplots of genomes from  <dig> annotated siphophages that infect e. coli yielded similar relationships whether using whole genome nucleotide or tmp nucleotide sequences . from either the whole genome or the single gene plots, eight groups of coliphages were evident and at least two of these groups appeared to have subcluster properties . it should be noted that tmp is not ubiquitous in enterobacteriophages, thus other ubiquitous genes must be explored for use for these phages, such as portal proteins or coat proteins  <cit> . unfortunately, portal or coat proteins will be dramatically shorter than tmp, and may not lend the same strength of predictability as is possible with siphoviridae. these data suggest that single genes may be used to predict relationships within many phage groups, not just mycobacteriophages.

proposed tape measure protein  coliphage groups are based on coliphage tmp and full genome gepard dotplot alignment.

CONCLUSIONS
with the explosion of recently isolated mycobacteriophages, we have access to a large data set of defined clusters and subclusters based on whole-genome analysis , but an even larger number of phages have been isolated which are not yet sequenced  . our data confirm the use of a single, ubiquitous, semi-conserved gene for the prediction of mycobacteriophage cluster, which is particularly useful when a full genome sequence is unavailable. irrespective of potential recombination events in the selected tmp gene, global alignment  and maximum likelihood or bayesian inference  of this single gene accurately recovered phage cluster and subcluster categorization already recognized by the whole-genome methods. gepard dotplot analysis of tmp proved to be the most reliable method for determining phage relationships, capable of recovering  <dig> ± <dig> % of  <dig> assigned mycobacteriophage clusters and distinguishing phages beyond cluster, down to the subcluster level with an accuracy of  <dig> ± <dig> %. this predictive ability is most likely due to the algorithms within the dotplot that allow for alignment of sequences with a high mosaic nature, both in sequence and orientation.

caution must be used with the single-gene approach to determine phage phylogeny. alignment-free methods, which account for high variability in genome length and gene content, are not designed for single-gene datasets and, accordingly, were not able to reconstruct mycobacteriophage clusters even when a large gene  was used. this inability reflects the requirement of the ffp method to use much longer sequences in order to capture the phylogenetic relationship among phages. with a whole genome sequence, the ffp method could reliably be used for phage classification, but the method should not be used with a single gene.

using a single gene to describe evolutionary relationships was recognized as a problem very early in molecular phylogenetics literature  <cit> . evolution is not linear and molecular and population events such as horizontal gene transfer  <cit> , incomplete lineage sorting, and gene duplication/extinction  <cit>  can and do affect our ability to equate gene trees to species trees  <cit> . this genetic exchange is even more pronounced in phages, which have rapid rates of gene transfer and are thus, highly mosaic  <cit> . cluster assignment is a simplification of evolutionary history for ease in categorization. for example, although similar phage groups appear using either whole genome sequence or tmp sequence for either mycobacteriophages  or coliphages , whole genome sequence provides more detailed evolutionary relationships indicative of horizontal gene transfer. only very weak relationships are seen between coliphage lambda and mep <dig> when tmp alone is used in dotplot analysis, while over half the genome shows similarity in the whole genome dotplot.

despite genome mosaicism, a single-gene that is ubiquitous and highly conserved may provide insight into evolutionary history of phages. hardies et al. reported that, in a  <dig> kb phage genome, the genes encoding tmp, tmp chaperonins, and phage tail properties are evolutionarily stable  <cit> . belcaid et al. furthered the study of tmp in respect to evolutionary relationships and reported identification of repeated units and markers within tmp that could be used to assess evolutionary relationships  <cit> . in addition, casjens et al. show high conservation of enterobacteriophage head coat proteins  <cit> . thus, for phages, structural genes may be the best option for a single, ubiquitous, semi-conserved gene that would reflect evolutionary relationships similar to 16s rrna sequencing for bacterial species. this study is the first to include such a large number of known phage genomes and the ability of the tmp gene to reflect genomic relationships down to cluster and subcluster. thus, horizontal dna transfer is not happening at a rate that obscures the existence of mycobacteriophage clusters and subclusters. the data indicate that a tmp gene tree reconstructed using a maximum likelihood or bayesian inference methods reflect current categorization of phages and thus can be used for a fast and reliable initial phage assignment.

single-gene categorization of phages is a valuable simplification for research. for instance, a key drawback to conventional methods of determining phage phylogeny is the necessity of whole genome sequence. whole genome sequencing generally requires purification and amplification of a phage that can be costly, time-consuming and challenging. this study reveals several computational strategies that are able to predict phage relationships based on a singe gene. the ability to rely on a single gene for initial prediction allows phylogenetic analysis of phages from complex samples without extensive effort or cost. another advantage of a single-gene approach to phage phylogeny is the ability to determine phage relationships easily during phage isolation by pcr. pcr results confirmed that subcluster-specific primers successfully determined subclusters from diluted and boiled spot tests as well as dna extracted using a high titer lysate that was diluted and boiled. thus, this analysis could be performed on very crude phage samples prior to amplification and sequencing, allowing the researcher to focus on phages of particular interest, answer specific ecological questions or simply validate the purity of a sample.

the proposed use of single-gene phage phylogeny prediction can extend to other phage groups beyond mycobacteriophages as evidenced by our single-gene dotplot analysis of siphovirus coliphages. the single-gene dotplots yielded identical phage clustering when compared to the whole genome dotplots . thus, the singe-gene approach works for two highly studied phages, the mycobacteriophages and the siphoviridae coliphages. the tmp prediction of relationships is particularly powerful for mycobacteriophages because there are no podoviridae, 91% are siphoviridae, and even the myoviridae of mycobacteriophages contain tmp . other groups of phages, such as enterobacteriophages, include podoviridae which lack tmp. thus a single-gene approach for such phages must utilize an alternative conserved, ubiquitous gene rather than tmp.

it is noteworthy that mycobacteria, an acid-fast genus, and e. coli, a gram-negative bacteria, are very different bacterial hosts entertaining phages with little relationship to one another. it is remarkable that tmp could accurately reflect phylogenetic groupings among both mycobacteriophages and coliphages. full genome analysis is appropriate for phylogenetic verification due to the rapid rate of gene exchange, especially among highly related phages. these results strongly suggest that if a single, ubiquitous, semi-conserved gene can be identified for a group of phages, simple single-gene phylogeny prediction may greatly expand our ability to identify and understand the complexity and vast society of bacteriophages.

