BACKGROUND
at the beginning of the 21st century, genome sequences of two closely related species, human and chimpanzee, were found to differ by approximately 4% based on conventional genome sequencing technology  <cit> . with the advent of next-generation sequencing , it has been established that each person has a unique genome  <cit> . within a single organism, genome sequences may be epigenetically different between cells, and sporadic differences are sometimes present between cells from different organs  <cit> . it is not clear, however, whether each cell within an individual organism possesses a systematically different genome sequence.

various breakthroughs have been steadily reshaping our understanding of genomes. these advances include accumulating analyses of whole-genome sequences of individuals  <cit> , identification of various non-coding rnas  <cit> , discovery of the existence of highly repeated sequences  <cit> , and recognition of frequent recombination of genome structures  <cit> . recently, an intensive study on the fate of cancerous cells by ngs revealed that lineages of such cells are vigorously mutating  <cit> . advanced papers on this topic have subsequently appeared  <cit> .

on the other hand, genome sequence differences have been examined by the copy number variation analysis between normal cells within a single organism  <cit> , which informed us of frequent occurrence of mutation in the form of replication slippage at particular genomic loci. in a sense, this is a filtered  observation of genome alterations. more wide observation of normal genomic dna is just beginning as can be seen in the recent report  <cit> . our study is the first to detect systematic genome sequence differences among cells in single organisms, i.e., within individuals of two woody plant species .

there has been a hypothesis  that long statured plants accumulate spontaneous mutations that expanded among modules  and become genetically mosaic as they grow  <cit> . this hypothesis is explicitly based on the idea of finite spontaneous mutation rate. that is, dna replication proceeds with limited accuracy, i.e., 10- <dig> to 10- <dig> errors/base/replication  <cit>  and thus every replicated genome sequence  naturally differs from its parental genome. in general, these differences were too small to be directly detected, as they were often below the detection limit of sequencing analysis. consequently, mutation rate has been conventionally estimated indirectly based on phenotypic changes, such as variation in antibiotic resistance. this situation has been changed by the advent of the ngs , enabling the detection of low rate of mutations  <cit> . however, its application is limited mainly due to high cost and difficulty in data processing  <cit> .

fortuitously, genome profiling  , an easily operable and informative genome analysis method  <cit>  is sufficiently competent to detect differences between closely related cells  <cit> . compared with conventional sequencing approaches, gp involves two unique procedures : i) collection of dna fragments from genomic dna by random pcr  <cit>  and ii) acquisition of dna sequence information using micro-temperature gradient gel electrophoresis  by separating dna fragments and observing their melting profiles   <cit> . in this method, the property, spiddos , derived from the dna sequence information  <cit>  plays the pivotal role in identifying a genome and enables us to measure the genome distance .

gp has been used as a tool for universal species identification  <cit>  and as an accurate detector of mutation  <cit> . in this study, we applied the gp method to a new challenge: detection of extremely small genomic differences between very closely related cells with the aim of examining within-organism sequence variation.

RESULTS
we used japanese beech  trees to examine whether gp was able to reveal if all leaves within a single tree had identical genome sequences . more specifically, we analyzed sets of species identification dots , a pivotal gp parameter derived from genome sequences , that were obtained from genome profiles, specified by both mobility and melting temperature, both of which are determined after calibration and normalization of band patterns by a computer using co-migrating internal references . although genome profiles  were not always reproducible because of experimental fluctuations , spiddos were highly reproducible as a result of a normalization process that compensated for experimental fluctuations . as shown in figure 4a, all leaves on the same japanese beech branch  clustered together. this was also the case for the genome profiles of leaves on branches a <dig> and a <dig>  leaves from different branches were found to have different genome sequences. spiddos of branch a <dig> and a <dig> leaves were more similar to one another than to spiddos of leaves on branch a <dig>  located furthest from the ground . differences were observed in spiddos between leaves belonging to the same branch, but these differences were the level of experimental errors and thus they cannot be said to be significant at this moment  <cit> . these results reveal that within statistical significance, leaves from individual branches possessed identical genome sequences, but had distinctively different sequences from those of different branches, a finding not previously reported. this result was further confirmed by conducting a similar experiment using different japanese beech individuals. we also analyzed another species, yoshino cherry , located ~800 km from the site of the japanese beech trees for more generalized confirmation . finally, to detect methodological differences, we sequenced a particular dna band obtained from gp . throughout these experiments, we consistently reached the same conclusion: genome sequences within organisms were not identical, but instead varied systematically.

figure 4b reveals that very similar results were obtained from the two additional japanese beech trees. interestingly, the same relationship trend was observed among all three trees: spiddos of leaves from uppermost branches  were distinct from spiddos of other leaves . the cluster dendrogram in figure 4b was globally constructed based on the whole set of distances  obtained from all leaf spiddos ; consequently, the resulting logically expected structure—leaves on the same branch grouped together and branches on the same tree clustered together—is most impressive and unexpected, demonstrating the effectiveness of this approach. it is therefore evident that genomes of leaves on a tree are neither completely identical to one another nor randomly different but, rather, systematically differ depending on branch location.

as shown in figure  <dig>  similar results were reproducibly obtained using the other species, yoshino cherry. results of cluster analyses of distances  obtained using spiddos data from three independent gp experiments using the same samples from five branches  are shown in figure 1a-c; clustering results based on an average of the three trials are shown in figure 1d. these results of individual experiments  show basically the same pattern as those obtained from the statistically more reliable averages , indicating that this experimental system has a rather low variance  with only a minor exception: positional exchange of branches  <dig> and  <dig> in figure 1c. the situation observed in figure  <dig>  also held true for yoshino cherry, i.e., genome profiles of leaves were not identical, but instead differed systematically. in addition, genomes of leaves from the uppermost branch  were genetically distant from leaves of middle branches, indicating a correlation between genomic distance and branch location. the same phenomenon was thus observed in two different, widely separated species, namely, that leaves from the same tree have different genome sequences that can be distinguished using gp.

our discovery was partially corroborated upon further investigation using direct sequencing. as shown in , leaves from the same branch tended to have more closely related sequences, as seen in pairs of leaves from the same japanese beech branches  and  in  and from closely located branches of yoshino cherry  and  in . because of missing data caused by generation of artifacts during cloning and sequencing, these results are somewhat equivocal; nonetheless, these data are congruent with the conclusions drawn from the gp experiments. with respect to these direct sequencing results, the experimental procedures used, and sequencing in general, need to be taken into account. dna fragments generated from the gp experiment were collected by excising their bands from polyacrylamide gels, the most reliable method for obtaining sequences common to both gp and conventional sequencing. collected dna was then subjected to cloning and sequencing, two procedures that can introduce mutations. many spurious sequences were in fact obtained and discarded, including sequences having very low sequence similarity to the primary sequence generated from the dna band, and sequences of non-plant origin. although they were within an apparently acceptable range based on sequence consistency , the results shown in  were thus subject to limitations inherent to the cloning and sequencing process. nevertheless, this illustrates one difficulty encountered when using such a clone-isolation- and sequencing-based approach to identify mutation frequencies: the two mutation types—original mutations and sequencing operation-derived mutations , cannot be distinguished in the final clonal sequencing results. to obtain statistically significant results using conventional high-precision sequencing, high-volume sequencing of the multiple-million base-pair level must be carried out to separate infrequently occurring mutations  from background noise. in this regard, it should be noted that the ability of the gp method to overcome this difficulty has been experimentally demonstrated: gp has been used successfully for species identification and classification  <cit>  and in high-sensitivity mutation assays  <cit> .

in this study, we have demonstrated that leaves from the same tree do not have exactly identical genome sequences. this conclusion is expected to be applicable to any multi-celled organism, as dna is not perfectly replicated in any organism, and thus each genome replication cycle induces mutations that are usually too infrequent to be detected   <cit> . in addition, epigenetic methylation of dna, of which degree must be different from cell to cell and may have a potential to induce base-substitution during pcr, does not effect its pcr amplification  <cit> , which was independently confirmed in our study . based on the total number of base pairs in the dna bands obtained by random pcr , we tentatively estimate the gp method has a detection sensitivity of 10- <dig> mutations/base/replication. more specifically, the total number of mutations accumulating over g generations, μ, can be calculated using the formula:

  μg=∑i=1gμi+γi, 

where μ and γ represent replication-dependent and repair-dependent mutation rates, respectively. if we tentatively assume μ = μ
c
  and μ > > γ for all i, then

  μg=g.μc 

step  <dig>  
hpaii 
sam; s-adenosylmethionine, nebuffer; new england biolabs buffer.

this estimate indicates that the gp method cannot detect mutations occurring at a frequency lower than g · μ
c
 . consequently, leaf genomes must contain a significant number of mutations, equivalent to the sum of replication- and repair-caused mutations. this finding leads us to consider whether the large number of estimated mutations implies that mutation events during replication and repair  have been unexpectedly frequent  <cit> , or if instead there is a large cell generation difference between tree branches, as follows:

if we assume that μ
c
 = 10- <dig> in the above context, then g, the number of generations, must be

  g=μgμc>¯¯10-410-8= <dig> 

because longitudinally tandem consecutive cells expand to the length g' · a, where g' is the number of cell generations and a is the unit cell length, we can calculate the number of cell generations  separating two branches. if a = 20 μm and the branch-to-branch distance, b, is 2 m, then

  g′=ba=22×10-5=105>g= <dig> 

and thus from eq.  <dig> 

  μc=μgg>μgg′=10-4105=10- <dig> 

based on this tentative calculation, the apparent genomic distance observed using the gp method, which has a detection limit ≥ 10-4/base, is within a reasonable range. in other words, the accumulated point mutations are as a consequence of the large generational difference between cells. obviously, this conclusion needs to be confirmed by other approaches. our finding regarding this unexpectedly wide genome-to-genome distance will surely collect the interest in this theme which have been less payed with attention.

except for cancer cells, cells within an individual organism have been previously believed to possess identical genomes. two brief reports have recently appeared suggesting that cells from a single individual might have different genomes  <cit> , although no hard evidence exists nor has systematic research been performed to confirm those observations. nevertheless, these reports are consistent with the findings of our study.

CONCLUSIONS
the study reported here provided with the first systematic analysis of genome sequence differences among cells in single individuals using the gp method. as a result leaf genome sequences within individual trees were found not to be identical, but varied systematically from the bottom to the top of the tree. since this phenomenon was detected by the gp method that cannot detect the mutation of less than 10-5/base/replication, a large number of accumulated mutations must exist between distantly located cells in the tree.

this fact leads to a natural inference that two cells in an individual differ in their genome sequences in relation to their physical distances. in other words, no two cells have completely identical genome sequences. this finding and inference will surely have an influence on the interpretation of various phenomena including mutagens, cancer and others.

