BACKGROUND
two basic strategies for the specification of primordial germ cells  have been described. in drosophila, c. elegans and xenopus the inheritance of germ plasm with associated germ cell determinants appears to be required for pgc formation  <cit> . in these organisms, maternally provided asymmetrically-localized germ plasm, or germ plasm-like structures that are visible in electron micrographs  are found in positions where the pgcs are formed. in drosophila it has been shown that the germ plasm has an instructive role in directing nuclei to the germline  <cit>  while zebrafish embryos from which the germ plasm was removed lacked germ cells  <cit> . in mouse  and urodelean amphibians the mechanisms of germline specification are different. here, morphologically distinct germ plasm has not been identified in early embryos but rather, as revealed in transplantation experiments, cellular interactions are thought to be responsible for pgc specification  <cit> . consistently, the formation of the founding population of pgcs in the mouse was shown to depend on extracellular factors of the bone morphogenetic protein  family  <cit> . whereas the actual specification and formation of pgcs in mammals and in urodeles appear to be independent of germ plasm, material resembling nuage, a germ plasm organelle, is found in germ cells of these organisms at later developmental stages  <cit> .

germ-cell specification in fish was studied mainly in bony fish  where the work relied on observations using light and electron microscopy. the germ cells were recognized by their large size and by the typical electron dense nuage-like structures. using these criteria, the earliest time point at which germ cells could be recognized in teleosts was around the onset of somitogenesis  <cit> . some investigators deduced that the position where the pgcs were first identified was their site of origin . transplantation experiments of the embryonic shield, the fish organizer, in the teleost fundulus, to the extraembryonic yolk sac of hosts resulted in, among other tissues, the development of germ cells and gonads with the highest frequency of germ cells found when the posterior quarter of the fundulus shield was grafted  <cit> . one could not exclude the possibility however, that a small population of pgcs existed already before the end of gastrulation and migrated to the position where they were identified either morphologically or by embryological transplantation experiments. thus, the question of the time and place of germ-cell origin in fish remained open.

the first molecular marker for pgcs in fish is the zebrafish vasa mrna  <cit>  an atp-dependent rna helicase of the dead-box family  <cit>  that is expressed in pgcs of many species . vasa was originally identified in drosophila as a maternal effect gene required for the formation of abdominal segments and for germ-cell specification  <cit> . similar to many other organisms, zebrafish vasa mrna is maternally supplied and it is detected in the pgcs during all stages of germ line development  <cit> . close examination by whole-mount in situ hybridization at the 2- and 4-cell stages revealed that the vasa transcript is enriched at the marginal positions of the first two cleavage planes leading to the formation of four stripes of intense vasa rna staining  <cit>  . interestingly, transmission electron microscopy showed that at the 4-cell stage vasa rna is embedded within an electron dense matrix that resembles nuage, indicating that at this stage the rna resides within the zebrafish germ plasm  <cit> . the position of the germ plasm and its early segregation among the first blastomeres strongly support the notion that in zebrafish cells are directed to the germ line fate by the action of determinants present in the germ plasm  <cit> . consistently, inhibiting the translation of rna molecules that are localized to the germ plasm of the zebrafish can result in severe defects in pgc development .

the findings obtained in zebrafish were extended to suggest that generally in fish, pgcs are specified by determinants found in the germ plasm and that the position of the germ plasm could be inferred from the position of rna molecules such as vasa and nanos which mark the early germ plasm. surprisingly, the cloning of the vasa and nanos genes from another teleost, medaka  and analysis of their mrna expression patterns did not provide direct support for the notion that germ plasm is responsible for pgc specification in all fish species  <cit> . in contrast to the enrichment of vasa transcripts in the position of the germ plasm observed in zebrafish, the transcripts of olvas, the medaka vasa homologue, were uniformly distributed until stage  <dig> at late gastrulation . at this stage, pgcs, recognized by higher levels of olvas expression, are found on either side of the shield, the fish organizer  <cit> . similarly, medaka nanos transcripts did not aggregate at the two first cleavage planes . as mentioned above, in zebrafish the germ plasm contains vasa and nanos mrnas and is found at the distal parts of the first two cleavage planes. these four locations are randomly oriented relative to the dorsal aspect of the embryo leading to specification of pgcs in random dorsoventral positions  <cit> . in contrast, at these stages, olvas and nanos mrnas were found to be uniformly distributed in the corresponding stages and when the pgcs are first observed using olvas as a molecular marker, they are found in a defined position relative to somatic structures. if the early expression site of vasa and its homologues indeed mark the site and stage of pgc origin, then the expression pattern of olvas would imply a different mechanism for specifying pgc in medaka.

in this work we investigate the question of the mechanisms responsible for pgc specification in medaka. we determine the effect of perturbations in somatic development on pgc specification and describe the properties of medaka pgcs regarding the metabolism of specific rna molecules. the results presented here are consistent with the notion that despite the differences in the expression pattern of vasa during early embryogenesis in these two teleosts that represent totally different branches of the phylogenetic tree, it is likely that similar basic mechanisms are responsible for pgc specification.

RESULTS
several lines of evidence strongly indicate that in mouse the pgc fate is induced by signals that originate in adjacent tissues. in this organism, germ cells arise just before or during early gastrulation, around the proximal part of the epiblast adjacent to extra-embryonic tissues  <cit> . the finding that medaka pgcs are first detected at a specific position relative to the embryonic shield  could be interpreted as evidence for induction of pgcs by the adjacent somatic cells. consistent with this suggestion, axial mesodermal tissues in fish are known to be capable of inducing cell fate in adjacent tissues .

medaka pgcs number is independent of patterning of somatic tissues
if pgcs in medaka are induced through interactions with somatic tissues at the site where they are first observed, then specific alterations in the development of these tissues are expected to bring about changes in the position and number of pgcs. to address this point early somatic development was affected in two ways: either by injecting b-catenin thereby generating two embryonic axes in a single embryo , or by disturbing early axial mesoderm specification through bmp pathway modulation .

the first manipulation was carried out by injection of  <dig> pg β-catenin rna into one marginal blastomere at the 8- or 16-cell stage . this resulted in formation of a complete secondary axis in about 3% of the injected embryos. control embryos were injected with the same amount of gfp-globin rna. the injected embryos were fixed at stages  <dig> and  <dig> and whole-mount in situ hybridization was performed using an olvas antisense rna probe to visualize the pgcs . the position of pgcs in embryos with an induced secondary embryonic axis was similar to that observed in control embryos of the same developmental stage. if pgc fates are indeed induced by somatic tissues of the organizer, one would expect an increase in pgc number when two shields are present in the embryo. however, the average number of pgcs in embryos with duplicated axes was found to be similar to the number of pgcs in control embryos .

mesoderm patterning during early gastrulation was modulated by either overexpressing bmp <dig>  or expressing a dominant negative form of bmp2/ <dig> receptor i ) , which results in ventralization and dorsalization of mesoderm, respectively. again, no alteration in the total number of pgcs was observed, although their localization was severely impaired . thus, the number of pgcs is independent of mesoderm patterning.

these findings do not support the idea that pgc fate is induced by neighboring cells at the site where they are first detected. rather, these results are more consistent with the model according to which pgcs in medaka are specified by inheritance of pre-localized maternal components whose amount is the limiting factor determining the number of pgcs. as bmp-induced mesoderm formation occurs during gastrulation and the induction of the secondary axis by β-catenin arises at a very early stage of development well before gastrulation initiates, we consider it unlikely that the pgcs are specified by an earlier inductive process.

medaka pgcs selectively stabilize maternally provided transcripts
as mentioned above, in drosophila and c. elegans the pgcs are specified by inheritance of maternally provided asymmetrically-localized cytoplasmic determinants. in these organisms, maternally provided transcripts that are expressed in the pgcs are selectively stabilized within these cells while being degraded in somatic cells  <cit> . similarly, in zebrafish the mrna of the vasa gene  <cit> , as well as nanos <dig>  mrna  <cit>  are degraded in somatic cells but are stabilized and translated in cells that contain germ plasm.

if specification of pgcs in medaka occurs by inheritance of germ plasm similar to zebrafish, then the phenomena of differential stability of rnas between somatic and primordial germ cells is expected to take place in this species, as well.

to examine this point, mrnas from three zebrafish gfp-fusion constructs, vasa-gfp, gfp-zfvasa 3'utr and gfp-nos <dig> 3'utr, were injected into 1- to 2-cell stage medaka embryos. following the injection of  <dig> pg rna, in situ hybridization using an antisense gfp-rna probe was performed at different times of development to reveal the spatial distribution of the injected fusion rnas. as a control, rna encoding gfp flanked by the xenopus laevis-globin 5' and 3'utrs was injected and the distribution of this rna was similarly followed at different stages of development. remarkably, the zebrafish vasa-gfp-fusion rna undergoes rapid degradation in the soma and is stabilized in the germ line cells . an analogous distribution is observed for gfp-nos <dig> 3'utr rna injected into medaka embryos . interestingly, the results resemble those obtained in zebrafish in several ways:  <dig>  these injected gfp-tagged rna molecules do not aggregate at the cleavage planes .  <dig>  the injected rna molecules exhibit differential stability between somatic and primordial germ cells. whereas at the onset of somitogenesis the soma is stained strongly with the antisense gfp probe , at stage  <dig>  virtually only the pgcs retain the injected vasa-gfp-fusion rna . in contrast, control embryos show no specific stabilization of the gfp-globin rna in the germ line but instead, exhibit general rna degradation in all cells . consistent with the notion that as in zebrafish, post transcriptional events control differential gene expression between germ cells and somatic cells in other fish species as well, uniform introduction  of gfp- nos <dig> 3'utr rna into 1-cell embryos of oryzias latipes , o. curvinotus , o. luzonensis  or betta splendens  resulted in germ cells specific gfp expression . therefore, differential -induced post-transcriptional events between somatic and germ cells appears to be a mechanism conserved in different fish lineages representing distantly related branches of the phylogenetic tree .

to determine whether this mechanism is relevant for the observed olvas mrna and protein distributions, a reciprocal experiment was performed in which the original full-length olvas rna was injected in zebrafish embryos. the analysis of its fate with an antisense olvas probe revealed no specific stabilization of olvas rna in the pgcs of zebrafish . thus, neither medaka olvas 3'utr nor olvas open reading frame  mediate germ cell specific rna stability in zebrafish. interestingly, in medaka, olvas-gfp protein expression was rapidly restricted to pgcs , although the olvas-gfp fusion rna itself was not efficiently differentially stabilized in the pgcs of medaka . therefore, the preferential localization of the olvas-gfp protein to the pgcs  could be attributed to complementary specific posttranscriptional mechanisms:  in agreement with kurokawa et al., a pgc-specific enhanced translation due to the olvas 3'utr  <cit> .  somatic inhibition of translation due to the open reading frame itself.  soma-specific destabilization of the protein  <cit> .

in addition, like olvas 3'utr in medaka, zebrafish vasa 3'utr has been shown to be essential for proper protein pgc localization in zebrafish. hence, when injected in medaka, gfp-zfvasa 3'utr failure of selective gfp expression  points out possible specie-variability of either targeted cis-acting rna sequence elements or rna-interacting protein sequence, but likely using a similar conserved mechanism.

thus, while we provide evidence for the existence of conserved mechanisms governing pgcs specification in zebrafish and medaka, the similarities apparently can not be extended to the control of pgc-specific expression of every molecule, as shown here for the zf-vasa and olvas rnas. hence, the mechanisms directing pgc-specific expression of olvas could depend on combined machineries associating enhanced/repressed specific soma/germline translation, protein stabilization and possibly, to a lower extend, rna stability.

identification of germ plasm like structures in early medaka embryos
as the results presented above are consistent with the idea that in medaka, like in zebrafish, inheritance of germ plasm is responsible for the formation of pgcs, we sought to identify germ plasm in early medaka embryos. both in birds and fish the detection of germ plasm in early embryos was possible only after molecular markers for this organelle became available   <cit> . in the absence of such a molecular marker for the medaka germ plasm we concentrated our efforts on positions equivalent to those where zebrafish germ plasm is found. in zebrafish, the germ plasm with its characteristic electron dense appearance was found to be concentrated below the first two cleavage furrows in 4-cell stage embryos  <cit> . in medaka, the first  <dig> blastomeres are much smaller in size and the cleavage furrows are not as pronounced as they are in zebrafish . however, within the cytoplasm at the areas where the  <dig> cells are in contact, distinct electron-dense structures were identified. these structures are formed of amorphous inclusions with a granular fine structure, lacking a surrounding membrane . serial sections show that this is a rod-like structure approximately  <dig>  μm in diameter. these features of the structure correspond to descriptions of germ plasm in many species  <cit> . the fact that this structure is found exclusively beneath the cleavage furrows, similar to the germ plasm in zebrafish at the corresponding stage leads us to suggest that the observed electron-dense material represents the germ plasm of medaka.

CONCLUSIONS
our findings in medaka are consistent with the suggestion that the mode of pgc specification is conserved with zebrafish and possibly other teleosts. first, we show that dramatic alterations in somatic development  do not alter the pgc number in medaka, which appears inconsistent with an inductive mode of pgc specification that depend on signals from somatic cells. second, the process of germ-line specific rna stabilization shown here for medaka has been described for those organisms whose pgcs are specified by inheritance of maternally provided cytoplasmic determinants. consistently, material resembling germ plasm was identified in 4-cell stage medaka embryos. the apparent paradox that the vasa-homologue of medaka differs from its zebrafish counterpart with respect to its early spatial distribution and its ability to be subjected to the "degradation-protection" control mechanism may be reconciled by the finding that vasa mrna appears to be dispensable for early pgc development in zebrafish  <cit> .

