BACKGROUND
cubozoa  is a class of cnidaria with a suite of distinct features including a cuboid bell, lens eyes and a typically highly potent sting. like many cnidarians, cubozoan life history includes a swimming planula larva that ultimately settles onto a substrate to become an asexually reproducing polyp. polyps then give rise to medusae , which have separate sexes and are the sexually reproductive stage. some cubozoan taxa have evolved complex sexual behavior including synchronous spawning aggregations, mating and internal fertilization . cubozoan medusae vary widely in the potency of their sting; in humans, cubozoan stings range from being harmless to causing deadly envenomation . a particularly note-worthy character of cubozoan medusae is their image-forming lens eyes, which have been implicated in visually-guided behavior .

like all other cnidarians, cubozoans possess nematocysts  essential for prey capture and defense. nematocysts are remarkably complex subcellular structures that develop within specialized cells called nematocytes. nematocysts are secreted from post-golgi vesicles and consist of a double-walled capsule containing venom and a harpoon-like spiny tubule; and one to several different kinds can develop within a cnidarian throughout its life cycle  <cit> . nematocysts are of several forms, broadly divided into penetrant  and adherent . penetrant nematocysts are primarily concentrated in the tentacles of cubozoan medusae where they are used for prey capture. in some species, nematocysts are also found in body parts with putative digestive roles, such as the gastric cirri , where they may further immobilize prey items inserted into the cubozoan mouth   <cit> . adherent nematocysts are typically found on the exterior of the cubed-shaped bell and do not appear to function in predation there  <cit> . the location of nematocyst development  is poorly known in most cnidarians; having only been well-characterized in the model hydrozoan polyp hydra, where morphology and molecular studies reveal clusters of developing nematocysts within the body  <cit> . in contrast, molecular studies of another hydrozoan medusa clytia, suggest that nematogenic regions are found in the tentacle bulb, proximal to the tentacles in which mature nematocysts are found  <cit> . transcriptomic and proteomic studies on the cubozoan chironex fleckeri, the scyphozoans chrysaora fuscescens and stomolophus meleagris, and the hydrozoan olindias sambaquiensis have focused on characterizing venom components from tentacle components , but it is unknown whether nematogenesis and venom production occur solely in the medusa tentacles. in a. alata, tiny unidentified nematocysts have been documented within the tentacle base which is contiguous with the pedalium, but it is not clear if these represent an early developmental stage of the larger euryteles that are highly concentrated in the tentacle tips  <cit> . studies comparing expression of “venom implicated genes” across medusa body parts can help identify additional putative site of venom production and regions of nematogenesis in cubozoans.

unique among cnidarians, only cubozoan medusae possess image-forming eyes implicated in visual-guided behavior  <cit> . two complex eyes, complete with lens and retina, are located on special sensory structures called rhopalia on each of the four sides of the medusa bell. each rhopalium also possesses a statocyst , and two pairs of ocelli   <cit>  that lack a lens, like other simple animal eyes . molecular components of the opsin-mediated phototransduction pathway have been identified in the rhopalium of the cubozoans tripedalia cystophora and c. brevipedalia   <cit> , as well as in non-rhopalium medusa tissue, and planulae, which have simple eye spots  <cit> . cubozoan planulae eye spots  studied in t. cystophora are single cell structures containing a cup of pigment and photosensory microvilli, serving as rhabdomeric photoreceptors  <cit> . opsins have also been documented in other cnidarians without lens eyes  suggesting a role in light perception independent of image formation. studies comparing expression of “vision implicated genes” across medusa body parts with and without eyes, and planula larvae with simple eyes, can help identify molecular components of the opsin-mediated phototransduction pathway in the rhopalium and aide in discovery of putative areas of extraocular photoreception in cubozoans.

although most cnidarians reproduce sexually by simple broadcast spawning of their gametes , many cubozoan species engage in complex sexual behaviors including synchronous spawning aggregations, mating and internal fertilization . in species with internal fertilization, such as alatina alata  <cit>  and copula sivickisi  <cit> , sperm are taken up by the female , and following fertilization blastulae or planulae are released into the water  <cit> . histological studies have detected a gametogenic differentiation gradient within the gonads of two cubozoan taxa   <cit> , but it is unknown how widespread this process is in cubozoans. equally elusive is the location of fertilization in cubozoans, although it has been hypothesized to occur in the gastrovascular cavity adjacent to the ovaries in a few species  <cit> . comparing expression patterns of “sex implicated genes” in different body parts can help determine whether a gametogenic differentiation gradient is present in additional cubozoan species, and might also aide in pinpointing more precisely the site of fertilization.

the goals of this study were to identify candidate genes in box jellyfish that may be involved in nematogenesis and venom production, vision and extraocular sensory perception, and sexual reproduction, which for brevity we refer to as “venom”, “vision” and “sex” implicated genes. we focused on the species alatina alata, which provides a number of advantages for molecular investigation of these traits. the distribution of nematocysts has been well-documented in this species  <cit> , and its sting is potent, causing serious human envenomation; like other cubozoans it has both simple and compound eyes on the medusa rhopalia as well as eye spots in planulae ; and mature medusae of this species form monthly nearshore spawning aggregations at predictable times  in indo-pacific and atlantic localities  <cit> . a. alata medusae have also been documented  in the open ocean at great depths  <cit> . the monthly predictability of mature medusae in nearshore waters  and the ability to obtain planulae in vitro make a. alata a particularly favorable candidate for a cubozoan model.

rna-seq transcriptomics provides a reasonably unbiased method of profiling putative candidate genes in different body parts and life stages. this approach has been used successfully in other cnidarians to identify putative genes involved in different stages of a scyphozoan life cycle  <cit>  and in different polyp types in a colony hydrozoan  <cit> ; to identify candidate venom genes in anthozoans  <cit>  and in the tentacles of venomous scyphozoans and cubozoans  <cit> ; and for reconstructing evolutionary relationships within cnidaria  <cit> . in the absence of a reference genome for a. alata, we generated a de novo transcriptome assembly pooled from rna-seq data from specific body parts  of a female medusa undergoing internal fertilization during a spermcast mating event. we compared these transcripts to known eukaryote gene and protein databases, and identified genes implicated in venom, vision and sex based on homology and tissue-specific gene expression profiles. we also investigated the expression of these candidate genes in planulae. presented here is the first functionally annotated transcriptome of a. alata, which serves as a valuable resource for understanding the molecular underpinnings of cubozoan biological processes and their mediation of complex behaviors.

RESULTS
sample collection
alatina alata material was collected during a spermcasting aggregation in bonaire, the netherlands  according to the methods in  <cit> . a single ovulating female medusa  was dissected to provide four tissue samples, namely: i. gastric cirri , ii. ovaries  ), iii. tentacle  and adjoining pedalium base, which we refer to collectively as the “tentacle sample” below , and iv. rhopalium  . a fifth sample consisted of planulae  that developed from blastulae  released by females in the lab. transcripts putatively involved in venom were characterized through their apparent up-regulation in the tentacle and gastric cirri samples; transcripts putatively involved in vision were targeted through analysis of the rhopalium sample; and transcripts putatively involved in sex and embryogenesis were investigated through analysis of the ovaries and planulae samples. we sought to identify the possible onset of expression of candidate genes in the larval planula stage. given the microscopic size  of the planulae, multiple individuals were pooled to obtain sufficient tissue for rna isolation and sequencing. detailed protocol is provided in methods.fig.  <dig> 
a-h morphology of a. alata mature female medusa similar to that collected and subsampled for de novo transcriptome assembly in this study. white boxes correspond to the location of medusa body parts sub-sampled. a mature a. alata medusa . b a portion of a gastric phacella removed from a live medusa, with five individual gastric cirri. c ovulation documented within the female gastrovascular cavity; arrow indicates imminent release of teardrop shaped ovum. d interaction between recently ovulated egg and spermatozoa  in the fluid examined from the gastrovascular cavity . e intact nematocysts  on the left, and a discharged eurytele on the right, isolated from the tentacle. f rhopalium connected to the rhopaliar stalk showing upper and lower lens eyes, and lateral pit and slit eyes . g bundles of blastulae released by females entangled in fibrous material and intact eurytele nematocysts. h swimming planula ; arrows indicating planulae eyes spots. abbreviations: cap = capsule of nematocyst; em = embryos; fil = filaments; fm = fibrous material, gc = gastric cirri; gp = gastric phacella ; nem = nematocyst s; ov = ovum ; ovr = ovaries; pe = pit eye; ped = pedalium; rp = rhopalium; rps = rhopaliar stalk; se = slit eye; sp = sperm; sft = shaft of nematocyst tubule; spn = spines of nematocyst shaft; tb = tubule of discharged nematocyst; tnt = tentacle. scale bars: a = ~15 mm, b = ~ <dig>  mm, c = ~250 μm, d = ~30 μm, e = ~20 μm, f = ~ <dig>  mm, g = ~100 μm, h = ~30 μm



rna-seq and bioinformatics
de novo transcriptome assembly
rna-seq was performed on five different tissues using the illumina hiseq <dig> sequencing system . using trinity software  <cit>  the ~ <dig> million trimmed raw paired-end sequence reads were assembled de novo into a pooled transcriptome yielding ~126 ktrinity transcripts corresponding to ~84 k trinity genes with an n <dig> of  <dig> . throughout this paper, we use the term “a. alata gene” to refer to each transcriptome component represented by a unique trinity gene id, and the term “a. alata transcript” to refer to additional transcriptome components that trinity assigned as multiple putative “isoforms” of a single unique gene id  <cit> . transcriptome completeness was assessed using the subset of  <dig> widely conserved eukaryote core genes  using the program cegma   <cit> . we retrieved  <dig> complete cegs  and an additional three partial cegs , resulting in 99 % ceg representation. we sought to identify highly expressed transcripts which, by definition, are represented by more reads , and thus have a better chance of being contiguously assembled. therefore we generated a filtered transcriptome comprising a subset of transcripts expressed above a minimum threshold of  <dig>  fragments per kilobase per million fragments mapped   <cit> , based on read quantification and alignment accuracy using rsem  <cit> . this filtering step is consistent with our aim of identifying highly expressed transcripts for potential candidate genes across different samples types. the filtered transcriptome, hereafter referred to simply as the a. alata transcriptome, yielded ~32 k transcripts corresponding to ~20 k genes; n50 =  <dig> . the percentage of sequences above 1000 bp doubled and the percentage of short genes  was reduced by half . figure  <dig> illustrates the workflow used in this study .table  <dig> 
a. alata pooled transcriptome assembly statistics


de novo assembly began with  <dig> , <dig> trimmed raw reads generated from medusa gastric cirri, ovaries, tentacle , rhopalium, and planulae samples

fig.  <dig> flowchart of methodology used in transcriptome assembly, gene annotation and differential expression of the five a. alata samples analyzed in this study. additional details provided in results and methods. figure modelled after  <cit> 



functional annotation
our first objective was to annotate the a. alata transcriptome. the longest open reading frames  were predicted for transcripts using transdecoder  <cit>  and subsequently annotated with trinotate  <cit> , which compiles results of homology searches of reliable databases  to capture basic local alignment search tool  protein and gene homologies. the resulting trinotate report for the ~32 k a. alata transcripts contained  <dig>  blastp top hits from trembl and  <dig>  blastp top hits from swissprot, from which  <dig> candidate genes were examined in this study for their putative roles in venom, vision and sex . in total  <dig> of the top  <dig> most abundant genes in the transcriptome  were assigned at least one trinotate annotation category: 85 % of those had blast top hits; and 63 % corresponded to candidate genes we explored as implicated in either venom, vision or sex in this study . the trinotate report listed  <dig>  transcripts corresponding to peptides based on transdecoder predicted orfs;  <dig> transcripts with transmembrane protein domains ;  <dig> transcripts containing the classical secretory signal peptide ; and  <dig> trembl blastp top hits corresponded to cnidarian proteins .

gene expression patterns and profiles
we then sought to detect gene expression patterns across the five samples  with the aim of providing a descriptive analysis of the top expressed gene clusters by sample. in order to estimate transcript abundance we aligned each set of reads back to the a. alata transcriptome and generated an rna-seq fragment counts matrix for each sample using rsem  <cit> . we subsequently identified differentially expressed genes  which we clustered according to their expression profiles using hierarchical clustering analyses within the framework of the edger bioconductor software package  <cit> , a preferred methodology for studies lacking biological replicates  <cit> . of the ~32 k trinity transcripts  identified in the a. alata transcriptome ~10 k transcripts  were found to be differentially expressed, within a broad range, across the five samples . edger takes the normalized gene counts for all samples , and then clusters genes with similar mean expression rates across samples  <cit> . gene clusters are visualized in the form of a heatmap, permitting pinpointing of genes abundant in certain samples that might be of interest as candidate genes. the results of hierarchical clustering were consistent with our initial rsem evaluation of abundant genes by sample.

in an attempt to identify genes that were specifically abundant in each medusa sample, we conducted subsequent hierarchical clustering with the planulae sample excluded. edger analyses of genes from just the four medusa samples  and rhopalium) revealed  <dig> differentially expressed genes. to identify patterns of highly expressed gene clusters by medusa sample, we generated a heatmap of the subset of  <dig> genes and further partitioned the subset into  <dig> gene subcluster profiles based on mean expression patterns across samples . furthermore, redoing the hierarchical clustering and subcluster profiling analyses for all five samples using the three subsets of candidate genes  allowed us to hone in on gene clusters that were relevant to transcriptome functional annotation and profiling of different a. alata samples.fig.  <dig> 
a-k heatmap of a. alata medusa samples. hierarchical clustering  and corresponding ten subcluster profiles for the  <dig> genes differentially expressed across a. alata medusa samples , rhopalium) . bright yellow patches correspond to the highest peaks for each k-mean subcluster profile. k-mean profiles  match the order of column names in a, representing the mean expression of gene clusters highly abundant in each sample . three bright yellow transcript clusters in the gastric cirri column correspond to each of the peaks seen in plots b, c and d in the ovaries column correspond to plots e, f, g and in the tentacle column correspond to h, i, j, while the two bright yellow clusters in the rhopalium column correspond to peaks in plots k, and to the less prominent peaks in plots g and h. the vertical colored bar on the left of the heatmap  indicates distinct patterns corresponding to the ten subcluster profiles , for which the number of genes each comprises is indicated. abbreviations: gc = gastric cirri, ov = ovaries, tnt = tentacle , rhp = rhopalium, and pln = planulae. 



tissue-specific “core genes”
our next objective was to identify specific genes that are highly expressed in particular body parts , and subsequently identify functional categories informed by the trinotate report. we constructed a venn diagram of the  <dig> differentially expressed genes from the four medusae samples , which revealed that 76 %  were expressed to some degree in all medusa samples . a subset corresponding to the top  <dig> most highly expressed genes per sample was plotted in a second venn diagram , and genes unique to each sample’s top  <dig> were respectively designated as that sample’s “core genes” . only one gene  among each sample’s top  <dig> most highly expressed genes overlapped in all four samples. an assessment of the core genes revealed that only about 40 % had trinotate-generated annotations . gastric cirri core genes  corresponded mostly to putative proteins  implicated in venom and digestion, including metalloproteinases   <cit> ; ovaries core genes  corresponded to putative proteins  involved in gametogenesis, including vitellogenins , which, although well studied in bilaterians  <cit> , are newly reported in cubozoans herein; tentacle core genes  corresponded to many putative proteins  associated with nematocyst development, including minicollagens  ; and rhopalium core genes  corresponded to several putative proteins  identified in vision and the phototransduction pathway, including j-crystallins   <cit> .fig.  <dig> 
a, b venn diagrams showing overlap of genes differentially expressed exclusively in a. alata medusa samples . a shows that of the  <dig> total genes differentially expressed across the four samples  <dig>  are expressed in all samples,  <dig> are unique to gastric cirri,  <dig> are unique to ovaries,  <dig> are unique to the tentacle, and  <dig> are unique to the rhopalium. b shows that of the top  <dig> most highly differentially expressed genes by sample type, a single gene is expressed in all four samples. the subset of genes unique to the top  <dig> most abundant genes by sample, called the “core genes” herein, comprises  <dig> genes in the gastric cirri,  <dig> in the ovaries,  <dig> in the tentacle , and  <dig> in the rhopalium. core gene annotations provided in additional file  <dig> and summarized in histograms fig. 6a-d


fig.  <dig> 
a-d abundances of annotated “core genes” in the a. alata transcriptome according to medusa sample. column headings correspond to rank among the top  <dig> of each core gene  by sample according to the venn diagram in fig. 4b, protein annotation from uniprotkb swissprot  and trembl  and fpkm values in a gastric cirri, b ovaries, c tentacle , d rhopalium. genes with putative functions in sperm motility are indicated with asterisks  in b. genes lacking trinotate annotations are not included. detailed statistics  provided in additional file 6)



candidate gene profiling
using the tissue-specific core gene annotations  as a starting point for identifying candidate genes in a. alata medusa body parts, we compiled three candidate-gene lists comprising  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> terms  broadly associated with “venom”, “vision”, and “sex”, informed primarily by relevant genes and proteins documented in the scientific literature . subsequently, we queried the a. alata trinotate report separately using each of the lists to identify matching terms among blastx, blastp and pfam  top hits from the trinotate transcriptome annotation report. this generated three additional targeted trinotate annotation reports consisting of gene subsets we categorized as “venom implicated genes” , “vision implicated genes” , and “sex implicated genes” . subsequently, edger hierarchical clustering  was conducted separately on each subset of corresponding candidate genes, generating three new heat maps ; profiling the respective patterns of expression of each set of candidate genes across all five samples. in all cases, gene cluster patterns were divided into  <dig> subclusters based on mean expression patterns for genes with potential association with venom  ; vision  ; and sex  . by comparing planulae samples with samples from body parts of the mature female medusa, an additional aim of this study was to detect the potential onset of expression of these possible candidate genes within developing planulae. differential expression matrices for all candidate genes and their respective annotations are provided in additional files  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig>  we did not detect expression of most candidate genes in the planulae sample. instead, we found that transcripts most highly expressed in the planulae comprised mainly: histones , nanos transcription factor, and genes implicated in neurogenesis, mitosis, microtubule, and protein processing .fig.  <dig> 
a-k venom heatmap for a. alata. hierarchical clustering  and corresponding ten subcluster profiles for the  <dig> genes implicated in venom differentially expressed across a. alata medusa , rhopalium) and planulae samples. intensity of color indicates expression levels for each of the ten hierarchical clusters . bright yellow patches correspond to the highest peaks for each k-mean subcluster profile. k-mean profiles  match the order of column names in a, representing the mean expression of gene clusters highly abundant in each sample . two bright yellow transcript clusters in the gastric cirri column correspond to peaks in plots b and c; one cluster in the ovaries column corresponds to plot d; four clusters in the tentacle column correspond to plots e, f, g and h; one cluster in the rhopalium corresponds to plot j and to the less prominent peak seen in plot i; one cluster in the planulae column corresponds to plot k. the vertical colored bar on the left of the heatmap  indicates distinct patterns corresponding to the ten subcluster profiles , for which the number of genes each comprises is indicated. abbreviations: gc = gastric cirri, ov = ovaries, tnt = tentacle , rhp = rhopalium, and pln = planulae. gene annotations by subcluster provided in additional file 7


fig.  <dig> 
a-k vision heatmap for a. alata. hierarchical clustering  and corresponding ten subcluster profiles for the  <dig> genes implicated in vision and the phototransduction pathway differentially expressed across a. alata medusa , rhopalium) and planulae samples. intensity of color indicates expression levels for each of the ten hierarchical clusters . bright yellow patches correspond to the highest peaks for each k-mean subcluster profile. k-mean profiles  match the order of column names in a, representing the mean expression of gene clusters highly abundant in each sample . one bright yellow transcript clusters in the gastric cirri column correspond to a peak in plot b; one cluster in the ovaries column corresponds to plot c; three clusters in the tentacle column correspond to plots d, e and f; three bright yellow clusters in the rhopalium column correspond to peaks in plots h, i and j, and two less intense clusters correspond to peaks in plots g and k, and a slightly intense yellow gene cluster in the planulae column corresponds to the peak in plot k. the vertical colored bar on the left of the heatmap  indicates distinct patterns corresponding to the ten subcluster profiles , for which the number of genes each comprises is indicated. abbreviations: gc = gastric cirri, ov = ovaries, tnt = tentacle , rhp = rhopalium, and pln = planulae. gene annotations by subcluster provided in additional file 8


fig.  <dig> 
a-k sex heatmap for a. alata. hierarchical clustering  and corresponding ten subcluster profiles for the  <dig> genes implicated in sex and early development differentially expressed across a. alata medusa , rhopalium) and planulae samples. intensity of color indicates expression levels for each of the ten hierarchical clusters . bright yellow patches correspond to the highest peaks for each k-mean subcluster profile. k-mean profiles  match the order of column names in a, representing the mean expression of gene clusters highly abundant in each sample . two yellow gene clusters in the gastric cirri column correspond to peaks in plot b and c; six bright yellow clusters in the ovaries column corresponds to profiles d-i; no major abundant gene clusters were detected in the tentacle column; four less intense clusters in the rhopalium column correspond to peaks in plots b, d, e, and h; two bright clusters in the planulae column correspond to peaks in the subcluster profiles j and k. the vertical colored bar on the left of the heatmap  indicates distinct patterns corresponding to the ten subcluster profiles , for which the number of genes each comprises is indicated. abbreviations: gc = gastric cirri, ov = ovaries, tnt = tentacle , rhp = rhopalium, and pln = planulae. gene annotations by subcluster provided in additional file 9




putative venom implicated genes
here we highlight our findings of the  <dig> transcripts we broadly refer to as “venom implicated genes” based on preliminary candidate gene profiling . this effort focused specifically on identifying genes highly expressed in the tentacle  and gastric cirri . by comparing a body part with tissue abundant in penetrant nematocysts   with one lacking nematocysts  our aim was to identify putative site of venom production and nematogenesis in a. alata. although nematocysts are typically abundant in the gastric cirri of many box jellyfish species  <cit> , only a single individual nematocyst has been documented in the gastric cirri of mature a. alata medusae  <cit>  despite examination of hundreds of mature specimens in several independent studies  <cit> . conversely, nematocysts  are primarily concentrated in the tentacle  of a. alata  <cit> , as is the case with all cubozoans  <cit> . hierarchical gene cluster profiling  revealed that many of the putative venom implicated genes were fittingly highly expressed in the tentacle , but were surprisingly also highly abundant in the gastric cirri .

catx/crtx toxin family genes
we identified eleven different homologs of the catx/crtx toxin family . these were either abundant almost exclusively in the tentacle   or in the gastric cirri  . this gene family consists of pore-forming toxins that cause pain, inflammation and necrosis during human envenomation  <cit>  and prior to this study has exclusively been associated with venom from nematocysts  <cit> . the taxonomically restricted catx/crtx toxin family  <cit> , previously called the “box jellyfish toxin family”  <cit> , was thought to be restricted to medusozoans  <cit> , but recently a homolog was also identified in the anthozoan coral acropora  <cit> . gene tree reconstruction  of the eleven catx/crtx gene homologs abundant in either the gastric cirri or the tentacle confirmed homology of the a. alata transcripts with catx/crtx toxin family genes in other cnidarians  <cit> . the analysis recovered four well-supported groups of a. alata catx/crtx genes, each exclusively containing transcripts with tissue-specific expression patterns, either in tentacle or gastric cirri . one group includes three a. alata homologs  specific to the tentacle that group with several non-cubozoan medusozoans including the coral acropora. three additional groups are all within a well-supported cluster of catx/crtx genes identified from cubozoan taxa. one of these nested groups includes the homolog  reported more than a decade ago  <cit>  in a. alata . homologs of this gene are sister to a sub-group comprised of chironex fleckeri homologs, which have been identified exclusively from tentacle tissue. the two additional nested groups  include the homolog  reported more than a decade ago in carybdea brevipedalia , consisting of transcripts only identified in our gastric cirri sample, in a well-supported cluster of homologs derived from carybdea brevipedalia and malo kingi. ours is the first report of expression of the catx/crtx toxin family in a medusozoan body part that lacks nematocysts.fig.  <dig> cnidarian catx/crtx toxin family gene tree. ml topology of all known homologs of the catx/crtx toxin family in cnidarian taxa from ncbi genbank and transcriptome components of a. alata in this study. assumes the wag + g + f model of amino acid evolution, as specified as most appropriate by prottest v.  <dig> . shimodaira-hasegawa-like branch support indices are shown at each node. tissue-specific expression patterns correspond to transcripts primarily enriched in the tentacle  and gastric cirri . in a. alata, the expression of genes annotated as the catx-a homolog is specific to the tentacle  sample , while genes annotated as the crtx-a homolog are specific to gastric cirri and a single tentacle gene . additionally, the expression of a single gene  annotated as both crtx and catx is tentacle specific



venom components
we report that an abundance of “cysteine-rich secretory protein family”  transcripts occurred almost exclusively in either the gastric cirri or the tentacle. some examples include: “serine protease coagulation factor vii”, “chymotrypsin-like elastase family” homologs, and “serine protease inhibitor” . likewise, multiple homologs of the “zinc metalloproteinase/astacin ”  were primiarily abundant in the gastric cirri, but with high expression in the tentacle as well. zinc metalloproteinases are peptidases with known roles in venom maturation in spiders and snakes, and were recently identified as tentacle venom components of some jellyfish taxa  <cit> . conversely, homologs of well-known bilaterian venom proteins /zinc metalloproteinase nas-4/venom factor ; scorpion , venom protein  <dig> ; the “venom prothrombin activator pseutarin-c non-catalytic subunit” from the eastern brown snake  ; and “alpha-2-macroglobulin family n-terminal region”  were most abundant in the gastric cirri and tentacle in this study, but were also expressed in the ovaries and rhopalium samples.

nematocyst structural genes
genes encoding putative nematocyst structural proteins were also characterized in this study. this is in line with our aim to characterize molecular components of cubozoan nematocysts and pinpoint putative regions of nematogenesis, given the current view that venom deployment in medusozoans is exclusively controlled by nematocysts. our findings revealed that three minicollagens, key components in nematocyst capsule development  <cit> , were abundant almost exclusively in the a. alata tentacle  , with slight expression signal in all other medusa samples. all three of the minicollagen genes identified from a. alata possess the characteristic collagen-like domain of short repeated tripeptides of the form gly-x-y flanked on both sides by proline repeats by n- and c-terminal cysteine rich domains . the crds for two of the three genes are of the regular form  and thus would be classified as group  <dig> minicollagens  <cit> . the third has a regular crd at the c-terminus but a variant form at the n-terminus that we refer to as group  <dig> variant. gene tree reconstruction of minicollagen genes for cnidarian taxa  show that the minicollagens identified for a. alata cluster primarily with other group  <dig> minicollagens. of the additional nematogenesis related genes  expressed in this study, most were almost exclusively abundant in the tentacle . they include “nematocyst outer wall antigen”  , “chondroitin proteoglycan 2” , “nematoblast-specific protein nb035-sv2/nb035-sv3/nb012a” , “nematogalectin-related protein” , and “dickkopf-related protein 3” . five different “dickkopf-related protein 3” homologs were abundant in a. alata tentacle sample; with only two having notable expression in other body parts .fig.  <dig> cnidarian minicollagen gene tree. ml topology of minicollagen gene family in cnidarian taxa from ncbi genbank and transcriptome components of a. alata in this study. assumes the bloss62i-g-f model of amino acid evolution, as specified as most appropriate by prottest v.  <dig> . shimodaira-hasegawa-like branch support indices are shown at each node. all a. alata minicollagen types were more closely related to non-cubozoan homologs. following shpirer et al.  <dig>  group  <dig> minicollagens possess n- and c-terminal cysteine rich domains  of a regular form . we use the label group  <dig>  to identify those minicollagens having three or more regular crds. group  <dig> minicollagens possess one regular and one irregular crd, with the variant form having the regular crd at the c-terminus, whereas group  <dig> minicollagens possess irregular crds at both termini. one  of the three recovered minicollagen homologs from a. alata was expressed across all five samples, but most abundant in the tentacle 



putative vision implicated genes
here we highlight our findings of the  <dig> transcripts we broadly refer to as “vision implicated genes” based on preliminary candidate gene profiling . this effort focused specifically on genes expressed in the rhopalium of a. alata, which bears a pair of lens eyes with cornea and retina, two pairs of simple ocelli-comprising photoreceptors, and a statocyst . by comparing the rhopalium with its visual capabilities and planulae with its known eye-spot photoreceptors, against the medusa samples that lack known photoreceptors , our aim was to identify the expression of opsins and other vision implicated genes in the rhopalium of a. alata, as well as in putative extraocular photoreceptors in a. alata. hierarchical gene cluster profiling  revealed that most of the  <dig> putative vision implicated genes  were abundant in the rhopalium , but in many cases they were more highly expressed in other samples, in particular in medusa samples .

opsins
in this study the trinotate report corresponding to the a. alata transcriptome contained a total of  <dig> transcripts with pfam annotations corresponding to homologs of the “ <dig> transmembrane receptor ”. of the rhodopsin family, opsins are considered universal light sensitive proteins associated with photoreceptor cells of animal retinas. we found eleven opsin homologs to be variably expressed across a. alata medusa samples, with only six homologs most abundant in the rhopalium . a gene tree reconstruction of all rhodopsin family cnidarian genes , which we rooted on the group that includes all previously known medusozoan opsins, recovered two of the three previously identified cnidarian opsin groups  <cit> . group a includes only anthozoan taxa, while group b includes all opsins previously known from medusozoans, eleven transcripts from alatina and a few from anthozoans. however, cnidarian opsins previously identified as group c fell into two groups—one of which includes thirty a. alata transcripts. this appears to be the first example of medusozoan opsins outside group b cnidarian opsins.fig.  <dig> cnidarian opsin gene tree. ml topology of all known homologs of the opsin gene family in cnidarian taxa from ncbi genbank and transcriptome components of a. alata in this study. assumes the lg + g model of amino acid evolution, as specified as most appropriate by prottest v.  <dig> . shimodaira-hasegawa-like branch support indices are shown at each node. blue, pink and brown shading correspond to cnidarian opsin groups a, b and c, respectively, recognized by feuda et al. . group a is arbitrarily chosen for rooting the topology; group b is monophyletic, but group c cannot be given our derived topology. stars denote opsin transcripts almost exclusively abundant in the a. alata rhopalium sample  and ovals denote the same in the planulae sample 



among the top  <dig> most abundant genes in the rhopalium of a. alata was a homolog of the cubozoan lens-eye opsin for carybdea rastonii  . the carybdea lens eye opsin was also highly expressed in all a. alata samples, including planulae which have eye spots . normalized counts revealed three additional opsin genes that were not differentially expressed across all samples, were almost exclusively found in the planulae sample . only two a. alata putative rhodopsin family homologs were expressed almost exclusively in the rhopalium  . among the putative “rhodopsin family” genes expressed in medusa samples, including those annotated in the trinotate report as non-opsin based photoreceptors, were: “compound eye opsin bcrh1/d dopamine receptor”  and “opsin rh1/mu-type opioid receptor” , “blue-sensitive opsin” , “visual pigment-like receptor peropsin” , “melanopsin-b” .

chromophores
we found that several isozymes of cis-retinol dehydrogenase, members of the retinoic acid signaling pathway, which convert retinol to retinal , were expressed in the rhopalium, and in other samples including planulae . in animals, retinal  is bound to opsin on the photoreceptors of the retina  <cit> , and is thought to be a universal chromophore , though various chromophores are used across metazoa  <cit> . carotenoid oxygenase beta, beta-carotene  <dig> '-monooxygenase   and beta, beta-carotene 9',10'-oxygenase , known to irreversibly cleave carotenoids to produce the essential visual pigments retinal and retinoic acid respectively  <cit> , were expressed in the four a. alata medusa samples , suggesting that the catalytic components are present to make retinal. we also report the expression of a putative blue-sensitive photoreceptor protein and circadian clock regulator “cryptochrome-1” in the rhopalium, but with high expression in the gastric cirri . this suggests the presence of an additional putative chromophore in a. alata that functions in extraocular blue-light mediated behaviors , previously documented in coral and other metazoans .

crystallins
we found transcripts showing similarity to all three known j-crystallin groups , and all were highly expressed in the rhopalium . the j <dig> crystallin homolog was expressed in all samples including planulae ; j <dig> crystallin was almost exclusively expressed in the rhopalium ; as were all but a single j <dig> crystallin homolog that was also abundant in the ovaries . crystallins are water-soluble stable structural proteins that provide transparency and increase the refractive index of eye lenses, though most also have roles unrelated to lens function. numerous types of crystallins are found across metazoa, and many are identical  to commonly expressed metabolic enzymes or stress proteins  <cit> . j-crystallins are classified in three evolutionarily independent groups, j <dig>  j <dig> and j <dig>  and thus far have only been reported in cubozoans  <cit> . a study on t. cystophora showed that the promotors of all three j-crystallin genes can be activated by the paired domain transcription factor paxb, but the promotor sites are non-homologous among the three j-crystallin types  <cit> . we aligned all known cubozoan j-crystallins  with the respective a. alata homologs identified in this study . the resulting three alignments illustrate the similarity between a. alata transcripts identified in this study and homologs of the three distinct t. cystophora j-crystallin types. additionally, alpha-crystallin b chain”   was abundant in the rhopalium, but expressed in all five samples. conversely, we report transcripts annotated as s-type crystallin  variably expressed across samples: s-crystallin  <dig> abundant in the rhopalium and absent in ovaries , s-crystallin  <dig> abundant almost exclusively in the tentacle , and s-crystallin  <dig> most highly expressed in planulae and gastric cirri .

homeobox genes and transcription factors
expression of putative homeobox proteins “six1b” and “six4” and the “six” transcriptional co-activator “eyes absent”  homolog occurred in all a. alata medusa samples, with the highest expression in the gastric cirri. across metazoa, the six-eya complex functions downstream from certain pax homeobox genes in a diversity of developmental processes including early eye development  <cit> . the putative “retinal homeobox proteins rx1b” and “rx3” were expressed in all samples, except for in the ovaries in the case of “rx1b”. retinal homeobox proteins  are essential for early eye-development and in regulation of stem cell proliferation in vertebrates  <cit> , but have not previously been reported in cnidarians.

putative sex and development implicated genes
here we highlight our findings of the  <dig> transcripts we broadly refer to as “sex implicated genes” based on preliminary candidate gene profiling . this effort focused mainly on genes expressed in the ovaries of a. alata during ovulation and internal fertilization. by definition, the ovaries are the site of oogenesis, and are situated within the gastrovascular cavity in a. alata  <cit> . microscopic examination of the gastrovascular cavity of the female a. alata medusa in this study revealed ovulation  and internal fertilization  occurring within this cavity. by comparing our ovaries sample, which also contained zygotes and embryos, with other body parts predicted to lack reproductive material , our aim was to identify genes involved in gametogenesis as well as to determine more precisely the location of internal fertilization within a. alata, which we expected would occur adjacent to the ovaries, in the sperm-saturated gastrovascular cavity  <cit> ). hierarchical gene cluster profiling  revealed that the highest expression of the  <dig> putative sex and developmental genes  occurred in the ovaries , but that many were also expressed across all samples .

oogenesis and embryogenesis
we found that homologs for the putative large lipid transfer protein vitellogenin- <dig> were most abundant in a. alata ovaries , though highly expressed in all medusa samples. conversely, genes annotated as vitellogenin- <dig> or simply vitellogenin were expressed in all medusa samples, but most abundant in the tentacle . likewise, genes annotated as apolipophorin or apolipoprotein b- <dig>  the other major animal protein group involved in lipoprotein processing  <cit> , were expressed across all medusa samples but most abundant in the tentacle . genes of the vitellogenin family are responsible for lipid transfer from ovarian follicle cells to oocytes, providing nutrition during embryogenesis in bilaterians and some cnidarians  <cit> , and have a documented role as egg yolk protein precursors in the ovaries of animals, including anthozoans  <cit> . gene tree reconstruction of a. alata transcripts with known cnidarian vitellogenin and apolipophorin-like proteins  confirmed their homology with other cnidarian large lipid transfer proteins.fig.  <dig> cnidarian vitellogenin gene tree. ml topology of all known homologs of the vitellogenin gene superfamily and apolipophorin-like putative vitellogenin precursor in cnidarian taxa from ncbi genbank and transcriptome components of a. alata in this study. assumes the lg + g model of amino acid evolution, as specified as most appropriate by prottest v.  <dig> . shimodaira-hasegawa-like branch support indices are shown at each node. grey  highlights a clade of apolipophorin-like putative vitellogenin precursor homologs for cubozoan carukia barnesi and a. alata from this study and hydrozoan hydra vulgaris, while the non-highlighted clade  highlights the relationships among known vitellogenins of cnidarian taxa. stars designate transcripts most upregulated in the ovaries ; all others are either most highly expressed in the tentacle  or equally high in the gastric cirri and tentacle samples 



we report the abundance of multiple creatine kinase isozymes in the ovaries , all of which were expressed to some degree in all samples including planulae . creatine kinase activity has a documented role in oogenesis and early embryogenesis in mammals  <cit> . more broadly though, creatine kinase is important in cells with variable rates of energy turnover, such as muscle, neurons, photoreceptors, and primitive spermatozoa  <cit> , which is consistent with its expression in all samples in this study.

sperm motility
creatine kinase isozymes have also been documented in mediating high energy phosphate transport between sperm mitochondria and sperm flagellar tail  <cit> . among the most abundant genes in the ovaries  were homologs functioning in sperm tail development and motility: “parkin coregulated gene protein homolog” , “outer dense fiber protein 3/sperm-tail pg-rich repeat/shippo-rpt” , and multiple putative creatine kinase isoenzymes including “testis isozyme/protoflagellar creatine kinase” . likewise multiple putative “serine/threonine-protein kinase” isoenzymes including “testis-specific serine/threonine-protein kinase 1”  were primarily abundant in the ovaries, but also variably expressed in all five samples. expression in all samples of these sperm-related genes is consistent with the presence of ubiquitous sperm documented within the female gastrovascular cavity  facilitating internal fertilization in this study . sperm were also abundant in the surrounding seawater, and were undoubtedly adhered to the tentacles and exterior of the medusa bell when all tissue samples were excised from a. alata.

sperm capacitation
we report the exclusive upregulation in the ovaries of the putative sperm hyperactivation and acrosomal vesicle reaction promotor protein “cation channel sperm-associated protein”  . catsper genes belong to the family of voltage-gated ca2+ channels that are crucial for sperm fertility in mammals  <cit> . in particular, capacitation, which typically occurs within the female reproductive tract, involves the destabilization of the acrosomal sperm head membrane allowing greater binding between sperm and oocyte during fertilization due to an increased permeability of ca2+  <cit> . recent studies have showed that sperm of several invertebrate species also undergo capacitation . however, until now the possibility of capacitation occurring in sperm of non-bilaterian invertebrates has not been investigated. unexpectedly, the “cub and zona pellucida-like domain-containing protein” was most highly abundant in the tentacle and gastric cirri , despite one of its known roles in ova of attracting sperm to eggs for fertilization in mammals  <cit> . however, the cub and zona pellucida-like domain-containing protein is also associated with trypsinogen activation and was previously found in box jellyfish tentacles  <cit> . overall, the abundance of transcripts related to sperm dynamics identified in the a. alata transcriptome permitted unforeseen profiling of molecular components involved in putative sperm capacitation and fertilization for the first time in a cubozoan.

discussion
this study has generated the first annotated transcriptome from multiple tissues of the cubozoan alatina alata, focusing on both the adult  and larvae . our transcriptome significantly adds to the genomic resources available for this emerging cubozoan model. this transcriptome, based primarily on multiple adult body tissues, complements a recently published transcriptome for the same species primarily from early developmental stages  <cit> . furthermore, in this study we annotated a large set of genes, allowing for an initial characterization of the molecular complexity of this cubozoan. we also compared transcript abundance across samples to identify genes putatively involved in several key features of cubozoans, namely nematogenesis and venom production, vision and sensory perception, and sexual reproduction. these quantitative data should be considered preliminary, due to lack of replication, but they are suggestive of interesting candidate genes that will be useful for future study. below we highlight some of the major findings from this initial comparison across samples focusing specifically on genes relevant to i) prey capture and defense, ii) vision and the phototransduction pathway and iii) sexual reproduction and embryogenesis.

prey capture and defense
in cubozoans, and more broadly in all cnidarians, prey capture and defense are based on nematocyst  and associated venom. by comparing a body part abundant in penetrant nematocysts  with one lacking nematocysts  our aim was to identify putative site of nematocyst development  and venom production in a. alata.

we found that transcripts corresponding to a number of putative nematocyst structural proteins  were abundant in the tentacle . although, putative nematogenic transcripts were detected primarily in the tentacle, some were also detected in non-tentacle medusa samples. we expect that this signal stems from the abundant adherent nematocysts covering the medusa bell. together these findings are consistent with nematogenesis in a. alata occurring primarily, but not solely, in the region comprising the tentacle and adjacent pedalium base. future in situ hybridization studies employing genes identified in nematogenesis in this study can help pinpoint more precisely nematogenic regions in a. alata.

venom is a complex cocktail of bioactive compounds  secreted by one animal that is delivered to another animal by an infliction  <cit> . venom disrupts physiological and biochemical molecules of prey and predators, thus facilitating feeding and defense  <cit> . nematocysts have long been considered the sole secretory structure for venom deployment in cnidarians  <cit> . however, we found preliminary evidence for venom production in the gastric cirri, where nematocsyts are lacking in mature a. alata. futhermore, we found that the gastric cirri and tentacle express distinct groups of homologs of a major family of cnidarian venom proteins, the catx/crtx toxin family  <cit> . this suggests that venom plays an important, and possibly different role in the gastric cirri and tentacle. venom components likley differ between the nematocyst-bearing tentacle, with a primary role in immobilizing prey and warding off predators, and the gastri cirri, with a primary role in killing and digesting prey  <cit> .

based on our findings, we hypothesize that a. alata has gland cells that secrete toxins associated with the gastric cirri. evidence was recently presented for toxin-secreting gland cells in the ectoderm of the sea anemone nematostella in regions containing nematocysts as well as areas that may lack nematocysts  <cit> , but our findings represent the first putative case in a cubozoan. future morphological studies examining the ultrastructure of the stomach and gastric cirri, and venom gene candidate localization studies, will permit testing of the hypothesis of toxin-secreting gland cells associated with the gastric cirri of a. alata.

although differences exist in the exact complement of putative bioactive toxins between the gastric cirri and tentacle sample, the venom cocktail in each body part includes transcripts from similar digestive enzyme families. a recent review of jellyfish toxins lists a number of toxin-like digestive enzymes that are deployed as components of nematocyst venom to disable homeostatic processes in prey or predators  <cit> , as has been noted in animals possessing venom glands  <cit> . these bioactive proteins function in cytolytic, paralytic and hemolytic roles, thereby facilitating prey digestion  <cit> . specifically we note the abundance of several enzyme groups primarily in either the tentacle or gastric cirri in a. alata that have been well studied in venomous animals  <cit> , namely astacin-like metalloproteinase and serine proteinase , and more broadly cysteine-rich secretory proteins . metalloproteinase and serine proteinase  are a common component of the venom of animals with venom glands either activating toxins or acting as toxins themselves  <cit> . in particular, cysteine-rich secretory proteins identified in snake venoms are thought to inhibit smooth muscle contraction in bite victims  <cit> . both metalloproteinase and crisps have previously been characterized in the tentacles of cubozoan  <cit>  and other cnidarians  <cit> . the abundance of multiple isozymes of astacin-like metalloproteinase and serine proteinase  and crisps in the gastric cirri and tentacle of a. alata suggest a dual role in venom and digestion. further studies are required to test this hypothesis given the broad involvement of these bioactive proteins in other biological processes  <cit> .

vision and the phototransduction pathway
cubozoans are the earliest diverging animal clade to have image-forming lens eyes, which are part of specialized sensory organs called rhopalia. by comparing a medusa body part bearing conspicuous eyes  and planulae with eye spots  against the medusa samples that lack documented photoreceptors , our aim was to profile the molecular components of the opsin-regulated phototransduction pathway and identify additional regions of putative extraocular sensory perception in a. alata.

we found that many genes with conserved roles in vision  were abundant in the rhopalium. although transcripts with putative roles in light-mediated phototransduction pathway were detected primarily in the rhopalium where eyes are present, their expression was broadly detected across the medusa samples, and in some cases in planulae. we expect this signal stems from the presence of additional photoreceptors  throughout the body of this cubozoan. together these findings are consistent with a vision-related role for opsins and crystallins in the lens-eye of the rhopalium, as well as a role in putative photoreceptors within non-rhopalium tissues and in planulae eye spots.

the animal phototransduction pathway is mediated by photopigments in photoreceptors consisting of two parts: a membrane protein  “opsin” and a chromophore “retinal”   <cit> . opsins mediate light as phototypical g protein-coupled receptors in both visual and non-visual systems  <cit> . currently more than  <dig> types of opsin are known across metazoa, with three subfamilies recognized in bilaterians: rhabdomeric , go-coupled plus retinochrome retinal g protein-coupled receptor  and ciliary   <cit> . studies characterizing opsins in cnidarians have raised the possibility that cnidarian opsins form a monophyletic clade referred to as “cnidops” that is sister to the c-opsins . other metazoan-wide analyses of opsins have categorized cnidarian opsins into three groups, a, b and c, in which each of these cnidarians opsin groups has been found, albeit with limited support, to be sister to each of the respective bilaterian opsin groups  <cit> . one study has revealed support for r-opsins in cnidarians  <cit> , which is consistent with the identification of planulae eye spots as rhabdomeric photoreceptors  <cit> . although a consensus is lacking on the relationships between cnidarian opsins and other metazoan opsins, our study identified a number of transcripts with molecular characters corresponding to diverse metazoan opsins  in a. alata, adding to the known diversity of this gene family within cnidarians.

our opsin gene tree only included the known cnidarian opsins and thus does not address the question of cnidarian opsin monophyly. however, our analysis recovered homologs within two of the three previously identified cnidarian opsin groups, namely group a and b  <cit> . our analysis also recovered many opsin homologs within a large group that also contains cnidarian opsin group c, previously thought to only be present in anthozoans. the presence of this opsin group in both anthozoans and medusozoans suggests that it was present in the cnidarian ancestor.

we found several opsin genes in a. alata to be highly expressed in samples other than the rhopalium, and similar results have been reported for opsins in another cubozoan, t. cystophora  <cit> . based on these findings we hypothesize that cubozoans have opsin-mediated extraocular photoreception activity possibly related to phototaxis, circadian rhythm or light-mediated spawning, such as has been demonstrated in other animals, including anthozoans  <cit> . these findings are also suggestive of extraocular photosensitivity  <cit>  that has a documented role in rhythmic behaviors and physiological processes in vertebrates and invertebrates, including nematocyst firing in cnidarians  <cit> . such suggested extraocular photoreceptor cells may also comprise anatomically dispersed light sensitive neurons, in addition to ciliary or rhabdomeric morphotypes, possibly functioning in dispersed photoreception, also called the “dermal light sense” . future characterization of the absorbance spectra for different opsin types in cubozoans, and visualization of the precise locality of expression using in situ hybridization, will help elucidate their potential functions in different medusa body parts and planulae.

in this study the expression of some of the components of the retinal photoisomerization pathway in all samples including planulae suggests that a. alata metabolizes the universal chromophore retinal  <cit> . however, transcripts for a putative blue-sensitive photoreceptor protein and circadian clock regulator cryptochrome homolog suggest an additional putative chromophore in a. alata that might function in non-rhopalium related blue-light mediated processes ; such a function has previously been documented in other metazoans  <cit> . determining the precise chromophore utilized by a. alata must await future functional studies.

crystallins are multifunctional proteins often related to stress or metabolic enzymes that serve as important lens components controlling optical properties  <cit> . the dual role crystallins play in eye lens as well as non-eye related tissues is known as “gene sharing”  <cit> . we found that all three types of j-crystallins previously reported in t. cystophora  <cit>  were present in a. alata and that these were typically most highly expressed in the rhopalium, with j <dig> crystallins showing more variable expression across samples.

we also identified transcripts corresponding to the developmental transcription factors six and eyes absent , representing the first homologs of these genes identified from cubozoans. genes in the six-eya homolog complex have known functions in eye development, including during embryogenesis and regeneration, in both non-bilaterians and bilaterians  <cit> . six-eya complex genes have been shown to act downstream of pax genes  <cit> , and paxb expression has been reported in both adult and larval eyes of t. cystophora, where it is inferred to promote j-crystallin expression  <cit> . we also identified transcripts corresponding to the developmental transcription factors six and eyes absent , representing the first homologs of these genes identified from cubozoans. genes in the six-eya homolog complex have known functions in eye development, including during embryogenesis and regeneration, in both non-bilaterians and bilaterians  <cit> . six-eya complex genes have been shown to act downstream of pax genes  <cit> , and paxb expression has been reported in both adult and larval eyes of t. cystophora, where it is inferred to promote j-crystallin expression  <cit> . conversely, in the scyphozoan aurelia, development of simple eyes is mediated by six-eya complex genes independent of paxb expression  <cit> . although the trinotate report for the filtered a. alata transcriptome did not contain any transcripts annotated as paxb, we identified two transcripts  annotated as other homeobox genes that appear to be putative paxb homologs based on sequence identity  with nematostella vectensis paxb mrna. whether eye development and six-eya expression in a. alata are dependent or independent of paxb expression remain open questions. future studies determining the spatial localization of gene expression during eye development in a. alata may be useful for further elucidating the gene regulatory networks functioning in eye development in cubozoan rhopalia and planulae eyes spots.

sexual reproduction and embryogenesis
cubozoan lifecycles alternate between an asexually reproducing sessile polyp stage and a sexually reproducing motile medusa stage. by profiling the transcripts from an adult body part  abundant in developing oocytes, our aim was to characterize the molecular components of oogenesis and early embryogenesis in a. alata. additionally, because we found that sperm are internalized and interact with newly ovulated eggs within the gastrovascular cavity of a. alata females, our ovaries tissue sample also provided the opportunity to identify genes that might be involved in fertilization.

we identified several apparent homologs of vitellogenin and apolipoprotein, which have documented roles in oogenesis and embryogenesis,  and found these to be most abundant in the ovaries of a. alata. vitellogenin is an animal egg yolk protein that is synthesized in somatic cell lineages and subsequently incorporated into developing oocytes , eventually serving as a nutrition source during embryogenesis . in medusozoans little is known about the characteristics of vitellogenins as they have only been documented as egg yolk proteins in two coral species  <cit>  and the model sea anemone nematostella vectensis  <cit> . vitellogenin proteins are expressed in both ovarian  and extra-ovarian somatic cells, consistent with their important roles in processing large lipoproteins in a broad range of complex biological processes among metazoans  <cit> , including their distinct role as honey bee venom allergens  <cit> . consistent with this, we found that in a. alata, apparent homologs of vitellogenin- <dig> were expressed most highly in the ovaries, yet they and other vitellogenins and apolipoprotein-like homologs were detected in all medusa samples. in this study we also found a number of creatine kinase genes to be most abundant in the ovaries, but many were also detected  in all of our samples. creatine kinases play an important role in oogenesis and early embryogenesis in mammals  <cit> , having a broad enzymatic function in yielding atp by catalyzing the reversible transfer of phosphate from creatine phosphate to adp in cells with high activity   <cit> .

we did not recover any genes characteristic of meiosis in the ovaries sample of a. alata, suggesting that the tissue was composed exclusively of mature ova at the time of sampling. it is also possible that the expression levels of putative meiosis transcripts were too low to be detected by our analyses, given our conservative transcriptome analysis protocol . however, few studies exist that characterize the molecular aspects of sexual reproduction in cnidarians  <cit> , limiting the number of potential gametogenic candidate genes targeted in this study. future transcriptome and proteome profiling studies of the gonads of a. alata and other cubozoans during medusa maturation are needed to shed light on the molecular underpinnings of the processes controlling gametogenesis in cubozoans.

in this study we also detected the expression of genes with putative roles in sperm flagella activation, pro-acrosomal vesicles and sperm capacitation, with many of these being most abundant in the ovaries of a. alata. these morphological and biochemical changes to the sperm are necessary for the sperm to reach and fertilize an oocyte, and their occurrence has been documented within the female reproductive tract in many animals  <cit> . sperm capacitation was previously thought to occur exclusively in mammals, but more recently it has been documented in several invertebrates  <cit> . our study is the first to suggest that sperm capacitation might occur within the gastrovascular cavity  of a cnidarian. we note that although sperm storage structures have been reported in a single family of cubozoans   <cit> , we do not expect sperm storage to occur in a. alata. morphological observations during the course of this study as well as previous studies in a. alata have identified no structure with a putative role in sperm storage in either male or female medusae  <cit> . future histological studies of a. alata medusae undergoing internal fertilization should elucidate the ultrastructure of the female reproductive tract and provide further insight into fertilization dynamics in this species.

based on our observations in this and a prior study  <cit> , monthly spermcasting aggregations of a. alata medusae consist entirely of males and females with mature gonad morphology. we therefore hypothesize that gonad development occurs offshore in response to environmental and molecular cues related to the lunar cycle that may instigate inshore migrations. during these monthly nearshore aggregations, which span three to four consecutive days, both sexes exhaust their entire gamete reserves in a process known as “controlled gonad rupture”  <cit> . male gonads completely disintegrate over the course of several hours, and females simultaneously ingest massive quantities of sperm for internal fertilization. the interaction of sperm and eggs witnessed in the gastrovascular cavity, followed by release of blastulae into the surrounding water by females within hours, along with the abundance of sperm and fertilization-related transcripts detected in the ovaries sample, corroborate previous observations  <cit>  that fertilization occurs immediately following sperm ingestion and ovulation, adjacent to the ovaries within the gastrovascular cavity. future molecular studies characterizing expression in sperm and eggs prior to and during fertilization will provide further insight into the dynamics of fertilization in cubozoans.

CONCLUSIONS
whereas most cubozoans are difficult to study in their natural settings, alatina alata is becoming a useful model for evolutionary and molecular studies because mature adults can be found predictably in near-shore waters. in this study, we generated a new genomic resource for a. alata, a transcriptome of multiple adult tissues and larvae, and characterized patterns of expression of transcripts across several body parts of a female medusa and larval planulae. we identified a large suite of candidate genes implicated in predation and defense, vision and the phototransduction pathway, and sexual reproduction and embryogenesis. this new genomic resource and the candidate genes we have identified will be valuable for further investigating the evolution of distinctive features of cubozoans, and the evolution of cnidarians more broadly.

