BACKGROUND
the three mountain systems  located to the north of the major southern european peninsulas  have played an important role in determining the current distributions of european biota, and they harbour exceptionnally high levels of biodiversity
 <cit> . their high elevation greatly influenced the climate-induced range shifts of many species during quaternary climatic cycles
 <cit> , and local speciation promoted by isolation of populations in long-standing refugia and potential contact zones between postglacial recolonizing genetic lineages have been invoked to account for such diversity
 <cit> .

the pyrenees are especially renowned as an important plant diversity hotspot because of their high floristic richness 
 <cit> , including considerable endemicity  and numerous plant associations
 <cit> . yet we still know relatively little about the processes that led to species accumulation within this region. their east–west arrangement clearly acted as a latitudinal barrier for postglacial dispersal predominantly out of the iberian peninsula. moreover, they served as an arena in which postglacial lineage contacts occurred
 <cit> . while the valleys in other european mountain ranges were only partially covered by ice even during the coldest periods of the ice age glaciations , the alps and the pyrenees were almost entirely covered by large ice sheets
 <cit> . such similarities in their glacial history may have resulted in analogous patterns of genetic structure of the plant species that inhabit the two east–west mountain ranges. unfortunately, in contrast to the high number of studies that have focused on the evolutionary history of plant lineages in the alps [see
 <cit> , few investigations have addressed the origin and colonisation history of pyrenean plant species in a phylogenetic context at the appropriate spatial scale. most of the previous phylogeographic studies that included the pyrenean range have relied upon limited sampling strategies . thus, the major patterns related to the origins and colonisation of pyrenean plant lineages after the quaternary ice ages remain largely unresolved.

the present study used antirrhinum species from the pyrenees to reconstruct the colonisation history of mountain plants in this region. monophyly of this genus, an important model system in plant biology primarily distributed in the western mediterranean basin, has been previously proved
 <cit> . the iberian peninsula harbours the highest species diversity; however, a few antirrhinum species are also found in other european areas, such as the alps  and italy , or are distributed widely across the mediterranean  despite the lack of any obvious long-distance dispersal syndrome. historically, the number of antirrhinum species has been the subject of taxonomic debate, resulting in different taxa circumscriptions. the difficulties in species delimitation, as well as the discrepancies between phylogenetic relationships and taxonomic classifications, have been interpreted as strong evidence for recent geographic speciation and extensive hybridisation since the pliocene
 <cit> .

four antirrhinum taxa from two sections are endemic to the pyrenees and pre-pyrenees range. the pre-pyrenees range is formed by a complex system of foothill ranges which stretches from the western side  to the mediterranean coast on the eastern end of the pyrenees . this range mostly runs parallel to the pyrenees along the iberian side, but it also includes the corbières range, towards the eastern end on the french side, where the pyrenees’s slopes descend rather abruptly. the four endemic taxa occur in different habitats throughout these mountain ranges, ranging from lowland areas  to high mountain environments . a. molle and a. sempervirens  inhabit limestone cliffs from medium to high altitudes, whereas a. majus subsp. majus and a. majus ssp. striatum  occur mostly in lowland areas of the eurosiberian woodlands . previous phylogeographic studies found that four of the eight main antirrhinum lineages are distributed in northeast iberia
 <cit> . thus, the pyrenees along with the pre-pyrenees mountains are one of the areas with the highest numbers of genotypes and lineages. recent studies have also been conducted to understand the cause and the maintenance of the parapatric distribution of two of these taxa , as well as the ecological process that occurs in narrow contact zones
 <cit> . thus, it seems reasonable to assume that the present-day distribution of antirrhinum in the pyrenees is the result of historical processes that have taken place across the mountain range and adjacent mountains during quaternary times. we evaluate this possibility with molecular phylogenetic and phylogeographic analyses.

based on previous phylogenetic and phylogeographic studies on plants , four hypotheses  can be proposed for explaining the origin of antirrhinum lineages that are found in the pyrenees:  a predominantly southern  origin;  a predominantly northern  origin;  a long-standing isolation of pyrenean populations; and  recurrent secondary contacts between iberian and central european lineages.

in this study, we first attempt to infer the historical connections between the pyrenees and other geographic areas. we also investigate the genetic structure within the species and assess the patterns of genetic diversity within the pyrenees region. by combining the results of these analyses, we explore potential processes that could explain the evolutionary history of antirrhinum lineages throughout the pyrenees.

RESULTS
phylogenetic analysis
detailed features of the two sequenced cpdna regions are summarized in table 
 <dig> . the total aligned length of the combined trns-trng/trnk-matk dataset of the  <dig> samples added to the  <dig> sequence matrix of vargas et al.
 <cit>  was 1795 bp . this revealed  <dig> variable sites of which  <dig> were parsimony-informative.

characteristics of the trns-trng and trnk-matk sequences obtained for antirrhinum matrix .

the 50% majority-rule consensus tree of the bayesian analysis is shown in figure 
 <dig>  no conflicts are found between the bayesian phylogenetic analyses for the trnk-matk and trns-trng separate matrices . the strict consensus tree of the mp  analysis was basically congruent with the ml  analysis, although with a lower resolution and support values . one subclade recognized under bayesian posterior probabilities  contained all a. majus subsp. majus, a. majus subsp. striatum, a. sempervirens and a. molle accessions  together with the accessions of species from southern iberia  and those species widespread across the mediterranean . no analyses supported the monophyly of pyrenean samples. the five samples of a. latifolium from the south-western alps were clustered together  and clearly unrelated to pyrenean samples. all three phylogenetic analyses showed high support values for clade  <dig> , which comprised samples primarily distributed in the eastern pyrenees.

estimation of divergence times
the values of standard deviation of the uncorrelated lognormal relaxed clock  and coefficient of variation  for rate heterogeneity within our trns-trng/trnk-matk dataset indicated low but significant rate heterogeneity among lineages . therefore the use of the uncorrelated clock was considered appropriate. examination of the mcmc samples with tracer  <dig> 
 <cit>  confirmed adequate sample size, with ess  values in the hundreds or thousands for both dating analyses. these also indicated adequate convergence and stationarity of the posterior probability distributions after discarding the burn-in. the topology of the maximum clade credibility  tree  was congruent with those of ml and mp analyses. the analysis revealed geographically structured lineages diverging since the pliocene. a highly supported lineage  containing samples of northern iberia , mediterranean basin  and the four pyrenean species was estimated to split between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ma – 95% highest posterior density  – in the late pliocene/early pleistocene. a well-supported lineage primarily from the eastern pyrenees  diverging between  <dig>  and  <dig>  ma  was also observed. additionally, we found highly supported sublineages of pyrenean populations diverging in the quaternary .

ancestral area reconstructions
dpa analysis showed uncertainty in the geographic origin of the pyrenean lineages; since several areas outside the pyrenees showed similar probabilities . nevertheless, stronger support was found for the geographic origin of more recent subclades, leading to a robust reconstruction of dispersal events within and around the pyrenees during the pleistocene. bayes factor  tests  for significant non-zero rates revealed a historically close connection between the pyrenees and the iberian peninsula . in contrast, south-western alps populations  were not linked to the pyrenees. the central pyrenees were the most likely ancestral location of western haplotypes . a colonisation episode involving a few populations may have also occurred from central pyrenees to the southern french basin, as indicated by a well-supported connection between these two areas . however, the colonisation of the southern french basin seems to have occurred mainly from the eastern pyrenees as indicated by a considerably higher bayes factor value . interestingly, a less supported link was also observed between eastern and central pyrenees . these results suggest:  no close-relationship between pyrenean lineages and those distributed in the south-western alps;  an origin of pyrenean lineages during the pleistocene; and  recent dispersal episodes within the pyrenees from two main spreading centers .

when the number of areas was reduced to four –pyrenees and surrounding areas, south-western alps, iberian peninsula  and rest of mediterranean areas– the inferred historical biogeographic scenarios from the s-diva  and dec  analyses were mostly congruent, but not very informative about the origin of the pyrenean lineages . however, the results agreed with a sister relationship between the south-western alps lineage and an iberian clade, indicating:  a historical connection between two distant areas and  no recent relationship between the alps and pyrenean lineages.

haplotype data analysis
antirrhinum network
the statistical parsimony analysis of the antirrhinum matrix found  <dig> haplotype lineages, of which seven included samples from ne iberia. in addition, five haplotype lineages from the pyrenees were formed by  <dig> haplotypes  obtained from the  <dig> populations collected across the pyrenees and adjacent areas. some missing haplotypes  and one loop were retrieved for the whole genus. most of the haplotypes were grouped primarily together within lineages i and ii of northern iberia . the five samples collected in the south-western alps provided two new haplotypes  with a tip position, which formed part of lineage vi from southeastern iberia.

pyrenees network
the haplotype network analysis of the pyrenees matrix distinguished  <dig> haplotypes  distributed into five lineages . the h <dig> resulted from a 9 bp deletion. neither loops nor missing haplotypes  were observed . no species had exclusive haplotypes, except for a. sempervirens that had four  .

genetic structure and diversity
the geographical distribution of haplotypes and lineages is shown in figure 
 <dig> . the eastern pyrenees harbored only haplotypes of lineage e, which appeared to be primarily distributed in this area. the western pyrenees harbored exclusively the haplotype  <dig>  the five lineages were distributed across the central pyrenees. the majority of 10× <dig> km quadrats  harbored only one haplotype, although some contained two  and three  haplotypes. moreover, few quadrats had haplotypes of two  and three  lineages, and all of them fell into the central pyrenees.

haplotype frequencies and molecular diversity indices per region are summarized in tables 
 <dig> and
 <dig>  central pyrenees contained the highest genetic diversity . in this area haplotype  <dig> occurred in the highest percentage , followed by h <dig>  and h <dig> . eastern pyrenees showed a lower value of genetic diversity in comparison with central pyrenees . only haplotypes of lineage e were found in the eastern pyrenees, with h <dig> showing the highest percentage . the lowest molecular diversity was found in western region, with h <dig> as the only haplotype.

n
s
h
hd
π
n = number of sequences; s = number of segregating sites; h = number of haplotypes; hd = haplotype diversity; π = nucleotide diversity.

fst values indicated that a phylogeographical pattern exists between the three regions . the highest fst value  was found for genetic differentiation between lineage e and the rest of lineages. amova  analysis showed significant values for genetic differentiation among groups for the following two comparisons:  sampling locations partitioned according to eastern, western, and central regions; and  according to lineage e versus rest of samples. nevertheless, variation values were higher among populations within groups . the results of samova  revealed two high fct values for clusters not including groups of a single population . variance among groups reached a value over 80% for the partition into seven geographic groups corresponding mainly to different plastid lineages and sublineages, without a clear geographic structure. the division into k =  <dig> clusters had the second highest variance among groups . both divisions clearly differentiated lineage e in a separate group. such split largely corresponded to the biogeographic boundary for eastern pyrenees, which can be visualized in the distribution map of haplotypes . with k ranging between  <dig> and  <dig>  fct values did not increase significantly and in most cases the newly defined groups comprised single populations. samova showed that a substantial portion of the cpdna genetic variability was found among groups, whereas the differences among populations within groups accounted for less variation.the clustering baps  analysis resulted in a best partition of k =  <dig>  these eight clusters primarily corresponded with the plastid lineages and sublineages . in the admixture analysis, all individuals were unambiguously assigned to their respective group without any probability of being misplaced.

comparisons were performed among populations from the eastern, central and western pyrenees, and among lineage e and the remaining lineages. asterisk indicates statistical significance .

va: variation among groups; vb: variation among populations within groups; vc: variation within populations.

demographic history
neither tajima’s d nor fu’s fs was significantly different from zero for lineage e . nevertheless, the mismatch distribution analyses did not reject the sudden expansion model for this lineage. the unimodal peak and nonsignificant harpending’s raggedness index  are indicative of recent demographic expansion
 <cit> . for the group of the remaining lineages, tajima’s d and fu’s fs were negative but not significant. mismatch distribution analyses rejected the range expansion hypothesis for this group by a bimodal distribution and significant ssd  and rag  values .

signification level p <  <dig> .

discussion
origins of antirrhinum in the pyrenees
regarding the geographic origin of the pyrenean lineages, an important historical connection between the northeast iberian peninsula and the pyrenees is well supported . it is notable that none of the analyses identified evolutionary relationships between the lineages from the pyrenees and those from the south-western alps, which is a connection found in other plant species with similar distributions e.g. erodium,
 <cit> , primula,
 <cit> . the lack of a connection between these two areas is also supported by nrits sequences . this is a rather unexpected, but essential, result since the yellow-flowered populations that inhabit the alps and the pyrenees have recently been circumscribed into a single species  by some taxonomists
 <cit> . the phylogenetic and dating analyses provide strong support for the divergence of pyrenean sublineages in the quaternary but poor support for sister-group relationships at the most basal nodes. the analyses presented here and those of vargas et al.
 <cit>  support the first hypothesis herein posit that the pyrenean lineages are the result of long-standing isolation and geographic differentiation from a widespread ancestor in the pleistocene. however, additional nuclear data, such as single-copy nuclear markers, would be required to determine whether the unresolved basal relationships are attributable to hard or soft polytomies
 <cit> .

east–west geographical structure of the genetic diversity
the main genetic discontinuity identified by the analyses  indicated the differentiation of the lineage e from the remaining lineages. these two groups basically correspond to the division between the eastern and central-west pyrenees . this cryptic transition area, which approximately follows the abrupt valley of the segre river, is supported by the phylogeographic gap in the southeastern part of the pyrenees that was already identified in previous studies of animals and plants e.g. <cit> . a similar phytogeographic boundary was previously proposed based on species distributions in the pyrenees
 <cit> . the high level of differentiation between the eastern pyrenean lineage  and the remaining lineages, suggests the isolation of eastern populations over more than one glacial cycle.

interestingly, the eastern and central areas may have experienced different historical processes during the last glaciations. according to the results of the mismatch distribution analyses, the observed genetic structure in the eastern pyrenees is congruent with a range expansion process, whereas this pattern was not observed in the central pyrenees. by contrast, the strong evidence for the genetic clustering of central pyrenean samples, which was detected by the baps and samova analyses, as well as the significant genetic differentiation among the different lineages that occur in the area, support long-standing genetic isolation in different local refugia without an extensive interglacial  range expansion as already inferred for pinus uncinata [according to
 <cit> . however, the homogeneously distributed genetic diversity indicates that moderate gene flow occurred among central pyrenean refugia during interglacial periods. thus, two different historical processes were inferred:  limited extinction/expansion during glacial cycles in the central area, and  population expansion  in the eastern area, may explain the observed differences in the genetic structure and diversity of both regions. a similar interpretation was proposed for ramonda myconi to explain genetic differences between populations from central and eastern pyrenees
 <cit>  where significant evidence was presented to support the existence of an important refuge near the central area. further support for a large refuge in central pyrenees was also found by palynological data
 <cit> , the patterns of phylogeographic concordance among different species
 <cit> , and the high diversity of habitats, species richness, and endemic species [ <dig> of the  <dig> endemic plant species of the pyrenean flora are exclusively from the central pyrenees;
 <cit> . in agreement with this and other studies e.g. <cit> , a scenario of multiple refugia in mountains adjacent to the central pyrenees  is gaining more support .

similar to the pattern found in antirrhinum, ramonda myconi also exhibits considerable differentiation but reduced genetic diversity in the eastern population
 <cit> . fossil pollen records and molecular studies suggest the presence of smaller refugia in the southeastern pyrenees, along the mediterranean coast
 <cit> . recent studies indicate that climatic fluctuations during the last glacial period affected the eastern pyrenees  more strongly than the central pyrenees, at least during the last  <dig>  years. overall, more pronounced oscillations between arid and humid periods prevailed in the easternmost regions
 <cit> . thus, severe reductions in population sizes and the isolation of peripheral populations at the edge of the distribution might have led to genetic drift and local adaptations via selective forces see . future comparative phylogeographic studies and coalescent demographic analyses could help to elucidate the historical processes responsible for the phylogeographic and floristic configuration of the pyrenees.

migration routes across the pyrenees
the colonisation of the western pyrenees occurred from the central pyrenees. indeed, the western populations have a low level of genetic diversity, which is shared by central populations. such gradual genetic impoverishment observed from the central to the western pyrenees is interpreted as a recent colonisation, which originated in the most central parts of the mountain range see
 <cit> . the results of the dpa analysis also indicate that the postglacial colonisation of the southern french basin occurred primarily from the eastern pyrenees . the geographic distribution of the haplotypes and the mismatch distribution analyses  suggest a gradual colonisation of southern france from northeastern iberia, where the edge of the glacial distribution range may have retreated early see
 <cit> .

similarities between the pyrenees and the alps
the causes of the separation of antirrhinum lineages and plant species by the abrupt valley in the pyrenees  are unclear. similar west–east vicariant lineages abutting along the etsch valley and the brenner pass in the alps have been reported
 <cit> . indeed, this discontinuity accounts for the most important phytogeographic and biogeographic boundary in the alps e.g. <cit> . similar genetic and floristic discontinuities are found in the alps and the pyrenees, which suggest that plant extinctions due to holocene glaciers and further recolonisation events were not distributed homogeneously across each of the two mountain ranges. the major effect of the glacial history of mountain valleys in the current configuration of intra- and inter-specific genetic diversity requires further investigation.

the present study also underlines the importance of periglacial areas for the survival of species during glacial periods of the quaternary. the pre-pyrenees range, is recognised as an important glacial refuge where many animal and plant species survived during cold episodes
 <cit> . previous studies focused on the alps have also recognised the importance of marginal and peripheral areas at lower altitudes with warmer climates as refugia for mountain species, where their present-day distribution were almost entirely glaciated reviewed in
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
our results do not support connections between the antirrhinum populations of the alps and those of the pyrenees. instead, the analyses agree with ancient connection with iberia followed by persistence of antirrhinum populations in the pyrenees, at least since late pleistocene times. the three pyrenean sections  have different colonisation histories. the western pyrenean populations are closely related to the central populations, which is here interpreted as evidence for a recent westward colonisation . it is likely that the central pre-pyrenees played an important role in the maintenance of the genetic diversity of antirrhinum by providing suitable conditions for the establishment of probably separate refugial populations during glacial periods. a significant influx of migrants from adjacent refugia  during the interglacial and postglacial periods would account for the genetic diversity found in the central pyrenees. however, the current genetic structure of antirrhinum in the eastern pyrenees appears to have been shaped by range expansion, which was probably preceded by range contraction at the southernmost edge of this area, from where little gene flow may have occurred into the central pyrenees over several glacial cycles. according to this, the eastern pre-pyrenees also appear to have been a refugial area, although less important than the central pre-pyrenees, from where antirrhinum colonisation southern france.

