BACKGROUND
last decade of experimental work using genomic technologies has provided many data on gene expression profiling of different biological and pathological states  <cit> . this great effort in biomedical research has lead to a large need for tools and strategies that allow clinicians to translate the genome-wide expression data into useful information, such as transparent and robust signatures to characterize and distinguish multiple pathological subtypes  <cit> . there are many machine learning and computational procedures that can be applied to build classification systems that allow identifying the type or category of query samples whose class is not-known a priori  <cit> . however, a common problem of these methods is that they often do not reveal any information about the genes that are selected as variables for the classification process  <cit> . although obtaining an efficient classifier might seem enough in some cases, there is a clear loss of biological information if the value or power of the chosen genes is not translated into parameters that allow to characterize and rank the genes.

many clinical and biomedical studies look for the separation between multiple disease subtypes as distinct pathological states, but they are also very interested in finding the specific genes that are altered in each disease subtype. to identify and quantify the power of such 'marking genes' is the only way by which machine learning techniques can bring back biological meaning to this kind of biomedical studies. moreover, gene products do not work in isolation as 'independent features', but rather interact with others in biomolecular networks to perform specific biological functions  <cit> . therefore, together with the identification of the genes that mark a disease, genome-wide studies of related biological states should also provide information about the associations between the affected genes  <cit> .

following these questions we have developed a bioinformatic approach to provide gene-based analysis and characterization of different diseases and construction of associated gene networks using expression profiles derived from experimental transcriptomic data. the approach integrates established statistical and machine learning methods into a single tool that allows to  identify the set of genes that are specifically altered in a disease when a collection of several diseases  are studied and compared together using genome-wide expression profiling;  obtain a minimum subset of these genes that enable to differentiate each disease subtype from the other;  provide information about how relevant each of these genes is for discriminating each studied class; and  find associations between the genes based on the analysis of the experimental expression profiles. this tool has been implemented in an r/bioconductor package named genetclassifier . in order to validate the tool as a whole and prove whether the results it provides have biological and functional meaning, here we present its application to two independent genome-wide expression datasets of human samples isolated from individuals with different subtypes of leukemia: one using high-density oligonucleotide microarrays and another using deep rna-sequencing.

RESULTS
finding genes associated to specific disease subtypes
the human gene landscape can be structured in functionally associated groups of genes which are specific to biological processes or states. since a disease will normally affect and alter one or several biological processes, we could depict a theoretical multidimensional "gene space" divided in regions that include genes associated to specific pathological states . the identification of these groups of genes is a great scientific endeavour for biomedical research, and some biological databases  have been built following the idea of a "gene-to-disease mapping", as it is known to happen in mendelian inherited diseases. in this theoretical scenario, the genes that are affected by a given disease can be overlapping with the ones affected by a similar pathological state. this will define genes that can be altered in multiple pathologies, but it will also define genes that are only affected by a specific malignancy when compared with other diseases.

considering the recognition of such theoretical gene-disease space , we apply expression profiling to find the genes that are altered in one specific disease subtype using differential expression analysis. to do so, we compare each disease category versus all the others using package ebarrays  <cit> , that implements an empirical bayes method  <cit> . this provides a posterior probability for each gene to be differentially expressed in one of the classes . sorting the genes by their probability allows to build a ranking of the genes ordered by their statistical significance . since each gene has a probability of differential expession per class, it is assigned to the class in which it has the best ranking. this allows to build non-overlapping gene lists that optimize the specificity and separation between classes. the posterior probability also allows to quantify the association of a gene with a class and identify how many genes are related to each class at a certain significance level.

constructing gene-based classifiers for multiple diseases
once the gene rankings have been established, the tool selects from the top of the list the minimum subset of genes required to identify each class. to achieve this, it uses a multiclass implementation  <cit>  of support vector machine , as a method that has been proven very efficient for classification of gene expression microarray datasets  <cit> . the svm is integrated into a wrapper forward selection scheme to test whether a selected subset of genes is actually enough to discriminate the classes  <cit> . several svm classifiers are iterativelly trained with an increasing number of genes taken from the ranked lists and evaluated through double nested cross-validation. the smallest subset of genes that provides the best performance is selected as feature set  and used to train and build a final classifier that will include all the available samples of the training set.

the classifier built for a given set of compared diseases can be used to query and identify new unlabeled samples. in addition, the classifier is analysed in order to obtain the discriminant power of the selected genes . each gene's discriminant power is a quantitative parameter that resembles the value of such gene in class differentiation. therefore, a high discriminant power  indicates that the gene is useful to mark and identify samples from its assigned class. full description of this parameter is provided in methods section.

building networks of genes associated to diseases
to infer possible associations between the genes assigned to each disease, genetclassifier calculates gene-to-gene correlation and mutual information  <cit>  in the expression dataset. this allows to identify possible relations of co-expression between the genes and possible relations of mutual redundancy. the detected associations are integrated in a network that also includes parameters derived from the differential expression analysis and from the classification analysis. since networks are built for each class, they provide an integrative view of the gene sets associated to each disease in a relational characterized context. examples of these networks are presented in the case studies in the following sections.

using genetclassifier: analysis of a leukemia dataset
we have applied genetclassifier to a dataset of genome-wide expression microarrays of samples from leukemia, as a well known disease that allows to test the tool in a real case study and confirm the biological relevance of the results. this dataset includes  <dig> microarray samples from bone marrow of patients of four major leukemia subtypes  plus non-leukemia controls , making a total of  <dig> distinct classes.

the first result that genetclassiffier provides is the set of rank-ordered lists of genes selected for each class, being the top genes the ones most significantly associated with each disease . the resulting lists of genes-per-disease do not overlap, in this way the method is optimized to find specific markers of each compared disease. the number of genes associated to each disease for a common threshold of significance is quite different from one class to another . this observation seems to indicate that some diseases can affect more genes than others according to their comparative changes in the global expression profiles. these sizes do not represent the absolute number of genes each disease affects, but rather the genes that are only affected by each disease in the specific contrast. in any case, this phenomenological consideration supports the proposed hypothesis of a gene-disease space, where different diseases affect different number of genes.

after the classification process the minimun subset of genes that allow the best class separation were selected:  <dig> genes for all,  <dig> for aml,  <dig> for cll, and  <dig> for cml .

external validation and performance of genetclassifier
once the classifier for leukemias was built, an external validation was conducted to evaluate the accuracy and performance of the algorithm and to confirm the robustness of the genes selected as markers of the corresponding classes  <cit> .

an external validation consists on querying the classification system with an independent set of samples whose class is a priori known. we used a different set of  <dig> samples of the same five classes . sensitivity, specificity, mcc, global accuracy and global call rate were calculated to evaluate the performance. these statistical parameters were estimated in  <dig> runs of external validation randomly splitting the available samples.

the external validation could be performed following two different approaches:  assigning all the samples to their most likely class or  leaving doubtful samples as not-assigned. .

when the not-assigned option was selected, the external validation done with  <dig> leukemia samples provided an average of  <dig> misclassifications per run . all other samples were either correctly assigned or left unclassified , resulting in an average global accuracy of 98% and average call rate of 92% . by contrast, since most samples that would have been incorrectly assigned had a probability under the thresholds , the accuracy when all samples were forced to be assigned to their most likely class was  <dig> %.

in overall, the external validation for the leukemias showed that the best performance  was obtained for all and cll , while nk-aml presented the lowest values . difficulties in the identification and classification of nk-amls were already described in a large-scale international leukemia study where the rate of misclassification for this specific subtype was  <dig> %  <cit> . in conclusion, the classification accuracy rates provided by genetclassifier confirms that the genes sets selected for each class can be good markers of the analysed disease subtypes.

genes and networks associated to each leukemia subtype
the gene networks produced for each leukemia subtype are presented in figure  <dig>  the plots include the top- <dig> genes selected for each class as characteristic markers of each leukemia subtype.

several of these genes have been already reported as functionally associated to these diseases. for example, in the case of all, the gene vpreb <dig> -that is the first gene in all ranking-encodes a protein that belongs to the immunoglobulin superfamily and is expressed selectively at the early stages of b lymphocytes development . this gene has already been proposed as a useful marker for the detection of normal and malignant human pre-b lymphocytes  <cit> . since all all samples included in this study correspond to pre-b-all without t, the selection of vpreb <dig> seems quite adequate. another gene selected to mark all is dntt. the protein encoded by dntt is expressed in a restricted population of normal and malignant pre-b and pre-t lymphocytes during early differentiation.

in the case of the genes selected for nk-aml, the network shows a cluster of homeobox genes . the co-expression of these genes detected in the dataset reveals that they are coregulated. meis <dig> is a transcriptional regulator also included in the homeobox co-expression cluster and selected as one of the genes with best discriminant power for the nk-aml class. two recent publications have reported that downregulation of meis <dig> and hoxa genes impair proliferation and expansion of acute myeloid leukemia cells  <cit> . moreover, hoxa has a specific translocation event that has been associated with myeloid leukemogenesis, and overexpression of hoxa <dig> has been shown as representitative of nk-aml patients during first diagnosis and if they suffer relapse  <cit> . these and other reports support the selection of meis <dig> and hoxa <dig> in the gene network that characterizes aml with normal karyotype  <cit> . another gene related to aml is angpt <dig>  that encodes protein angiopoietin  <dig>  angiopoietins are proteins with important roles in vascular development and angiogenesis which have also been identified as over expressed in bone marrow of aml patients  <cit> .

finally, the gene network produced for cml includes characteristic genes such as prg <dig>  that encodes for eosinophil major basic protein  <dig>  which is specific of eosinophil granulocytes, a myeloid cell type. moreover, it has been shown that many molecules essential for tumor cell growth  enter cells via a proteoglycan-dependent pathway that involves prg <dig>  <cit> . all these published reports do not prove that the genes included in the networks for each leukemia subtype are essential for the development of such diseases. however, they give important support to the results and underline the value of the method for creating significant gene sets and gene networks associated to specific disease subtypes.

application of genetclassifier to an rna-seq dataset
genetclassifier can be applied to different types of genomic data produced with different platforms. we have also applied it to an rna-seq dataset of acute leukemia samples  <cit>  from which we selected  <dig> samples from patients with two aml subtypes:   <dig> samples of patients with t chromosomal translocation characteristic of acute promyelocytic leukemia , and   <dig> samples of aml patients with normal karyotype and no detected fish abnormalities . apl is an aml subtype that has good clinical prognosis. its sensitivity to all-trans retinoic acid  allows an efficient treatment unique among leukemias. by contrast, nk-aml is one of the most frequent subtypes of aml  and usually has a poor clinical prognosis due to the lack of an efficient treatment  <cit> . out of these two aml subtypes, nk-aml was also present in the previous microarray dataset analysed. this allows us to investigate the performance of the algorithm studying a common disease subtype in a different context and using a different type of expression data.

genetclassifier was applied to the rna-seq dataset of apls and nk-amls using  <dig> samples from each class as training samples and then validated with the rest of the samples. we repeated this process  <dig> times randomly selecting the training samples. the global accuracy obtained in this analysis was 100% with a call rate of  <dig> %. the list of genes most frequently selected for classification  included several homeobox genes  and meis <dig>  showing agreement with the results obtained for nk-aml in the microarray analysis. in this way, the expression profiles from these genes in the rna-seq dataset are consistent with the results obtained with the array dataset, e.g.: genes hoxa <dig> and meis <dig> were down regulated in apl in comparison to nk-aml . in addition, the network generated for nk-aml selected a set of homeobox genes that form a highly connected co-expression cluster . other genes detected in this analysis, for example meg <dig>  showed over-expression in apl versus nk-aml . in fact, it has been reported that meg <dig> expression is lost in multiple cancer cell lines of various tissue origins and it inhibits tumor cell proliferation in vitro. the identification of meg <dig> as marker over-expressed in the aml subtype with better prognosis  provides support to the selection of this gene as a discriminant feature between apl and nk-aml.

finally, to have a better estimation of the global agreement provided by the algorithm in the analysis of the genes assigned to a given disease subtype, we analysed the total overlapping of the genes selected for nk-aml in the arrays dataset and the rna-seq dataset. both platforms included a common set of  <dig>  human protein-coding genes. within this set, the number of significant genes selected for nk-aml were  <dig> . the rna-seq results included  <dig> of these genes , and  <dig> of them were selected in more than three runs. an overlap of  <dig> genes corresponds to an odds ratio of  <dig>  and to an enrichment p-value <  <dig>  . therefore, it can be said that the consistency of the method to select genes that mark a specific disease subtype is high.

comparison of genetclassifier with other methods
finally, we have evaluated the performance of genetclassifier relative to other gene selection and classification methodologies. we compared genetclassifier with four machine learning methods for feature selection using cma package  <cit> , which provides a comprehensive collection of various microarray-based classification algorithms . we have also evaluated the classification procedure of genetclassifier using svb-improver contest platform  <cit> , which includes a diagnostic signature challenge with several datasets to assess and verify computational approaches that classify clinical samples based on transcriptomics data . in both cases, the performance of genetclassifier algorithm is within the best methods. however, it should be noted that we could only compare the classification and gene selection procedures. the other features included in our package could not be found integrated in other methods.

CONCLUSIONS
biological annotation of the genes selected and the networks built to mark and separate different pathological states confirm the value of using genetclassifier to analyse multiple disease subtypes based on genome-wide expression profiles. the tool is provided open access in bioconductor to facilitate the type of studies illustrated in this report.

as a general conclusion, the results using genetclassifier showed a robust selection of gene markers for characterizing disease subtypes and allowed the construction of specific and weighted gene networks associated to each disease subtype. the method can be applied to data derived from different types of technologies  and it is designed to analyse datasets with multiple categories of samples.

