BACKGROUND
the apc protein plays a pivotal role in wnt signal transduction, has been suggested to have important functions in cell migration and mitosis, and apc mutation is a crucial early event in the development of most colorectal cancers  <cit> . the intracellular localization of apc has long been the subject of close scrutiny, with a number of distributions having been described in a variety of experimental systems . two mammalian apc distributions have previously been described as populations found at peripheral cellular sites. the first of these to be identified and widely accepted consists of apc clusters that localize to specific cortical sites in a microtubule-dependent manner  <cit> . support for this distribution has been presented in studies examining the behavior of xenopus apc-gfp fusion proteins in living cells  <cit> . in addition, an analogous localization to the plus-ends of microtubules close to the basolateral surface of highly polarized epithelial cells has been shown  <cit> . evidence for a second peripheral pool of apc in the form of an actin-dependent localization to membranes involved in cell-cell adhesion has been found by immunostaining studies  <cit>  although the validity of this has been questioned  <cit> . nevertheless, evidence that potentially supports a functional role for apc at cell junctions has recently been presented. in human cells, restoration of expression of full-length apc in a colorectal cancer cell line has been shown to promote cell-cell adhesion  <cit>  while in drosophila the apc homologue e-apc has been shown to associate with and play a role in maintaining the integrity of epithelial cell junctions, a localization mediated by its armadillo repeats  <cit> .

to date the great majority of information about the distribution of full-length mammalian apc has been based upon immunostaining studies in fixed cells. since recent work has raised questions about apc antibody specificity  <cit> , confirmation of these different apc distributions by other means is clearly desirable. while some data on gfp-apc expression in cos- <dig> cells has been previously published  <cit> , this work concentrated on a purely microtubule-associated gfp-apc localization in subconfluent populations of cells and the gfp-apc construct used in the study lacked the n-terminal region of the protein. at present the dynamic behavior of a junctional apc population in live mammalian cells, if such a population exists, has not been addressed.

in this study we investigated the intracellular distribution of apc using live imaging of human gfp-apc fusion proteins in mammalian cells. our study confirms previous work showing that gfp-apc can be localized within the cell in a microtubule-dependent and highly dynamic manner. however, we show for the first time that human gfp-apc can remain associated with shrinking as well as growing microtubule tips. we also confirm that human gfp-apc is localized to sites of cell-cell adhesion in an actin-dependent way in confluent populations of cells. to our knowledge this is the first time that this actin associated gfp-apc population has been imaged in living mammalian cells.

RESULTS
direct observation of microtubule and cell junction associated gfp-apc in living cells
to date, a junctional association for mammalian apc has only been observed using immunofluorescence microscopy. immunostaining studies of apc distribution are open to criticisms concerning antibody specificity and fixation artefacts and are unable to yield data about the dynamic behaviour of the protein. previous attempts to examine this localisation using gfp fusion proteins were hampered by the toxic side effects associated with the expression of full-length apc in mammalian cells  <cit> . to address this issue and to further define the subcellular distribution of apc we attempted to examine the distribution of a gfp-apc fusion protein in a variety of mammalian cell lines. in most of these transfection efficiencies were low and gfp-apc expression was poorly tolerated. however, our data indicated that cos- <dig> cells represented a system in which good transfection efficiencies could be achieved and expression levels suitable for imaging were tolerated without obvious short-term effects upon cell morphology or viability. however, since cos- <dig> cells are not epithelial in origin, we first confirmed that they expressed apc  and that the endogenous apc in confluent cos- <dig> cells was localised to the cell cortex along with the known junctional proteins cadherin , β-catenin , and actin . cos- <dig> cells were found to possess full-length apc protein and this endogenous apc was found to be closely associated with junctional proteins, confirming that these cells do indeed form junctions when confluent. we were therefore confident that we could use this cell line to study dynamic microtubule-associated, as well as junction-associated localisations of our gfp-apc constructs. the integrity of gfp-apc constructs used for localisation studies in cos- <dig> were confirmed by immunoprecipitation, sds-page and western blotting of transfected cell extracts . the largest of these fusion proteins , consisting of full-length gfp-apc and minimal deletion mutants, are indistinguishable by band locations on western blots with the gel and blotting systems used in this study because of their large size.

a variety of gfp-apc distributions could be observed in cos- <dig> cells using time-lapse fluorescence microscopy, all consistent with either previous immunostaining studies or known interactions of mammalian apc, suggesting that our gfp-apc imaging was a good reflection of endogenous apc behaviour. the first was an association with microtubule tips at specific regions near the cell periphery ; additional file 1). this consisted of labelling of microtubule distal segments and the presence of discrete gfp-apc puncta or clusters on or just behind the microtubule tip. cells expressing gfp-apc were co-stained with anti-α-tubulin, confirming that the gfp-apc clusters were indeed microtubule associated . gfp-apc puncta on the end of these microtubules were observed to move at speeds consistent with microtubule growth . as previously shown by workers using xenopus gfp-apc, gfp-apc puncta located behind the microtubule tip underwent anterograde movement towards the tip  <cit> . peripheral deposition of gfp-apc puncta by shrinking microtubules could also be observed . these observations closely resembled both previous reports of apc distribution based upon immunostaining .

however, we noted in cos- <dig> cells that peripheral gfp-apc puncta on microtubule ends frequently underwent retrograde linear movements with average velocities of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min ; additional file 3). typically this movement occurred over distances of less than  <dig> μm. in some cases portions of an original puncta were deposited within the cytoplasm while the remainder continued retrograde movement on the microtubule end . we also noted that the depolymerising microtubules tipped by gfp-apc puncta could undergo pause and then re-growth with the puncta of gfp-apc still attached . interestingly, close examination of sequences such as additional file  <dig> indicates that separate gfp-apc puncta decorating the distal segment of a microtubule are swept up into a single tip-associated structure as the microtubule shrinks but re-separate into a string of beads-like distribution during microtubule regrowth, before finally beginning to re-coalesce into a single structure at the tip of paused microtubules near the cell membrane. the behaviour of gfp-apc at microtubule distal tips is clearly therefore very complex. retrograde trafficking of gfp-apc was not documented in previous studies  <cit> . furthermore, these movements seem likely to represent puncta associated with shrinking microtubule tips and not with growing tips looping back from the cell edge or retrograde transport of gfp-apc puncta along microtubules since the microtubule distal segment could clearly be identified by gfp-apc labelling in many cases. we therefore conclude that mammalian apc can remain associated with shrinking microtubule tips at the cell periphery, a novel observation for this protein.

these observations represented the major gfp-apc distribution in cells imaged in subconfluent cultures although other minor localisations were also seen. gfp-apc was occasionally observed at structures resembling the centrosome . this localisation was confirmed in fixed cos- <dig> cells expressing gfp-apc co-stained with γ-tubulin . a centrosomal localisation for apc was recently examined in detail by other investigators  <cit> . in less than 5% of cells a motile comet-like distribution within the cell interior was seen . these comets moved with an average velocity of  <dig>  ±  <dig> μm/min . this was essentially indistinguishable from the distribution and behaviour observed for the microtubule tip-tracking apc ligands eb <dig> and eb <dig> when expressed as gfp fusion proteins in cos- <dig> cells . gfp-apc expressing cos- <dig> cells fixed and co-stained for eb <dig> showed that the gfp-apc comets did indeed co-localise with eb <dig> staining at the end of microtubules . finally, gfp-apc puncta were occasionally observed in the cell interior . over the time course of imaging these were either immobile or underwent rapid translocations at peak speeds consistent with microtubule motor-mediated transport . previous reports have described an interaction between apc and kinesin-associated transport complexes  <cit>  that could explain this behaviour.

in cultures that were seeded and transfected to be largely confluent during imaging a further gfp-apc distribution was seen. this consisted of a discontinuous array of punctate structures associated with peripheral membranes contacting other cells . this junctional localisation was confirmed by co-immunostaining for β-catenin  and actin , both of which confirmed that gfp-apc was closely associated  with junctional proteins at the cortex. in comparison with the microtubule-associated gfp-apc distributions these cortical structures were far less dynamic. tracking analysis indicated that they moved with an average velocity of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  μm/min . this movement appeared to directly correlate with remodelling of the cell periphery during long-term changes in cell shape, indicating that these structures were essentially immobile relative to the cell cortex.

the junctional gfp-apc localisation was dominant in cells having extensive contacts with neighbouring cells, particularly those in densely confluent regions of an imaging dish. however, in regions of lower cell density we observed that both the microtubule and cell junction-associated gfp-apc distributions could be found in different regions of the same cell . the junctional population seen in these cells was unlikely to represent an overexpression artefact since it was present at low gfp-apc fluorescence intensities and no phenomena indicative of apc overexpression were seen . observation of cells with both junctional- and microtubule-associated gfp-apc confirmed the very different dynamic behaviours of these protein populations. the microtubule-associated gfp-apc localisation was restricted to free cell edges and cell vertices and was highly motile whereas the junctional localisation was only present at sites of cell-cell contact and was essentially immobile. dynamic gfp-apc microtubule-associated clusters were not seen in the vicinity of cell junctions, although when present the eb1-like localisation to growing microtubule distal tips was. we therefore suggest that the two gfp-apc populations might reflect the localised regulation of apc interactions in specific cellular regions.

previous reports have shown that microtubules can be resistant to nocodazole treatment in cells overexpressing microtubule-associated gfp-apc  <cit> . in order to test the effect of nocodazole on transfected cos- <dig> cells possessing cortical and microtubule-associated gfp-apc we first incubated cells with  <dig> μg/ml nocodazole for  <dig> hour . we noted that even after a one-hour incubation cells containing a small number of stable microtubules could be found . in transfected cells these remnant microtubules were decorated with gfp-apc . however, cortical apc could be clearly distinguished at the cell cortex in the absence of microtubules and appeared unaffected by nocodazole treatment . we next examined the effects of microtubule depolymerisation on gfp-apc-cortical localisations in living cells. figure  <dig>  panels d-g and additional file  <dig> shows a cell in which both junctional  and microtubule  gfp-apc populations are present. at the beginning of the recording nocodazole was added to a final concentration of  <dig> μg/ml. as previously reported by other investigators  <cit> , the gfp-apc localization to microtubule distal tips was rapidly lost and the cortical clusters at microtubule ends gradually dispersed. however, the behaviour and intensity of junctional gfp-apc was unaffected by nocodazole, even in subsequent experiments where the drug concentration was raised to  <dig> μg/ml for  <dig> min . we conclude that the junctional association of gfp-apc is independent of microtubules. we next wanted to study the response of junctional gfp-apc to treatment with the actin depolymerising drug cytochalasin d. preliminary experiments with this drug at standard experimental concentrations of  <dig> μg/ml led to rapid cell rounding . this made it impossible to study the effects of cytochalasin d on cortical gfp-apc dynamics in these cells. we therefore decided to use low concentrations  of drug in order to study the effect of gradual, but not total, loss of cortical actin in cos- <dig> cells. treatment of cos- <dig> cells expressing a gfp-actin construct  <cit>  confirmed that at low concentrations cytochalasin d perturbed actin integrity at the cell cortex in a stereotypical way. figure  <dig>  panels a-d, and additional file  <dig> show a gfp-actin expressing cos- <dig> cell treated with  <dig> μg/ml cytochalasin d. at the beginning of the experiment the cell possesses a cortical actin belt around the cell periphery. over the time course of the experiment this cortical belt can be seen to weaken and break at points within the cell , these breakages lead to the contraction of the cortical actin belt along cell edges and the accumulation of actin at cell vertices. we next examined the results of low-level cytochalasin d treatment in gfp-apc expressing cells. the results of a typical experiment are shown in figure  <dig>  panels e-h, and additional file  <dig>  the cell of interest in this sequence has both cortical- and microtubule-associated gfp-apc. the earliest response, beginning around  <dig> min after drug addition, was a slow contraction of the whole cell; this was followed by breakage of the cell-cell contacts  and the contraction of the gfp-apc puncta along the cell edge . this data closely resembled the effects of cytochalasin d on the junction-associated cortical actin ribbon in cos- <dig> cells expressing gfp-actin . when confluent gfp-apc expressing cos- <dig> cells were treated with  <dig> μg/ml cytochalasin d for  <dig> min before fixation and staining with phalloidin an association of gfp-apc with both cytoplasmic actin aggregates  and cortical actin  was seen, confirming that the distribution of gfp-apc was closely linked to that of actin in these cells. these drug experiments lead us to conclude that in transfected cos- <dig> cells two spatially separate populations of gfp-apc exist at the cell periphery and can co-exist in the same cell. the first is highly dynamic and associated with microtubules near free edges and cell vertices, while the second is comparatively static and is closely associated with actin at sites of cell-cell contact.

deletion analysis of the apc-cell junction association
to further define the domain in apc responsible for mediating its junctional localisation we made a number of gfp-apc deletion constructs for analysis in cos- <dig> cells. it seemed possible that the junctional localisation of apc cells could be mediated by an interaction with the junctional protein discs large , a known ligand of apc  <cit> . this interaction requires the extreme c-terminus of the apc molecule. we therefore made a construct, pegfp-apcΔc , which directed the expression of full-length gfp-apc lacking its final 54aa. apc also dimerises using heptad repeats at the n-terminus of the protein and deletion of the first  <dig> amino acids of apc prevents this  <cit> . since any construct made by us might potentially be able to localize to junctions by interacting with endogenous apc, we therefore made a second construct, pegfp-apcΔnΔc . this directed the expression of gfp-apc lacking both its final 54aa and first 207aa, which would both abolish dlg binding and prevent dimerisation. expression of these constructs in transfected cells was confirmed by western blotting . in transfected cos- <dig> cells examined by time-lapse fluorescence microscopy the distribution of both of these fusion proteins closely resembled that of full-length gfp-apc, with the full range of both microtubule associated  and junctional apc localisations observed . this indicated that dlg binding was not required to recruit apc to the cortex in cos- <dig> cells and suggested that apc dimerisation was also unnecessary. a third construct, pegfp-apc-c <dig> , drives the expression of a protein consisting of the last  <dig> amino acids of apc fused n-terminally to egfp and would be predicted to interact with dlg. it showed a diffuse cytoplasmic localization within transfected cells , suggesting that a dlg interaction alone is insufficient for apc targeting to junctions in cos- <dig> cells. the final construct we examined, pegfp-apc-n , directed the expression of a gfp-apc molecule truncated just after its armadillo repeat motifs. this construct showed three distinct localizations within the cell. the first was to the centrosome , confirmed by co-immunostaining of transfected cells for the centrosomal marker γ-tubulin . this observation confirms previous studies indicating a centrosomal localization for truncated apc proteins  <cit> . the second localization was to small, sometimes motile puncta within the cytoplasm . as noted above, the armadillo repeat region of apc has been shown to mediate an association with kinesin  <cit> . this association may potentially mediate this localization, but confirming this hypothesis was beyond the scope of the present study. the third localization was to sites of cell-cell contact in a distribution that resembled that previously seen with the full-length gfp-apc protein , confirmed by co-immunostaining for β-catenin  and to microtubules  in a manner similar to that previously seen for gfp-apc. panel c. the short c-terminal fragment gfp-apc-c <dig> has a cytoplasmic localization similar to that seen with gfp alone . panel d. gfp-apc-n localizes to the centrosome , cytoplasmic puncta and the cortex . panels e-g. gfp-apc-n expressing cells co-immunostained for the centrosomal marker γ-tubulin show gfp-apc-n localises to the centrosome . gfp-apc-n green, γ-tubulin red, panel g is a merged image. panels h-j. gfp-apc-n expressing cells co-immunostained for β-catenin confirm the gfp-apc-n junctional localisation . gfp-apc-n green, β-catenin red. panel j is a merged image. bars =  <dig> μm.

our data indicated that c-terminally truncated gfp-apc molecules retained an ability to associate with sites of cell-cell contact in transfected cells. the pegfp-apc-n  construct used in this study is similar to some of the more extremely truncated apc proteins expressed in colorectal cancer cells. our observations might therefore predict that mutant apc should also localise to sites of cell-cell adhesion in cancer cells, as long as these cells were capable of assembling functional intercellular junctions. we therefore looked for colon cancer cell lines containing similar truncations to our pgfp-apc-n construct. the cell line colo <dig> expresses an apc protein truncated at amino acid  <dig>  unfortunately however, this cell line displays very poor cell-cell adhesion so it was not possible to look at an apc junctional localisation in this cell type. we therefore examined the distribution of endogenous apc in the human colorectal tumour cell lines caco- <dig> and sw <dig>  caco- <dig> cells possess one mutant copy of apc and express a protein truncated at amino acid  <dig>  these cells form adhesive junctions and although the truncated apc protein is longer than our minimal construct the question of whether c-terminally truncated apc proteins could localise to the cortex could still be addressed. the polyclonal m-apc antibody and the monoclonal antibody ali12- <dig> would both be predicted to recognise the truncated apc protein. unlike a previous report  <cit> , we found that truncated apc localized to sites of cell-cell adhesion in caco- <dig> cells following immunostaining with the polyclonal m-apc antibody  or the monoclonal ali-12- <dig> antibody , but not with monoclonal antibodies specific for the apc c-terminus . cells were also co-stained for actin to confirm the presence of adhesive junctions in the confluent cultures . the colon cancer cell line sw <dig>  containing an apc protein truncated at amino acid  <dig>  produced similar results to those seen with caco- <dig> cells .

discussion
in this study we have confirmed that apc can be found at sites of cell-cell contact in mammalian cells by live imaging of gfp-apc fusion proteins. recently, other workers have presented an examination of gfp-apc dynamic behaviour in transfected cos- <dig> cells  <cit>  but did not report findings similar to those presented here. the reasons for this are unclear. although the gfp-apc construct used in the previous study contained a short n-terminal deletion our data indicates that this would not have precluded the observation of a junctional apc population . however, we note that the authors of this previous study were primarily focused upon defining the behaviour of gfp-apc decorated microtubules at peripheral sites rather than examining the possibility of a gfp-apc pool at cell junctions. they may not therefore have examined gfp-apc expressing cells in confluent cell cultures. similarly, we are unable to conclusively explain why previous attempts at mapping the minimal region required for the gfp-apc junctional localisation were unsuccessful and led to the hypothesis that only full-length apc could achieve this distribution  <cit> . we suspect, however, that difficulties similar to those we experienced in attempting to image gfp-apc in cell types other than cos- <dig> were a major contributory factor to this.

in addition to the microtubule-associated gfp-apc localisations found by other workers we identified an association of gfp-apc puncta with shrinking microtubule tips in transfected cos- <dig> cells . apc is known to promote microtubule stability and assembly both in vitro and in vivo  <cit>  and as such we might have expected it to be found only on polymerising microtubule tips. the presence of gfp-apc puncta on depolymerising tips would suggest that additional proteins involved in microtubule dynamics might regulate the effects of apc on microtubule plus-end dynamics. for example, the presence of a destabilizing factor on a microtubule tip, such as the kin i kinesin mcak  <cit> , might override the normal stabilising ability of apc. however, if the destabilising factor is inactivated on the microtubule, any tip-associated apc could then re-promote microtubule stability and growth. that xenopus apc has recently been shown to associate with mcak raises the interesting possibility that apc might form part of a microtubule plus-end complex responsible for the general control of microtubule behaviour in specific regions of the cell periphery  <cit> .

the mechanism by which apc associates with actin at cell junctions remains unclear. an interaction between apc and the mammalian homologue of the drosophila discs large protein has been proposed to be responsible for the localization of apc to neuronal synapses  <cit> , structures that can be regarded as a specialised form of cadherin-based cell-cell adhesion. however, we found that this interaction was not essential for localising apc to sites of cell-cell contact in cos- <dig> cells although an interaction between apc and dlg at the cortex once both proteins have been recruited there cannot be ruled out. instead, our data indicated that a truncated apc containing only the heptad and armadillo repeat domains of the protein was capable of localizing to junctions.

we therefore propose that the n-terminal region of the apc protein mediates its localization to the cortex. we speculate that the armadillo repeat regions of apc mediate this localisation since we also noted that a larger construct lacking a number of the heptad repeats remained capable of localising to adhesive membranes . however, further work needs to be carried out to directly confirm this. this may be complicated by the observation that a number of potential binding partners exist for the n-terminal region of apc, particularly the armadillo repeat domain. these include the kinesin-associated protein kap <dig>  the rac effector asef and the cdc <dig> activator iqgap <dig>  <cit> . any of these could plausibly mediate an apc junctional localisation, as could an interaction with an as yet unidentified binding partner for this region of apc. notably, the drosophila e-apc protein has also been shown to localise to sites of cell-cell adhesion via its armadillo repeats  <cit> . mislocalization of e-apc leads to the disruption or impairment of intercellular adhesion, implicating e-apc in the regulation of cell contacts in drosophila. in the light of our study and recent observations by other investigators  <cit>  it seems possible that apc might play a similar role in mammalian epithelial tissues.

our observations of cells where both junctional and microtubule-associated gfp-apc populations were present indicated that these different pools did not spatially overlap. the question of how this might be achieved has parallels with a long-standing problem in apc biology: how is apc targeted to the tips of a subset of microtubule ends at specific sites at the cell periphery? recent work from other investigators has indicated that an apc localisation to microtubule ends near free cell edges arises from a cdc42-initiated signalling cascade that results in a local inhibition of gsk3β activity  <cit> . phosphorylation by gsk3β inhibits the microtubule-binding ability of apc  <cit> . therefore, local inhibition of the activity of this enzyme promotes the association of apc with microtubules in specific cellular regions where cdc <dig> is active. implicit in this model is the assumption that gsk3β activity elsewhere in the cell normally suppresses the association of apc with microtubules. if this model is combined with the observation that apc can localise to cell junctions when they are available then a plausible mechanism for generating the compartmentalisation seen in our study can be formulated.

CONCLUSIONS
in this study we show that apc is capable to localising to both microtubules and to junctions within the cell, depending on cellular context. the junctional localisation is likely to be mediated by the n-terminal region of the apc protein. consistent with this we find that colon cancer cell lines expressing truncated apc proteins are also capable of localising to the cortex in cells having the necessary cell-cell contacts. as well as losing function within the wnt signalling pathway, it seems possible that truncated apc proteins might act as dominant-negative mutants in cells that retain a normal copy of the apc protein, with the mutant copy interfering with the action of full-length apc molecules at intercellular junctions. this may have direct implications for the development of colorectal cancer.

