BACKGROUND
staphylococcus aureus is a pathogenic gram-positive bacterium that causes a variety of disease conditions, some life-threatening, both in hospital settings and in the community at large. moreover, various strains of this organism have evolved resistance to some of the most clinically useful antibiotics, including methicillin and vancomycin <cit> . although the mechanisms of antibiotic resistance and infection have been elucidated, there is little published information regarding the basic and systemic biochemical function of s. aureus, especially under carefully controlled environmental conditions in chemically-defined media. while some research has been performed towards this goal <cit> , its scope and extent does not compare to the research undertaken for better-studied model organisms. in fact, the annotated genome sequence of a strain of s. aureus contains much more readily-available specific information regarding the organism's metabolism than does a compilation of literature data <cit> .

the annotated genome of a microorganism, in conjunction with biochemical and physiological data, can be used to reconstruct the metabolic network of that organism <cit> . such reconstructed networks consist of a set of chemical reactions that together comprise the known metabolic transformations that take place in a particular organism. these networks are at the genome-scale when all or most of the genes with known metabolic function are included in the network reconstruction. these network reconstructions convey the interactions between cellular components identified from the sequence annotation, and thus reconstructions can be thought of as two-dimensional annotation of the genome <cit> .

genome-scale reconstructions  represent a biochemically and genetically structured database that can be queried and interrogated using in silico analytical methods <cit> . with the imposition of appropriate constraints on the reactions in the genre, including their exact stoichiometry and reversibility, a genome-scale model  is formulated. gems reflect allowable network states, or phenotypes of a cell, by defining a range of permissible solutions consistent with its mathematical representation <cit> . this range of allowable states can be searched for the 'best' growth rates using linear programming methods, and the results from such computations are close to experimental observations  <cit> .

gems using the constraint-based modeling formalism have been constructed for a number of microorganisms, including escherichia coli <cit> , saccharomyces cerevisiae <cit> , methylobacterium extorquens  <cit> , mannheimia succiniciproducens <cit> , helicobacter pylori <cit>  and haemophilus influenzae <cit> , and reconstructed networks for human cells are beginning to appear <cit> . gems are amenable to a wide variety of analysis techniques, yielding a number of interesting results, as recently reviewed <cit> . importantly, genres are two-dimensional annotations, are portable, and can be used for computations by different laboratories. in particular, the genres for e. coli and s. cerevisiae have been analyzed by groups around the world . these analyses have led to several publications of general interest that focus on such diverse topics as the causes of enzyme dispensability <cit> , the reconfiguration of metabolism following the loss of a gene or enzyme function <cit> , and the distribution of metabolic fluxes in microorganisms <cit> .

gems do not only give valuable computational results, but they also provide a wealth of hypotheses that can be experimentally tested <cit> . the generation of easily testable hypothesis by biological models permits model validation and improvement through iterative model building <cit> . when the predictions made by a model do not agree with experimental observations, the knowledge that went into the model construction is clearly not complete regarding the area of disagreement. importantly, an in silico model allows us to identify areas where our understanding of an organism is inadequate and where additional experimentation is needed <cit> .

the work reported herein describes the first manually curated genome-scale elementally and charge balanced metabolic reconstruction and model for the important pathogen s. aureus, termed isb <dig> following a previously described naming convention <cit> , representing the first draft of its two-dimensional annotation <cit> . this genre allows for the formulation of hypothesis ranging from relative growth capabilities on different media to the outcome of potential gene deletion experiments. importantly, due to the curation and refinement necessary to form a functional gem for s. aureus, the work reported contains the most comprehensive metabolic reaction list available for this significant pathogen that is consistent with known phenotypic functions.

RESULTS
basic network properties
we have formulated a genre for s. aureus strain n <dig> consisting of  <dig> genes,  <dig> proteins,  <dig> reactions, and  <dig> metabolites. the entire reaction list of this genre is included in the supplemental material  and is also available at . a set of metabolic maps graphically representing the genre is also available at the same web address. this genre was built without the benefit of an earlier manually curated reconstruction and model and should be considered a first-draft to the two-dimensional annotation of the s. aureus genome. unlike other initial genres <cit> , the s. aureus genre is nearly completely elementally and charge balanced. all but three reactions produce no net change in terms of chemical elements and charge. of these three reactions, one  is never used because it is a dead-end , one  is a weighted combination of various fatty acids to form an average phosphatidate molecule for this organism, and one  participates in methionine and spermidine metabolism.

most of the reactions  in the genre are associated with one or more genes with only 9%  of the reactions included without a known gene. the reactions that do not have a gene association are principally transport reactions, allowing metabolites to cross the cell membrane, and reactions that involve the formation of lipids and other cell wall components . the inclusion of these reactions, as well as the reactions which we were able to associate with a gene despite their absence in the genome annotation , is a legacy-data based enhancement of genome-annotation based knowledge on the metabolism of s. aureus. we provide the most comprehensive reaction list to date, including reactions that were added based on systemic analysis  – the gem cannot produce biomass without them. all reactions that are associated with genes are also associated with proteins, and they are represented by what have been termed gene-protein-reaction  associations <cit> , which are available as boolean statements connecting genes to reactions in the supplementary material  and in graphical form at . basic properties of the reconstructed network are summarized in table  <dig> 

particularly because this is a first-pass reconstruction, the network has a significant number of dead-end metabolites, as other genres do <cit> . these dead-ends are compounds that are either only produced or only consumed by reactions in the network. three hypotheses exist regarding the presence of a dead-end metabolite in a reconstructed network:  other enzymes required to produce or consume the metabolite may be missing in the reconstruction,  the reaction that causes the dead-end may have been misidentified based on a homology search and may not actually occur in the organism, or  the dead-end may exist in organism. because the accumulation or depletion of any compound cannot occur in a steady-state, any reaction in the network involving any of these compounds cannot be used in a computed network state. in total,  <dig> reactions present in the reconstruction involve dead-end metabolites. all of these reactions have an associated gene and are included because of genetic evidence that they are present in s. aureus. subsequent additions to the model will likely close some of these gaps. these reactions are further detailed in the supplemental material .

a reaction representing biomass formation, consisting of  <dig> metabolites required for cellular growth, has been defined and is detailed comprehensively in the supplemental material . key components of this reaction include amino acids, nucleotides, lipids, and cell wall constituents. because data describing the biomass composition of s. aureus could not be located in the literature, data from bacillus subtilis was substituted where necessary <cit> ; quantitative data specific to s. aureus accounts for only a small fraction of the biomass function. although a comprehensive biomass function has been published for e. coli and used to analyze the networks of other initial reconstructions <cit> , this was not appropriate for s. aureus because of the differences between gram-positive and gram-negative bacteria. the relative quantities of each required metabolite were included in the biomass function when information existed, but many of the trace compounds were included in small ratios that are not quantitatively accurate. it has been shown previously that the calculated biomass production is relatively insensitive to the exact ratios used in the biomass function <cit> . the biomass function is a key element of the linear programming  formulation used for hypothesis generation because it allows for the computational prediction of growth.

minimal media and growth requirements
linear programming using the assumptions of flux-balance analysis  allows for the computation of feasible steady-state fluxes through a reaction network that maximize a particular objective and satisfy various constraints, including stoichiometry, thermodynamics, and enzyme capacity <cit> . specifically, we used fba to determine fluxes leading to optimal growth subject to constraints on the usage of each reaction. this principle allowed us to systematically predict a minimal media composition capable of supporting growth of s. aureus. a literature search revealed experimental growth requirements <cit>  for s. aureus and they are compared with the computational predictions . these requirements are for growth with oxygen, nitrate, or nitrite as a terminal electron acceptor. computationally, we predict that s. aureus can grow with a variety of carbon sources, and table  <dig> presents a glucose minimal medium because the available experimental data assumes that glucose is the carbon source. this table should be considered as a prediction of the growth requirements of s. aureus derived from its genre. although some of the components in the medium seem obvious, like phosphate and a carbon source, they still serve as validation for the gem. if we were to computationally predict that growth was possible in the absence of a carbon source, it would quickly become apparent that something was amiss with the gem. an agreement between the computationally-predicted and the experimentally-determined requirements indicates areas where simple model predictions are consistent with existing experimental data.

the primary difference between the computationally predicted growth requirements and those from experimental data is the amino acid requirement. kuroda et. al <cit>  report that the six amino acids listed in table  <dig> are specifically required for strain n <dig> to grow and speculate that, since the strain has pathways for the synthesis of all amino acids, regulation might require the presence of these amino acids. isb <dig> does not account for regulatory effects and as such predicts media requirements as if regulatory processes allow any gene to be expressed at the needed levels. the transcriptional regulatory network reduces the functionality of a constraint-based metabolic model by limiting which reactions are active at a given time <cit> . if enzymes required for the synthesis of a given amino acid are encoded in the genome, but are not sufficiently transcribed or translated due to regulatory processes, the cell will require that amino acid as a component of the medium even though a purely metabolic model indicates otherwise.

we experimentally predict growth if any one of the nine amino acids or derivatives listed in the table is provided. each of these compounds can either provide nitrogen through a deamination reaction or be directly converted into another compound that can provide nitrogen. s. aureus is said to require an organic source of nitrogen provided by amino acids <cit> , so the requirement of at least one amino acid is not surprising. it should be noted that the data from kuroda et al <cit>  listing six essential amino acids is "unpublished data" and thus this information should be viewed with some skepticism. furthermore, s. aureus has shown the ability to grow without amino acids previously thought to be required <cit> ; thus the amino acid requirement appears to be flexible. the differences in computationally-predicted and experimentally-determined essential amino acids highlight an area that has been historically under considered.

to explore the discrepancy between experimental results and computational predictions, we elected to study in silico the effect of adding each amino acid individually to the predicted minimal media listed . the individual results are shown in figure  <dig>  we found that, on average, providing one of amino acids noted as essential from experimental data led to more biomass production than providing one amino acid not listed as essential. using a wilcoxon rank sum test with matlab , these results are only  <dig> % likely to be the result of random chance. the relative biomass production that we predict should be taken as a hypothesis that can be tested experimentally. it is not unreasonable that a pathogen would have developed regulation that leads it to require the uptake of amino acids that significantly aid its growth, especially when they are readily available in its typical environment. in essence, we predict that s. aureus can grow more efficiently by uptaking certain amino acids rather than synthesizing them, even though its genome encodes that functionality. although one might intuitively think that this would be the case for all amino acids, the results in figure  <dig> indicate that the synthesis of some amino acids is not predicted to substantially inhibit growth under the conditions studied .

deletion study
in order to determine the effects of the deletion of a reaction from the network, as would occur in a gene knock-out experiment, fba is used with the additional constraint that the flux through a particular reaction is zero. this allows for the rapid prediction of the results of gene deletions and also reaction deletions, as occur when a selective enzyme inhibitor is used. we calculated the effects of all single reaction and gene deletions both on minimal medium and on a rich media . we found that, on rich media,  <dig> reaction deletions and  <dig> gene deletions are computationally predicted to be lethal. on minimal media,  <dig> reaction deletions and  <dig> gene deletions are predicted to be lethal. these predictions are detailed in the supplemental material . there are fewer lethal gene deletions than reaction deletions because some essential reactions are not associated with genes, some essential reactions are associated with isozymes, and some genes catalyze multiple reactions. when analyzed in the context of gpr associations, we found that  <dig>  of the reactions that are essential on minimal media are associated with isozymes. this calculation indicates that gene dispensability is explained by the presence of isozymes less often than in s. cerevisiae   <cit> . we note that the distinction between isozymes that independently catalyze a reaction and multiple gene products required simultaneously for a reaction is not always clear from the data sources used in this reconstruction.

we took the results of the reaction deletion study on rich media and searched pubmed for chemical inhibitors of each of those reactions . most of the inhibitors listed do not have any published information regarding their effectiveness in s. aureus to the best of our knowledge. these computational predictions can be experimentally tested with targeted gene deletions or the inhibitors listed. due to the diversity of biological systems in which the inhibitors were initially discovered, gene deletions would be expected to agree with our predictions more than the use of chemical inhibitors. there are a variety of reasons why any one of these inhibitors listed may have no utility whatsoever as a drug. for example, there may be no way for the inhibitor to actually enter a cell. nevertheless, when considered as an initial guess at potential drugs, table  <dig> represents hypotheses formed by a systems-level approach that has not been applied to an organism as clinically troublesome as s. aureus before.

additionally, we considered comparing the results of our gene deletion study with the results of an existing experimental approach to determine gene essentiality. unfortunately, although we are aware of two large-scale studies on gene essentiality in s. aureus <cit> , there does not exist a comprehensive, publicly-available resource listing all essential genes in this organism. there is a comprehensive gene essentiality study for the related organism b. subtilis <cit> , but this is a different organism. should comprehensive gene essentiality data become available for s. aureus, a comparison between experimental data and the predictions detailed herein can easily serve as validation for this model and identify problem areas. the absence of a comprehensive, publicly-available data set regarding gene essentiality in this organism is in itself powerful motivation to undertake the reconstruction detailed in this paper, as the reconstruction can rapidly predict essential metabolic genes that can later be screened experimentally as potential drug targets.

growth phenotypes
we computed the sensitivity of growth rate to oxygen uptake on a variety of different carbon sources . the carbon source uptake rate is restricted to the same molar maximum for all calculations. as expected, biomass production increases with oxygen uptake up to the point where there is no longer an oxygen limitation. in addition, the carbon sources which contain more carbon atoms also generally allow greater biomass production. for example, trehalose, which contains twice as much carbon as glucose, allows close to twice as much biomass production as an equivalent molar amount of glucose. the normalization used, explained in the figure caption, allows a quick analysis of the efficiency of the network in utilizing different carbon sources. importantly, these predictions can be tested experimentally as a means of validating and improving the current gem.

CONCLUSIONS
the work reported is the first genome-scale metabolic reconstruction for the pathogenic bacterium s. aureus and represents the first draft to its two-dimensional genome annotation. the genre with the gpr associations represents a chemically and genetically structured database derived from the underlying data. when the properties of this genre are analyzed using fba, the model computationally predicts phenotypic states. based on the surprising paucity of physiological growth data available for this organism, especially under carefully defined conditions, the predictions made by the gem are best viewed as hypotheses. these hypotheses can be experimentally tested, with similar results serving as validation for the gem and dissimilar results describing failure modes of the gem. these failure modes can be more interesting than correct predictions because they provide direction for improvement of the gem and point to areas in metabolism and regulation that need further investigation. the analysis of failure modes and subsequent improvement of the gem constitute a cycle of iterative model building <cit> , with the potential to significantly improve a gem. second generation models of e. coli and s. cerevisiae have made substantial improvements over initial genome-scale reconstructions. these enhancements include greater coverage of metabolism, explicit gpr associations, more detailed enzyme localization, and better enforcement of elemental and charge balancing. we expect that future enhancements to isb <dig> will improve the accuracy of the reaction network and the gpr associations.

the scope of hypotheses that can be devised with a constraint-based metabolic model ranges from the relatively mundane, such as prediction of relative growth on different carbon sources, to the potentially groundbreaking, such as the determination of novel prospective drug targets. with an organism as harmful as s. aureus, any advancement of knowledge is welcome.

