BACKGROUND
the powerful technique of cdna amplification by polymerase chain reactions  is used to quantify small amounts of mrna in a variety of applications from genomics to medicine <cit> . using reverse transcription, the mrna is converted to cdna, which is then amplified by repeated duplication in the pcr process . various detection systems are available, including taqman probes and sybr green, which mark the amplification process by fluorescent emission and so allow monitoring the dna amplification in real time. the taqman system uses a sequence-specific probe that attaches to a nucleotide sequence within the template. after the attachment of primer and taq enzyme, the duplication of the template strands proceeds in the extension step. as part of the extension, the attached part of the probe molecule is digested, separating the fluorescent reporter dye from the quencher sequence. probe molecules are 'used up' in the duplication process. by contrast, the sybr green system binds non-specifically to any double-stranded dna complex and emits fluorescence only in the attached state. the dye molecules dissociate during the denaturation step, but are used again in later cycles.

it is the goal of quantitative pcr to use the record of observed fluorescent emissions to estimate the initial amount of cdna, either in absolute terms of the amount of cdna at the start of the amplification or in relative terms when the initial amount of cdna for one pcr is estimated as a fold change from that of another pcr. in either case, the estimation requires a mathematical expression or model to link the initial amount of amplicon to the observed fluorescence. the most well known approach uses data from the short span of cycles whose fluorescent emission just rise above the background fluorescence, but for which duplication can still be approximated by an exponential curve, such as the one below:

 fc= f0c 

here fc is the observed fluorescence at the cth thermal cycle, and f <dig>  the fluorescence that would be emitted by the initial amount of amplicon, when duplicated. the quantity fc is generally found to be less than f <dig> 2c, so that, using equation  <dig>  the efficiency, e, can be no greater than  <dig> 

many different and ingenious approaches have been published using this expression; however, the use of this expression brings with it  <dig> important drawbacks:

1) the observations of relatively few cycles are used, and those cycles are not always easy to identify.

2) information beyond the observations from the pcr amplifications is needed to convert from the observed fluorescent scale to estimated quantities of amplicon in nmol/l.

the 2nd drawback is of importance only for the estimation of absolute quantities of amplicon and does not apply to methods of relative quantitation  <cit> .

absolute quantitation using this principal is achieved using the standard curve technique  <cit> , where the efficiency of the duplication is found by amplifying serial dilutions of a known concentration of the amplicon. this approach can be costly both in time taken to construct the standard solutions and in reagents for the pcr reactions since multiple samples are used. alternatively, swillens et al applied equation  <dig> specifically to pcrs run with the taqman probe, making use of the fact that the probe is used up in amplification process  <cit> . by assuming that the entire initial amount of probe is used up and relating the initial probe amount to the final fluorescent reading, they estimated the conversion factor between number of probe molecules and observed fluorescence, thus estimating the initial amount of amplicon absolutely.

the effort to use more of the thermal cycles in a pcr has led to fitting a mathematical expression for a sigmoid curve to all of the fluorescent data using nonlinear regression  <cit> . the curves used by these authors can fit the observations very well, but do not reflect any of the internal processes of a pcr, so that it is difficult to fit them more precisely by adding information that may be known about specific reactants. there is also no intrinsic reason to believe that a curve that fits observations above the background fluorescence will also fit the observations below the background fluorescence, which could also affect the estimates of the initial amount of amplicon. furthermore, when the sigmoid curves are applied to a dye that is not inactivated by the duplication process, a standard solution with a known amount of the target molecules is still needed to estimate the conversion factor between fluorescent emission and number of target molecules  <cit> . goll et al applied numerous sigmoid expressions to observations generated by the taqman probe but again used solutions with known copy number to estimate the conversion factor  <cit> .

alternatively, detailed models of the reactions taking place in the anneal and extension steps of the pcr have also been presented  <cit> . using reaction equations to describe each chemical reaction in the duplication process, a detailed picture is built up of what is known of the process. including all reactions allows insight into consequences of limiting nucleotide bases, primers or enzyme for example, but requires a large number of parameters that are approximated with values from the literature. the models describe the chemical processes in a pcr consistent with detection systems similar to sybr green, so that there are no equations comparable to the annealing and digestion of the taqman probe. this simplifies the system of equations, but again requires the information of a standard solution to estimate the conversion factor between fluorescent emission and number of target molecules.

in this paper, we present a compromise between the last two approaches. that is, we present a model based on the chemical reactions taking place in the anneal step of pcrs with taqman probe, but use simplifying assumptions, to reduce the model to only  <dig> parameters. all parameters are shown to be estimable using the observations from a single amplification. since the model includes the digestion of probe molecules as part of the duplication, a more precise estimate of the amount of probe converted to fluorescence and therefore a more precise estimate of the conversion factor is possible.

in the body of the paper we present the basic model in detail, including the duplication process with probe digestion as well as the re-annealing of template. in the appendices we present equations that represent an additional process that may be important to particular pcrs: duplication of template without release of fluorescence, i.e. 'unmarked duplication'.

we fit the model to  <dig> data sets with known initial concentrations of amplicons to evaluate the model's estimates. adding the unmarked duplication process improved fits and estimates in cases where the initial amount of probe was smaller than the initial amount of primer. for one of the data sets the estimates are quite good, and in all cases the estimates are of the right order of magnitude, though sometimes underestimated. in the cases where the initial amount of amplicon is underestimated, the fold changes of different concentrations of the amplicon are still well estimated, indicating that a factor common to both amplifications has been left out of the model.

RESULTS
general description of model
the model presented in this paper estimates the initial amount of template that is amplified through the pcr process. if the pcr process is used to quantify an unknown amount of mrna , the mrna must first be reverse transcribed to form what is in theory an equivalent amount of cdna. the efficiency of the transcription varies with the practitioner and the reagents, but estimating the efficiency of the transcription is beyond the scope of this paper. it is the transcribed amount of cdna that is estimated by our approach.

once the mrna has been transcribed, the pcr process acts to duplicate the cdna through a succession of thermal cycles. the thermal cycles alternate between  <dig> phases: the anneal/extension step and the denaturation step. ideally in the anneal/extension step, each single strand of template is hybridized by both a probe molecule and a primer molecule. when a molecule of taq enzyme attaches to such a triplex, the extension process begins and nucleotide bases attach to form a duplex consisting of the original dna template and a completed second strand of opposite orientation. as part of the extension process, the taq enzyme also digests the attached part of the taqman probe, releasing and separating the fluorescent marker from the quencher sequence. a given taqman probe only attaches to dna sequences of a particular orientation. for the data in this paper, the probe molecules were designed to attach to molecules of the dna sequences corresponding to the cdna transcribed from the original sample of mrna. the single-stranded dna of opposite orientation duplicates without probe attachment and so without fluorescent emission. we assume duplication of strands of either orientation proceeds at the same rate. we also assume all duplexes separate during the hotter denaturation step.

the simplified model presented in this paper, includes an approximation to the above duplication process, predicting the amounts of both probe and primers used by the pcr for each cycle. in addition, the model includes the process of re-annealing, whereby single strands of dna previously synthesized and of opposite orientation hybridize. the competition for single strands of dna by this second process diminishes the predicted efficiency of the duplication process over the course of the pcr  <cit> . details are shown in the methods section. we show the results below of the basic model and the model extended by adding the unmarked duplication process.

the model was applied to  <dig> data sets described in the method section. the  <dig> data sets amplified a total of  <dig> gene sequences, rnasep, cyp1b <dig> and actin. in each case, the initial concentrations of the amplicon were known, with amplifications run on several known dilutions of the original concentration. tables  <dig> through  <dig> in the body of the paper compare the estimated amount of amplicon with the known concentration. figure  <dig> shows an example of the model fit to an amplification run of the rnasep data set.

estimation results of initial amounts of rnasep amplicon. initial concentrations of probe and primer were  <dig> nmol/l and  <dig> nmol/l respectively. the basic model accounts for the duplication of target sequence with release of fluorescence as well as re-annealing of previously formed dna strands. the extended model additionally takes into account duplication of target sequence without probe attachment and hence without release of fluorescence. results are given for individual replicates of each initial amount of amplicon.

estimation results of initial amounts of cyp1b <dig> amplicon. initial concentrations of probe and primer were  <dig> nmol/l and  <dig> nmol/l respectively. the basic model accounts for the duplication of target sequence with release of fluorescence as well as re-annealing of previously formed dna strands. the extended model also takes into account duplication of target sequence without probe attachment and hence without release of fluorescence. results are given for individual replicates of each initial amount of amplicon.

the estimates of the initial amounts of amplicon from tables  <dig> and  <dig> were used to estimate the fold change from the solutions with the largest initial amounts of amplicon to those with lower amounts. the first column gives the correct fold change. the final column shows fold change estimates using the method described by livak et al  <cit> .

estimation results of initial amounts of cyp1b <dig> and actin amplicons. initial concentrations of probe and primer are given in the first column. note that using the extended model only increases the estimates for the pcrs with a higher initial primer concentration than probe. 1initial number of amplicon molecules placed in solution. 2equations found in table  <dig>  3equation  in the appendix.

model choice and cycle number
in table  <dig>  we present the estimation results of the initial amounts of amplicon for the rnasep data set. as pcrs are frequently run for  <dig> rather than  <dig> cycles, the results are analyzed using just the first  <dig> cycles as well as using all available  <dig> cycles. both the basic model and the extended model ) were used.

even when the basic model is used with the data of only  <dig> cycles , the estimates of the initial concentration of amplicon are of the right order of magnitude , ranging from 57% to 72% of the true value. the estimates are somewhat better for the larger initial amounts,  than for the smallest initial amounts , suggesting that there is information carried in the later cycles of a pcr. figure 2a shows that the measured fluorescence at the 40th cycle is further from the horizontal asymptote for the lowest initial amounts of amplicon so that there are fewer information-carrying observations for the lower dilutions.

the results of using the basic model with all  <dig> cycles are shown in the 3rd column of table  <dig> and range from 66% of the true value to 85%. for these data the estimates do not seem to improve with higher initial concentrations, suggesting that  <dig> cycles were sufficient for these initial amounts of amplicon. when the extended model is used, even the estimates using only  <dig> thermal cycles improve consistently, with the quality of the estimate again increasing with the initial concentration. using the expanded model with  <dig> cycles leads to some overestimation for the highest initial concentration, but generally estimates initial amounts of amplicon very close to the true values.

in table  <dig>  the same patterns seen in table  <dig> are repeated: the basic model with  <dig> cycles shows the poorest estimates, especially for the lowest initial concentrations. adding the last  <dig> cycles improves all estimates, but the improvement is greater for the lower initial concentrations. the estimates are again of more uniform quality for the basic model applied to the data from all  <dig> cycles. allowing for duplication of target sequence without fluorescent emission  again improves the estimates using both  <dig> and  <dig> thermal cycles of data. for this data set all estimates underestimated the true initial amount of amplicon, estimating values between 53% and 67% of the true value.

fold change prediction
in table  <dig>  we use the absolute estimates found earlier to estimate fold changes between dilutions of the initial amounts of amplicon. in each case we compared the highest concentration to a lower one. for the cyp1b <dig> data, this meant computing  <dig> estimates of a fold change, while we were able to compute  <dig> estimates of each fold change for the rnasep data set.

in contrast to the absolute estimates, the estimates of the fold changes are not improved by using the expanded model over the basic model. the best estimates generally come from using  <dig> cycles of data with the basic model, which provides the largest amount of data with the fewest parameters to be estimated. the conclusion is that the basic model may underestimate the amount of amplicon by a consistent factor over the various concentrations, so that the fold change remains well estimated. in that case having fewer parameters to estimate with more data provides better estimates. correspondingly, the worst estimates of the fold change are made using the expanded model with  <dig> cycles of data.

fold change estimates made using the 2−Δct
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqaiyagmdaahaawcbeqaaiabgkhitiabfs5aejabdoeadnaabaaameaacqwgubavaeqaaaaaaaa@328b@ method  <cit>  are listed in the final column of table  <dig> for comparison. in this approach a 'threshold value' is set for fluorescent emission, low enough that amplification is still exponential. the dilution fold is estimated using the fractional cycle numbers  at which the amplifications cross that threshold in the following formula:

 fc=2−
 mathtype@mtef@5@5@+=feaafiart1ev1aaatcvaufkttlearuwrp9mdh5mbpbiqv92aaexatlxbi9gbaebbnrfifhhdyfgasaach8aky=wiffydh8gipec8eeeu0xxdbba9frfj0=oqffea0dxdd9vqai=hguq8kuc9pgc9s8qqaq=dirpe0xb9q8qilsfr0=vr0=vr0dc8meaabaqaciaacagaaeqabaqabegadaaakeaacqwggbgrcqwgjbwycqgh9aqpcqaiyagmdaahaawcbeqaaiabgkhitmaadmaabagaem4qamkaemivaq1aasbaawqaaiabdigaojabdmgapjabdeganjabdigaobqabawccqghsislcqwgdbwqcqwgubavdawgaaadbagaemibawmaem4ba8maem4dachabeaaasgaay5waiaaw2faaaaaaaa@4394@ 

here fc is the estimated fold change. the subscripts 'high' and 'low' refer respectively to the highest initial concentration of amplicon and the lower concentration being compared to it. the threshold was set at  <dig> times the standard deviation of the first  <dig> cycles of the highest concentration in the comparison. generally, the estimates made using all  <dig> cycles with the basic model are closer to the true fold changes.

varying probe and primer concentrations
the last data set comprises the averaged observations over  <dig> replicates of several pcrs applied to the cyp1b <dig> and actin sequences with various combinations of initial probe and primer concentrations. the results are shown in table  <dig>  the 1st column gives the initial concentrations of probe and primers; the 2nd column gives the initial number of amplicon molecules. columns  <dig> and  <dig> give the results for the actin sequence; the last  <dig> columns give the results for the cyp1b <dig> sequence.

the results vary between probe/primer combinations and gene sequence, with good results for cyp1b <dig> generally for the higher concentrations. the initial amounts of actin amplicon are considerably underestimated, although these estimates also improve for higher initial amounts. nonetheless there is a consistent pattern that shows some improvement of the estimates using the extended model, but only for those cases where the initial concentration of primer exceeded the initial concentration of probe. this is consistent with the improvement in estimates seen with the extended model in tables  <dig> and  <dig>  both of which also show results for amplifications with more primer than probe available. for every estimate in table  <dig> where the concentration of probe is at least as high as that of primers, the basic model either outperforms the expanded model or fails to be improved by the extended model. we conclude that as long as there is at least as much probe as primer available, the preferential attachment of template to probe over primer precludes duplication of template without probe attachment. in that case, the model with the fewer parameters will provide the better estimate, since the extra parameter may be over-fitting to noise.

discussion
in this paper we explore balancing mechanistic modelling of the chemical reactions taking place in a pcr with the requirement that the model be estimable using the data from a single pcr amplification without an additional standard solution. the model was developed using taqman probes to monitor the duplication. the taqman detection system worked well, because the probe molecules are digested in the course of duplication. this characteristic allows the estimation of the conversion factor between the number of digested probe molecules and the observed fluorescence. while others have used this characteristic before  <cit> , they required that all the probe molecules be used up. by modelling the consumption of probe molecules, the conversion factor can in principle by calculated using the predicted number of digested probe molecules and comparing that to the observed increase in fluorescence.

the presence of unused probe molecules after the completion of the pcr was predicted by the extended model in both data sets containing replicate data . in both of these data sets more primer was available than probe, but with both re-annealing and unmarked duplication included in the model, unused probe was left even though the upper asymptote was clearly reached . between 82% and  <dig> % of probe was used in the rnasep amplifications and around 95% for the cyp1b <dig> amplifications.

in applying the model to the data, we found that the observed upper asymptotes corresponding to identical combinations of initial amounts of probe and primers did not always have the same values. this is visible in fig. 2b, showing the cyp1b <dig> replicate data. we were unable to reproduce the differences in the upper asymptotes without allowing different conversion factors between observed fluorescence and the number of digested probe molecules. for this reason we did not use a common conversion factor.

the results of the estimation of amplicon were mixed. for the rnasep amplifications, the estimation of the initial amount of amplicon was quite good; for the cyp1b <dig> and the actin sequences the initial amount of amplicon was underestimated, sometimes severely so. even in these cases, the fact that the estimates were of the right order of magnitude indicate that the approximations used in the model were reasonable. the underestimations do indicate that more work needs to be done with this approach before it can be used by itself or in a clinical setting.

in order to simplify the chemical reactions taking place in the pcr to the point that the model could be estimated by a single amplification means that many processes are necessarily left out. the cumulative effect of all unmodeled processes could be significant, even if the individual unmodeled reactions have a small effect on the outcome. we mention here several of the reactions that were not included in the results presented here.

primer dimerization occurs when primers specific to dna strands of opposite orientation hybridize during the anneal step. primer-dimers may extend during the extension step, in which case the primers are no longer usable, even after denaturation. if the dimers do not extend, then the primers may be used in later cycles  <cit> . although a differential equation describing primer-dimerization can be constructed ), the problem is that the additional parameter has to be estimated. if primer-dimerization is added to the extended model, then a total of  <dig> parameters have to be estimated for a single amplification, which is sometimes too many. we did attach the primer-dimerization equation to the basic model and applied the result to some of the amplifications of the averaged data. for these data, adding the additional reaction improved neither the fit nor the estimate.

the amount of taq enzyme might become limiting, if the enzyme degrades over the course of the pcr as a result of repeated exposures to high temperatures. the decrease in enzymatic activity has been investigated  <cit>  and did not seem to have a strong impact on the amplification process.

in simplifying the model, we were especially ruthless with the extension step, assuming perfect irreversible extension for all cases. this means we did not examine the quantity of nucleotides being limiting or the possibility of incomplete extension  <cit> . unlike the primer-dimerization, these processes would be very difficult to incorporate into the model, and still have it be estimable from a single amplification.

in spite of these shortcomings however, the model  did prove to be estimable in all cases. the predictions when compared to the known concentrations of amplicon were quite good in the case of the extended model applied to the rnasep sequence and of the right order of magnitude  in the other cases. furthermore, the fold change estimates using the basic model did well for both the rnasep and the cyp1b <dig> sequence. in addition, the model seems to be sensitive enough that processes included in the model that do not contribute to the output of a particular amplification also do not improve the fit. in particular, this was the case for the unmarked duplication process where enough probe was available .

CONCLUSIONS
there are advantages to having a model that can estimate initial quantities of amplicon from a single amplification; using only the data from a single amplification means that no additional reference tissues need to be analyzed, no standard solutions need to be made up, no additional replicates or dilutions need to be run, and there are no concerns about whether the efficiencies of the amplifications or the conversion factors linking fluorescent emissions to molecules are nearly enough the same across replicates or reference solutions. there are also advantages to using a model based on the science of the process: such a model allows the estimated quantities to have meaning within the context of the chemical reactions, provides a basis for comparison across experiments run under differing conditions and allows greater insight into the critical components that govern the net outcome of a complicated series of reactions.

in this paper we present proof of the principle that it is possible to estimate absolute concentrations of template in single pcr amplifications through modeling the biochemical processes present within the thermal cycles. that the drastically simplified model nonetheless produced good estimates in some cases and at least estimates of the right order of magnitude in others shows that the assumptions going into the model produce good approximations.

