BACKGROUND
symbiosis plays a key role in the life of many insects that live on nutritionally unbalanced diets, such as plant sap, blood or grain  <cit> . the adaptation of these insects to such food sources is possible only in association with certain microorganisms that are specialized in nutritional complementation. endosymbiosis is, thus, a central process in these animals and more than 10% of insect species depend on intracellular bacteria for their development and survival  <cit> . this is true for aphids that feed on phloem sap  <cit> , a very unbalanced diet that is characterized by a high concentration of sucrose and by very low levels of several essential amino acids crucial to the development of these metazoans  <cit> . the obligate intracellular symbiotic bacteria in aphids belong to the buchnera genus and they provide these important pest insects with the essential amino acids lacking in their diet  <cit> . symbiotic bacteria are contained in specialized host cells, called bacteriocytes, that are localised in the abdominal haemocoel, close to the ovaries in sexual and asexual females  <cit> . in fact, aphids have a life cycle that alternates sexual and asexual reproduction  <cit>  and the success of aphids as crop pests is enhanced by their phenomenal reproductive rates, through viviparous parthenogenesis, during spring and summer. parthenogenetic viviparous females have two ovaries, each containing several ovarioles. in the pea aphid, acyrthosiphon pisum, embryos at different stages of development can be observed, at any given time, within six or seven ovarioles  <cit>  and an adult asexual female reared in the laboratory produces an average of  <dig> embryos during her lifespan. the vertical transmission process of the symbionts is vital for the reproductive success of aphids and it takes place at the end of blastoderm formation in the a. pisum embryonic development  <cit> . at this stage, approximately  <dig> buchnera aphidicola bacteria are transmitted from maternal bacteriocytes to a single viviparous embryo, and they increase in number by  <dig> fold during the remaining embryonic development  <cit> .

the importance of b. aphidicola nutritional complementation was initially indicated by the observation that aposymbiotic aphids  show significantly reduced growth and reproductive rates  <cit> . a. pisum has been extensively used in laboratory studies and its genome has been recently sequenced and annotated  <cit> . several b. aphidicola genomes, from different aphid species  <cit>  and from strains of pea aphid  <cit> , have also been sequenced. in fact, a comparison between the pea aphid genome and that of its symbiont  <cit>  confirmed the previously hypothesized integrated metabolism for these two organisms, in particular for the amino acid pathways  <cit> . the symbiotic bacterial genome includes genes for almost all enzymes involved in the essential amino acid pathways, while the few missing genes in the leucine, isoleucine, valine, methionine and phenylalanine pathways are present in the host genome  <cit> . a recent rnaseq transcriptome study of maternal bacteriocytes, compared with other tissues, supports the integrated nature of the host-symbiont metabolic network: this is demonstrated by specific gene expression regulations of amino acid metabolism genes in the symbiotic compartment, compared with other aphid body compartments  <cit> .

the availability of the genome sequences for both partners of this symbiosis opens up several new research perspectives for this genomic model of symbiosis  <cit> . functional genomics will help to characterize the role of different genes, and their regulation, in different physiological processes that contribute to the reproductive and ecological success of aphids. as seen in several other symbiotic bacteria, the b. aphidicola genome is reduced in size when compared to that of free-living bacteria  <cit>  and it shows a clear reduction in the classic bacterial gene expression regulatory networks . several studies have indicated the lack of a strong and specific transcriptional response of this bacterium following a stress applied to the aphid host  <cit> . nevertheless, a structured link between the organization of genes on the chromosome and gene transcription levels is conserved in b. aphidicola, as compared to the phylogenetically related free-living bacteria  <cit> , and, more recently, a specific transcriptional response of the pleu plasmid to a leucine stress applied to the pea aphid host has been demonstrated  <cit> . the integrated metabolism of the two partners indicates that the b. aphidicola regulatory capability is connected to the host transcriptional responses to stress events or to different physiological conditions. certain studies have analysed the pea aphid transcriptome in different tissues and physiological conditions  <cit> , but no global gene expression analysis of the aphids’ parthenogenetic embryonic development has yet been performed.

although the metabolic complementation between b. aphidicola and aphids is important throughout their life cycle, the symbiosis is thought to play a key role during the parthenogenetic embryo development . for example, embryonic growth in aphids is highly dependent on bacterial-derived phenylalanine and tryptophan and, to a lesser extent, on methionine and lysine  <cit> . after microinjections of radioactively labelled amino acids into the haemocoel of adult aphids, the selective uptake of phenylalanine and lysine by embryos confirms their specific metabolic needs  <cit> . it is difficult to determine whether this requirement for a high level of amino acids in pea aphid embryos is supported by the maternal tissues  or by the embryonic complement of the symbiotic bacteria localized in the embryonic bacteriocytes. it has been established that late embryos can rely on their own complement of symbiotic bacteria for a supply of essential amino acids, particularly for the aromatic amino acids  <cit> . more recently, a study on the embryos of the black bean aphid aphis fabae, maintained in vitro with artificial diets lacking amino acids, confirmed the importance of certain amino acid supplies, specifically phenylalanine and valine, acquired exogenously from b. aphidicola in the maternal symbiosis, and tryptophan, acquired endogenously from symbiotic bacteria within the embryo  <cit> .

in all the early ex vivo studies of embryonic nutritional needs, the ovaries were always analysed as a whole and, consequently, no data on the distinct embryonic developmental stages were available. more recently, a study on the separate stages was performed to assess b. aphidicola transcriptional changes during development  <cit> . this work revealed that the number of b. aphidicola genes differentially expressed between embryos and maternal tissues varies significantly among the early, intermediate and late embryos, indicating that the symbiotic interactions between the developing host and its bacterial partner are dynamic, changing in response to the developmental age of the host. the availability of the a. pisum genome prompted us to complement this work with an analysis of pea aphid transcription profiles during parthenogenetic development. using a nimblegen custom microarray, we analysed the host transcriptome comparing different developmental groups, thus generating a complete analysis of gene expression during viviparous parthenogenesis of a symbiotic insect. these transcriptomic data were coupled with an analysis of amino acid metabolism, which enabled us to identify some key aspects of the contribution of the symbiotic partners to the metabolic needs of developing parthenogenetic embryos.

RESULTS
global analysis of gene expression during embryonic development
using the newly developed “inra-bf2i_a.pisum_nimblegen-acypi_4x72k_v1” microarray , built on the pea aphid genome v <dig>  assembly  <cit> , we obtained gene expression profiles of aphid embryos belonging to three distinct groups, namely early , intermediate  and late  embryos, collected according to their developmental stage , together with aphids at their first larval stage . three biological replicates were used for each experimental group .

assignment of embryos to the three groups  was based on size range and on morphological criteria detailed in this table . the developmental stages were defined according to miura et al. <cit> . larval stages were determined according to the development time after laying.

to check the overall quality of the data, after normalization, we performed an unsupervised cluster analysis using the 50% of genes showing the highest sd in all the samples  and, with this approach, we were able to classify the data in the original  <dig> groups analyzed , with all the biological replicates clustering together. as this analysis confirmed the reliability of our data following the dissection and isolation of the embryos, we then used all the data available to perform the following pair-wise comparisons:  ee vs. ie,  ie vs. le and  le vs. l <dig>  using a one-way between groups anova. among the  <dig>  transcripts analyzed,  <dig>   were considered as being significantly differentially expressed during the development of the pea aphid using the following criteria: an adjusted p-value lower than  <dig>  and a two-fold change in the considered contrast . using these criteria, we identified, respectively,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  differentially expressed genes for the comparisons ee-ie, ie-le and le-l <dig> . we observed an increase in the total number of genes differentially expressed during development, whereas the proportion of up-regulated genes decreased by  <dig> %,  <dig> % and  <dig> %, respectively, in the three sequential comparisons ee-ie, ie-le and le-l <dig>  this observation shows an activation of the expression of many genes in the earlier stages , followed by a down-regulation of the genes important for development and not needed for the first instar larval stage aphids . an analysis of the intersection between stages allowed us to characterize the developmental switches and to identify significant expression changes. for example, the highest number of common genes is found at the intersection between the ie-le and le-l <dig> comparisons, with  <dig> genes . it is worth noting that, out of these  <dig> genes common to the ie-le and le-l <dig> comparisons,  <dig> showed expression changes in opposite directions in the two comparisons and, among those,  <dig> were up-regulated between ie and le and down-regulated between le and l <dig>  these observations support the fact that numerous genes that are important in development are activated in the early stages and they are gradually repressed in the more advanced stages, up to the l <dig> stage. on the other hand, between the ee-ie and ie-le comparisons, we observed a continuity of expression in the majority of common genes . overall, our results show the expected higher number of genes changing their expression at the transition between the embryonic and larval stages.

microarray data validation by quantitative rt-pcr
to validate the data obtained from the microarray analysis in our first experiment, we repeated the experiment for the same four stages and quantified the expression of eight a. pisum genes, belonging to four functional classes , using quantitative reverse transcription-pcr . the whole experiment was performed again using three new biological replicates for each stage group and for these samples total rna was not amplified . we compared the data obtained from qrt-pcr with that obtained in the independent microarray experiments and found very good concordance, with a pearson’s correlation coefficient of  <dig>   between these two datasets   <cit> .

developmental genes expression analysis
among the  <dig> pea aphid developmental genes annotated by shigenobu et al. <cit> , using homology with drosophila melanogaster,  <dig> were present in our microarrays and were analysed. in our dataset,  <dig> genes  showed significant differential expression in at least one of the three comparisons we performed . in the comparisons ee-ie, ie-le and le-l <dig> we found, respectively,  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> significant variant genes . twenty-one genes increased their expression during development, while  <dig> genes showed decreasing levels of expression. among these  <dig> genes,  <dig> were found only in the comparison ie-le, i.e. the last of the embryonic developmental stages analyzed in this study. we performed a detailed analysis of two gene classes, as defined in the shigenobu et al annotation paper  <cit> : the homeobox-containing genes and the signalling-pathway genes, which are involved in the establishment of anatomical patterns and in the regulation of developmental processes in all the metazoans. among the  <dig> homeobox-containing genes annotated in the genome of a. pisum,  <dig> were identified as differentially expressed in at least one of the three comparisons; the same was true for  <dig> signalling pathway genes, among the  <dig> annotated, showing significant differential gene expression at different stages of development . we also performed a detailed manual analysis for  <dig> genes belonging to the six main classes of developmental genes classified as being involved in body axis formation, in embryo segmentation, in germline specification, in neurogenesis and in eye development, together with the hox genes. of these  <dig> genes, only  <dig> showed differential expression in at least one comparison. none of these genes were up-regulated in the ee-ie and ie-le comparisons and the majority were down-regulated during development, when comparing ie with le. a few genes showed up-regulation in the le to l <dig> transition, including homologs of the d. melanogaster tslr, knrl- <dig>  ci, hh, ubx and so genes .

gene ontology analysis of significant genes
we performed an unsupervised analysis of the genes showing significant differential expression in the three comparisons , using an enrichment analysis of the functional classes of genes based on the gene ontology  annotation. this analysis revealed  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> enriched functional classes for the comparisons ee-ie, ie-le and le-l <dig>  respectively, thus showing a higher number of gene class changes in the two embryonic development comparisons . we observed enrichment in transporter activity genes both in the ee-ie and ie-le comparisons, with the presence of amino acid transporters being amongst the most significant. in the ie-le comparison, the morphogenesis and appendage development genes showed significant changes in expression levels. for the ie-le and le-l <dig> comparisons, the analysis revealed three go classes involved in the cuticle formation process.

metabolism gene expression: the amino acid pathways
to explore the general metabolic changes that take place during the parthenogenetic development of the pea aphid, we analyzed the relevant genes  using the annotations available in the acypicyc database, which contains the global reconstruction of the metabolic network of the pea aphid  <cit> . at least one enzyme-coding gene showed significant differential expression for  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> pathways in the ee-ie, ie-le and le-l <dig> comparisons, respectively . we classified all these pathways, in acypicyc, into five broad groups of compounds: lipids, amino acids, sugars, nucleotides, and others. an analysis of the distribution of genes within these classes, compared with the total number of genes in the pea aphid genome, did not reveal any significant changes that would indicate a class of particular interest. for example,  <dig> % of the total number of differentially expressed enzyme-coding genes in our dataset forms part of the amino acid metabolism group and, in the pea aphid genome, the percentage of genes coding for this class is  <dig> %. so, the number of detected genes is not significantly different from the number that would be expected by chance. the same is true for the other classes, but we decided to carry out further gene-by-gene analysis for those classes supposed, a priori, to play an important role in symbiosis or in developmental processes.

in particular, we analyzed in more detail the gene expression profiles of the  <dig> genes involved in the amino acid biosynthesis or degradation pathways  <cit> , which were present in our overall analysis and which represent one of the key functions in the physiology of pea aphid/ b. aphidicola symbiosis. this analysis revealed that the majority of the genes involved in these pathways are strongly expressed :  <dig> % of these genes are among the 25% of genes showing the strongest expression. of the  <dig> annotated genes,  <dig> showed significantly differential expression in our comparisons . among the genes involved in amino acid biosynthesis, the significant ones can be classified into four groups:  the aspartate biosynthetic family ;  the phosphoenolpyruvate biosynthetic family ;  the glutamate biosynthetic family ; and  the 3-phosphoglycerate biosynthetic family  .

the tyrosine  pathway appeared to be particularly interesting with two genes, encoding for the proteins with the enzymatic activities ec  <dig> . <dig>  and ec  <dig> . <dig> , showing significantly increased levels of expression during development . in particular the expression of the acypi <dig> gene, which encodes for the enzyme phenylalanine 4-monooxygenase responsible for the synthesis of tyr in the pea aphid , significantly increased in the ie-le comparison . another three genes were annotated as potentially coding for this enzyme: for two of them  other ec annotations were supported by the analysis in acypicyc , while acypi <dig> had a weak annotation score for the enzymatic activity ec  <dig> . <dig>  but it did not show significant changes in expression.

four genes in the pea aphid genome  encode for the enzyme aspartate transaminase , which catalyzes the synthesis of phenylalanine from phenylpyruvate . our gene expression analysis revealed  <dig> distinct transcription profiles for these four genes : acypi <dig> and acypi <dig> showed a consistently high level of expression during development, acypi <dig> gene expression was constant and very low during development, while acypi <dig> showed a significant change in its expression level. the expression of this gene was relatively low in the early  and intermediate  embryo stages, compared to other genes, but it increased significantly between ie and l <dig> . the gene expression changes, detected using the microarrays for acypi <dig> and acypi <dig>  were also confirmed by specific qrt-pcr experiments .

amino acid transport activation
we analyzed, in detail, the amino acid transport function using the recent annotation by price et al.  <cit> : our microarray contains probes for  <dig> of the  <dig> annotated amino acid transporters and four of the six annotated na/k/cl co-transporters of the pea aphid genome. all of the  <dig> genes represented on the array were detected as expressed in all the samples analyzed. furthermore, as expected from the go enrichment analysis, the majority  of the genes coding for amino acid transporters are part of the significant group in at least one of the three comparisons . among those genes, six out of  <dig> members of the eukaryotic specific amino acid/auxin permease  family showed significant differential expression during development. with regard to the genes coding for the transporters of the amino acid/polyamine/organocation  family,  <dig> out of  <dig> of them showed significant changes in gene expression levels during development. as for the na/k/cl co-transporters, needed to create the gradient used by the apc and aaap transporters, three out of four represented on our microarray showed changes in gene expression. our data constitute the first characterization of the transcription of amino acid transporter genes during pea aphid development and we found that not all of the genes belonging to the same specific gene family showed differential gene expression. for example, this is the case for the members of the pea aphid slimfast transporter gene family  <cit>  that showed developmental stage-specific expression profiles .

accumulation of tyrosine in late embryo stages
we extended the analysis to metabolism by performing free amino acid analysis, using hplc, on the same embryo groups used in the transcriptome experiments. to analyse the larval stages, on the basis of our transcriptome results, we decided to perform the analysis at two distinct time points of the first larval stage of development in order to monitor, in more detail, any changes in the amino acids content related to cuticle changes in larval growth. therefore, our hplc analysis on l <dig> larvae was performed on two groups: early l <dig>  and late l <dig> . the results of this analysis were expressed as a fraction of the total free amino acid content . for histidine and methionine, the concentrations in the ee and ie stages were below the method detection limits. for two amino acids  no significant variation in proportion was observed between any of the stages. the aspartic and glutamic acids  showed a tendency to decrease their relative concentration during development . threonine decreased during embryonic development and increased in the larval stages. four amino acids showed a significant increased relative concentration during development : arginine, tyrosine, lysine and proline . among these amino acids, the greatest difference during development was observed for tyrosine in the late embryo group , showing a six-fold increase in concentration compared with the early embryos . the proportion of free tyrosine decreased rapidly form early to late larvae l <dig>  however, phenylalanine, the precursor of tyrosine, did not show any significant change between any of the stages .

embryo development specific regulation of the gene acypi004243
the matching profiles of the enzyme-coding gene expression for tyrosine synthesis and the accumulation of this amino acid in the le and l <dig> embryo groups prompted us to perform a more detailed analysis of the genes involved in this pathway . to gain a better understanding of the differences between the four genes , annotated in the acypicyc database as coding for the enzyme aspartate transaminase , we performed a detailed enzyme gene annotation using the dedicated priam tool  <cit> . this analysis revealed that, for all of the corresponding proteins, after the primary annotation as enzymatic activity aspartate transaminase , two other complementary annotations follow: the enzymatic activity tyrosine transaminase  and the enzymatic activity aromatic amino acid transaminase  . this additional in silico analysis confirmed the hypothetical role of these four genes in coding the enzymes catalyzing the aspartate, tyrosine and aromatic amino acids transamination reactions. the two more specific annotations of priam are not included in the acypicyc database as they did not pass the cut-off point applied in the generation of the database using cycads  <cit> . finally, we analyzed the gene structure and the genome organization of the four genes encoding for the enzyme aspartate transaminase  in the pea aphid. among these genes, acypi <dig> shows a two-exon structure, with the coding sequence restricted to exon  <dig>  while all the other genes have an 8-exon structure . it is worth noting that the genes acypi <dig> and acypi <dig> mapped to the same contig in the pea aphid genome. an analysis of the protein sequences was performed and the alignment of the four proteins revealed the expected conservation, with the exception of the acypi000044-pa protein sequence that has a unique n-terminal portion which is not aligned to the other three proteins with the enzymatic activity aspartate transaminase  . a detailed phylogenetic analysis of the four aspartate transaminases, expanding the protein information available in phylomedb  <cit>  and using the uniprot database  <cit> , was performed . the evolution of the aspartate transaminases, also called aspartate amino transferases  family, revealed five major duplications separating bacterial aat  from mitochondrial aat  and cytoplasmic eukaryote aat families . acypi000044-pa clearly belongs to mitochondrial aatm. acypi006213-pa, acypi004243-pa and acypi003009-pa diverged more recently and seem to be specific to aphids.

the peculiarity of the acypi <dig> gene structure, the differences observed in its protein sequence, and its phylogenetic position as regards the mitochondrial aat prompted us to carry out an additional analysis of the acypi000044-pa unique n-terminal sequence. we can confirm that this corresponds to the mitochondrial targeting signal peptide. as a result, the acypi000044-pa protein has the highest score for potential export to mitochondria, when compared to the other three genes encoding for this enzymatic activity . the gene structure of  <dig> of the  <dig> aatm proteins, in the same clade as acypi000044-pa, was available  and it is interesting to note that only two other genes had a single exon encoding the protein: these two genes are from the yeast schizosaccharomyces pombe and the amoeba dictyostelium discoideum.

the cuticle formation pathway
tyrosine is used to produce dopa and dopamine, both of which are needed for melanization and sclerotization of the cuticle. our observation of the increase in cuticle related gene expression between the le and the l <dig> stages, coupled with the role of tyrosine as a precursor of cuticle formation processes, prompted us to analyse the dopa and dopamine synthesis pathway in more detail. in effect, the gene coding for tyrosine 3-monooxygenase , the enzyme catalyzing the reaction converting tyrosine to dopa , showed significant up-regulation in the comparison ie vs. le and a reduction in expression in the passage from le to l <dig> . multiple pea aphid proteins have been annotated as having the enzymatic activity dopa decarboxylase  in acypicyc and, among them, the gene acypi <dig> received the highest annotation score  <cit> . it was also seen to be significantly up-regulated in the le embryo group, compared to ie, and down-regulated in the transition from le to l <dig> . another six proteins have been annotated as having the enzymatic activity aromatic-l-amino-acid decarboxylase  but with a lower score  <cit> : five of them did not show any change in gene expression during development, while one showed a reduction in expression in the comparison le vs. l <dig> .

we also analyzed the  <dig> genes annotated as cuticular proteins by the go annotation and, as expected from our gene ontology analysis , the majority  showed significant up-regulation during at least one stage in the late developmental phases , when the cuticle is being formed. many of these genes  showed a significantly lower level of expression in l <dig>  when compared to le, but others maintained a constant level of expression throughout the subsequent cuticular processes in larval development .

these data, taken together, demonstrate an up-regulation of the metabolic pathways leading to the synthesis of cuticular proteins and of the key precursors for the process of cuticle melanization and sclerotization, in the le stage of pea aphid development .

discussion
in this study, the transcriptome analysis of parthenogenetic development in embryonic pea aphids enabled us to characterize the gene expression profiles at key stages in the development of this insect. a comprehensive transcriptome dataset, such as this, is important for the ongoing genome annotation effort as gene expression profiles at specific steps of pea aphid development, or in specific tissues, can lead to an initial characterization of the role of different genes in aphid physiology.

after an unsupervised clustering analysis, that indirectly demonstrated the good quality of our dataset, we identified  <dig> genes that showed significant changes in expression level in the developmental groups analysed here . we examined this high number of variant genes, combining unsupervised and hypothesis driven analyses.

we identified the expression profiles of key developmental genes among the ones that had been annotated, in silico, during pea aphid genome analysis  <cit>  . using a global analysis based on gene ontology , we identified biological and cellular processes for which significant expression changes were apparent in the developmental stages under study. between the ie and le stages, several significant expression changes in the go classes are linked, as expected, to the development of appendages and morphogenesis. in both the ee vs. ie and ie vs. le comparisons a set of go classes linked to amino acid transport were identified as changing significantly during development. to further investigate this observation, we analysed the set of pea aphid amino acid transporters recently characterized  <cit>  and we demonstrated a global induction of the majority of these annotated transporter genes during development . these observations represent the first characterization of gene expression profiles of this family of genes involved in amino acid transport during the pea aphid’s parthenogenetic development. an intriguing amplification of ortholog genes of the d. melanogaster slimfast gene  has been described in the pea aphid  <cit>  and we have analyzed the gene expression profiles of nine out of the  <dig> gene copies of this insect genome. seven of these slimfast orthologs showed increased expression during development in the stages where embryonic growth is greatest : this observation is in agreement with the role of these genes as nutrient sensors during insect growth  <cit> . among these slimfast genes showing increasing expression during parthenogenetic development, we find the three paralogs previously identified as having an expression bias in male morphs   <cit> . this observation does not contradict the male-biased expression, but further characterization of these genes would be interesting to gain a better understanding of their role in the growth of the different morphs. we can speculate that the expansion of this gene family in the pea aphid genome, and the increased expression of several of these genes during embryonic development, might play a role in the high growth rate observed for parthenogenetic viviparous embryos in this insect. this hypothesis could be confirmed by transcriptional analysis indicating either lower gene expression levels or different regulations for the slimfast genes in embryos produced by sexual reproduction and having a low growth rate.

the recent pea aphid genome analysis showed how the enzyme repertoires of the two partners of this metabolically obligatory symbiosis are complementary  <cit> . a comprehensive analysis of the genes involved in metabolism, performed using the acypicyc database annotations  <cit> , did not reveal any significant global change in gene expression in the specific pathways. nevertheless, the known central role of amino acid metabolism pathways in this symbiotic relationship  <cit>  and, in particular, during pea aphid development  <cit> , together with the induction of expression of the amino acid transporter genes observed in our experiments, prompted us to analyse, in more detail, all the genes involved in the amino acid pathways  <cit> . most genes coding for enzymes involved in amino acid metabolism showed strong expression levels , as expected given the central role of amino acids in embryonic development  <cit> . a significant induction of gene expression during pea aphid development, in the stages under study, affects several amino acid pathways . among these, the pathway for the synthesis of phenylalanine and tyrosine showed significant gene expression changes in both of the enzymatic activities  encoded in the pea aphid genome, for the steps complementary to those in b. aphidicola . to further investigate this pathway, which plays a key role in this symbiosis, we analysed the content of free amino acids in the same developmental groups studied in the transcriptome analysis. our hplc analysis revealed an accumulation of tyrosine in the late embryonic stages , coupled with a decrease in the aspartate content. it is worth noting that this amino acid is located upstream of the tyrosine pathway and is the amino group donor for phenylalanine synthesis . this observed biochemical phenotype corresponds to the induction, during pea aphid development, of the expression of specific genes coding for the enzymes of the final steps of the pathway. our work demonstrates the existence of an insect specific gene transcription regulation of this key amino acid synthesis and, thus, complements our previous observations of a lack of significant gene expression regulation of the aromatic amino acid pathways in the symbiotic bacteria during embryonic development  <cit> . the accumulation of tyrosine during pea aphid development is probably facilitated by a total lack of the genes encoding for the tyrosine degradation pathway in this insect genome  <cit> , a pathway that is present in  <dig> other arthropods  with a sequenced and annotated genome . tyrosine has been previously identified as the most abundant free amino acid in body fluids in another aphid species, uroleucon ambrosiae   <cit> .

a recent rnaseq study on the pea aphid, by hansen and moran  <cit> , demonstrated that several genes, coding for key enzymes complementary to the b. aphidicola metabolic repertoire, are highly expressed in the bacteriocytes  when compared to the rest of the body, excluding the embryonic compartment. in the present work, we identified two pea aphid genes  that are regulated during parthenogenetic and viviparous development to supply the growing embryos with tyrosine, a key precursor to the cuticle formation and sclerotization process. in fact, two other genes, acypi <dig> and acypi <dig>  both important for cuticle formation, are up-regulated in the late phases of the pea aphid embryonic development: they code, respectively, for the enzymes catalyzing the reactions that produce dopa  and dopamine , starting from tyrosine . dopa and dopamine participate in the melanization  and the sclerotization  of the insects’ cuticle formed by cuticular proteins and chitin  <cit> . the observed general increase in cuticular gene expression during the late phases of pea aphid embryo development  demonstrates that all components of this key developmental process in insects are active in the late stages of pea aphid parthenogenetic development.

among all the transcriptionally regulated genes coding for enzymes that we were able to identify, the most interesting example is aspartate transaminase . among the four genes coding for this enzyme, only acypi <dig> showed significant increases in expression level during pea aphid development while the other three showed a constant expression, albeit at different levels for each gene . however, acypi <dig> showed a lower expression level in adult bacteriocytes in the rnaseq study, when compared with the entire body   <cit> . among the four genes coding for the enzyme aspartate transaminase , acypi <dig> had the highest level of expression in the adult pea aphid bacteriocytes  <cit> . in our study, we detected a relatively higher expression of acypi <dig> in the embryos and larvae, in comparison to the other  <dig> genes, but the expression levels of this gene did not change during pea aphid development. the same absence of change in expression during development is true for the other two genes, acypi <dig> and acypi <dig>  which show different levels of expression  that are consistent with the results of rnaseq experiments performed on adult bacteriocytes  <cit> . although it is not possible to define the role of each gene coding for the enzymes with aspartate transaminase activity  our data demonstrate, for the first time, that among these four genes only acypi <dig> expression levels increase during the parthenogenetic development of the pea aphid. this observation suggests that, in the pea aphid genome, acypi <dig> is controlled by a specific transcriptional regulation mechanism to respond to the need for phenylalanine and tyrosine synthesis during this important phase of development, with a particular link to cuticle formation.

CONCLUSIONS
we have characterized, for the first time, the transcriptional profiles underlying distinct developmental groups in pea aphid parthenogenesis, thus providing new data for gene function annotation and novel hypothesis generation. furthermore, as a result of the combination of transcriptional profile analysis with a biochemical approach, we were able to show a correlation between gene transcriptional changes at the enzyme level and the accumulation/decrease of corresponding amino acids, demonstrating an embryo-specific gene regulation in the phenylalanine and tyrosine pathways. the integrated metabolism of the pea aphid and its symbiotic bacteria, b. aphidicola, is far from being completely understood, but our study elucidates, in detail, the role of specific genes in tyrosine metabolism for cuticle formation during the parthenogenetic development of this symbiotic insect.

