BACKGROUND
dna methylation plays an essential role in several critical cellular processes including gene expression regulation, imprinting and x chromosome inactivation, and deregulation of the epigenetic machinery has been directly implicated in both mendelian disorders and tumorigenesis  <cit> . in mammals, dna methylation predominantly occurs at the 5-position of the cytosine pyrimidine ring within a cpg dinucleotide. many techniques to detect cpg methylation have been developed that can be broadly classified by underlying chemistry, including bisulfite conversion, methylation sensitive restriction enzyme analyses, and methylated dna immunoprecipitation  <cit> . each has its own advantages and disadvantages; however, bisulfite conversion has been the most widely used sample preparation method for dna methylation analysis. common methylation detection techniques coupled with bisulfite conversion include pcr-based assays, microarrays, sequencing and other approaches, which differ in their capacities for single-nucleotide resolution, quantitation, and throughput.

since the initial  <dig> report on cpg methylation detection using bisulfite sanger sequencing  <cit> , the technique has been widely used for methylation discovery and as a diagnostic assay for detecting methylation abnormalities at imprinting control regions and the cpg islands of specific genes  <cit> . importantly, the ongoing advances in sequencing technology have resulted in additional platforms available to execute bisulfite sequencing, including pyrosequencing  <cit>  and next-generation sequencing  <cit> . although laborious and low-throughput, bisulfite sanger sequencing historically has been one of the most accurate and quantitative techniques to assess cpg methylation. coupled with pcr amplicon cloning, bisulfite sanger sequencing allows for allele-specific cpg methylation assessment; however, this is offset by a costly and time-consuming protocol and an inability to multiplex. bisulfite pyrosequencing offers a faster, reproducible and quantitative analysis of dna methylation, but is restricted to short read lengths  with limited capacity for multiplexing  <cit> . although a serial pyrosequencing technique using multiple primers has been developed for extended read lengths, it is still constrained by short pcr amplicon lengths  <cit> . additionally, it should be noted that all standard bisulfite conversion-based cpg methylation detection methods cannot discriminate 5-hydroxymethylcytosine from 5-methylcytosine. consequently, oxidative bisulfite sequencing  <cit>  and microarray  <cit>  methods have recently been developed to distinguish these related nucleotides.

in contrast to targeted bisulfite sequencing techniques, next-generation bisulfite sequencing, including reduced representation bisulfite sequencing   <cit>  and whole-genome bisulfite sequencing  <cit> , can profile dna methylation across an entire genome by quantitatively assessing the majority of cpg sites in a single experiment. this unparalleled resolution in methylation detection is transforming the field of epigenomics; however, adopting these genome-wide approaches requires significant bioinformatics expertise and may be prohibitively expensive for certain applications given their low throughput. an example of multiplexed and targeted bisulfite sequencing using  <dig> next-generation sequencing chemistry has been reported; however, the utility of this highly quantitative method was restricted to read lengths of only ~130 bp  <cit> .

to address the need for a quantitative and highly multiplexed targeted bisulfite sequencing method with long read lengths, we developed a technique that combines bisulfite conversion with third-generation single-molecule real-time  sequencing. coupled with an optimized long-range bisulfite amplification protocol and empowered by the long read lengths of smrt sequencing   <cit> , multiplexed smrt bisulfite sequencing  can accurately measure cpg methylation across ~ <dig>  kb regions without the need for pcr amplicon subcloning. as a cost-effective alternative to other targeted bisulfite sequencing techniques, smrt-bs is an efficient and highly quantitative method for dna methylation analysis.

RESULTS
smrt bisulfite sequencing  procedure
the smrt bisulfite sequencing  procedure consists of five steps :  bisulfite conversion of genomic dna;  amplification of bisulfite-treated dna using region-specific primers coupled with universal oligonucleotide tags;  re-amplification of amplicon templates using anti-tag universal primers coupled with sample-specific multiplexing barcodes;  amplicon purification, pooling and smrt sequencing; and  cpg methylation quantitation.figure  <dig> illustration of the smrt bisulfite sequencing  procedure. for detailed description of each step see results and discussion.



bisulfite conversion
to maximize the capacity for long-read sequencing, sample preparation was optimized based on bisulfite conversion and pcr amplification. six commercially available bisulfite conversion kits were tested and the size distributions of converted dnas were assessed. despite the dna damage and fragmentation inflicted by bisulfite conversion  <cit> , five out of the six bisulfite conversion kits resulted in dna fragment distributions with peaks greater than ~2000 bp , suggesting that longer amplicons than the typical bisulfite pcr size range   <cit>  may be achievable.figure  <dig> bisulfite conversion and long-range amplification.  six commercially available bisulfite conversion kits were tested and treated dnas were examined using an agilent  <dig> bioanalyzer to assess size distributions.  two bisulfite-converted dnas from each of the six kits were subjected to pcr with two amplicons  and three different extension temperatures  to assess capacity for long amplicon amplification. bisulfite-converted dna from two kits  with a pcr extension temperature of 65°c had the most robust amplification of the longer 1109 bp amplicon.  eight amplicons ranging in size from 655–4027 bp  were designed to determine the upper amplicon size limit of bisulfite pcr.  agarose gel image of bisulfite pcr with the eight primer sets using dna converted by the epigentek methylamp and qiagen epitect kits revealing stable amplification of the 1631 bp amplicon with the epigentek methylamp converted dna and the reported pcr conditions.



since bisulfite conversion of dna results in a substantial increase in adenine  and thymine  content and previous reports have indicated that a/t rich dna can be more efficiently amplified by reduced pcr extension temperatures  <cit> , long-range bisulfite pcr was evaluated using a gradient of extension temperatures. treated dna from each of the bisulfite conversion kits were subjected to pcr with two amplicon lengths  and extension temperatures of 65°c, 68°c, and 72°c . these data indicated that two bisulfite conversion kits  and a pcr extension temperature of 65°c resulted in the most consistent amplification of the longer 1109 bp product using the reported conditions.

long-range amplification and smrt-bs quality filtering
to determine the maximum pcr amplicon size achievable with bisulfite converted dna from the qiagen and epigentek kits, eight primer sets were tested that ranged in amplicon length from 655–4027 bp . all primers were previously validated by short-length pcr to ensure their capacity for amplification. these results indicated that bisulfite pcr with dna converted by the epigentek methylamp kit using the reported conditions could amplify products up to ~ <dig>  kb , although amplification of the  <dig>  kb product was not generally consistent. the ~ <dig>  kb product was consistently amplified and was determined to be the approximated upper limit of stable bisulfite pcr using these conditions.

notably, the ability to amplify longer amplicons following bisulfite conversion with the epigentek methylamp kit was not reflective of poor bisulfite conversion efficiency as the cytosine conversion rate of amplicons subjected to smrt-bs  had an average conversion rate of  <dig> %. all amplicons with conversion rates less than 95%  were filtered prior to cpg methylation quantitation, which increased the average conversion rate to  <dig> %. in addition, potential clonal pcr artifacts, as defined by identical patterns of both cpg and non-cpg cytosines throughout the amplicons   <cit> , were filtered prior to cpg methylation quantitation.

long-read smrt-bs and reproducibility
to assess if long-range pcr amplification introduces any bias based on methylation level, cpg islands with low , intermediate , and high  methylation levels  were subjected to smrt-bs with four overlapping amplicons ranging from 625–1491 bp . in addition, reproducibility was measured by simultaneously sequencing each of these four amplicons in triplicate using independent pcr reactions and unique barcodes. the methylation levels of all cpg sites interrogated were quantitated and are illustrated as a heat map in figure 3b. the reproducibility of smrt-bs was very high for all methylation levels and amplicon sizes, with an average overall correlation of r =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  between independent triplicate amplicons . however, despite the overall high reproducibility, correlation with the longer amplicons was reduced compared to the correlation observed between shorter amplicons .figure  <dig> long-read smrt-bs and reproducibility.  to assess if amplicon length influenced methylation quantitation, cpg islands with previously determined low , intermediate , and high  methylation levels were subjected to smrt-bs with four overlapping amplicons ranging from 625–1491 bp. each amplicon was designed to completely or partially cover the cpg island  and each was independently amplified in triplicate to determine reproducibility.  a heat map of cpg methylation identified by smrt-bs for amplicons illustrated in , demonstrating strong consistency with methylation quantitation between triplicate amplicons and between amplicon lengths.  a heat map of correlation between triplicate amplicons and across the different sized amplicons identifying strong overall correlation , but reduced correlation with the longer amplicons.  box plots of the standard deviation of cpg site methylation levels between triplicate amplicons for all tested regions . of note, moderately increased variability in cpg site methylation levels was observed with the intermediately methylated cpg island  and with amplicons greater than ~1 kb . overlaid is a green line graph of sequencing depth for each amplicon, suggesting preferential sequencing of the shorter amplicons compared to the longer amplicons and the influence of reduced sequencing depth on cpg site methylation level reproducibility.



in addition to assessing the correlation between overall amplicon methylation, individual cpg site methylation levels were compared and the average standard deviations  between triplicates in each tested amplicon are illustrated in figure 3d. of note, the median sds for all cpg sites across all triplicate amplicons was less than ~ <dig> . the unmethylated and highly methylated cpg islands were very consistent at all amplicon lengths and replicates  . however, analysis of the cpg island with an intermediate methylation level using the four different sized amplicons identified cpg site methylation median sds of  <dig> ,  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig> , respectively.

as also illustrated in figure 3d, the amplicons that were greater than ~1 kb had lower smrt-bs sequencing depth than the shorter amplicons despite being pooled with equal numbers of molecules. this resulted in methylation reproducibility being positively correlated with sequencing depth and negatively correlated with amplicon length. consequently, these data underscore the need for increased sequencing depth for regions with intermediate methylation levels compared to those with low or high methylation levels to achieve similar confidence intervals and margins of error. shorter amplicons may get preferentially sequenced when pooled with longer amplicons, which could be counterbalanced by increasing the molecule quantity of longer amplicons in the smrt sequencing reaction when multiplexed with shorter amplicons. in addition, the increased variability observed in the intermediate methylation amplicons also suggests that pcr bias towards unmethylated dna may occur, as has previously been reported with traditional bisulfite sequencing  <cit> .

validation of smrt-bs methylation quantitation
validation of smrt-bs was accomplished by comparing identified tubgcp <dig>  mest, and ehpa <dig> cpg methylation levels from peripheral blood dna samples with methylation data on the same samples from two independent technologies, the humanmethylation <dig> beadchip  and the sureselect™ human methyl-seq target enrichment next-generation sequencing platform . the smrt-bs methylation levels of these cpg sites ranged from  <dig> to  <dig>  and had an average sequencing depth of 106x. correlation analyses indicated that the identified smrt-bs methylation levels were consistent with the two orthogonal technologies with an overall r =  <dig>  ±  <dig>  and r =  <dig>  ±  <dig> , respectively. the lower correlation observed with the humanmethylation <dig> beadchip data was likely due to fewer cpg sites included in the analysis. stratifying the correlation analyses by amplicon length indicated that although the overall correlations were very good for all lengths, reduced correlation was observed with the amplicons greater than  <dig>  kb than those less than  <dig>  kb . these results are consistent with the increased sd observed between replicates of the longer amplicons  and are likely influenced, in part, by lower sequencing depth compared to the shorter amplicons . however, the pattern of shifted intermediate methylation levels observed in the validation analyses also support the aforementioned possibility of pcr bias towards unmethylated dna that has been previously reported with amplicon bisulfite sequencing  <cit> .figure  <dig> smrt-bs validation.  methylation quantitation by smrt-bs of  <dig> cpg sites was compared to available data on the same sample using the humanmethylation <dig> beadchip , resulting in an overall correlation of  <dig>  ±  <dig> . correlation analyses were stratified by amplicon lengths, indicating a reduction in correlation with longer amplicons and possible pcr bias towards unmethylated dna for the intermediate methylation region .  methylation quantitation by smrt-bs of  <dig> cpg sites was compared to available data on the same sample using the sureselect™ human methyl-seq target enrichment next generation sequencing platform , resulting in an overall correlation of  <dig>  ±  <dig> . correlation analyses were stratified by amplicon lengths, indicating a reduction in correlation with longer amplicons and possible pcr bias towards unmethylated dna for the intermediate methylation region .



smrt-bs multiplexing and utility
to evaluate the utility of smrt-bs with multiplexed amplicons and specimens, four distinct cpg island amplicons  and  <dig> hematological malignancy cell lines were simultaneously subjected to smrt-bs . the average sequencing depth was 110x for each of the  <dig> amplicons, which identified a spectrum of highly quantitative methylation levels across all cell lines and interrogated cpg sites . the cdkn2a tumor suppressor gene is commonly deleted in hematological cancers and those cell lines with cdkn2a deletions could not amplify products. of note, one of the cell lines included in the smrt-bs multiplexing analysis  was previously subjected to rrbs methylation analysis through the publically available encode project  <cit> . there were  <dig> cpg sites covered in this cell line by both data sets, with average smrt-bs and rrbs sequencing depths of 101x and 31x, respectively. among these cpg sites,  <dig> had >20x coverage by rrbs, and the pearson correlation between smrt-bs and rrbs methylation levels among these  <dig> cpg sites was  <dig>  , further supporting the overall accuracy of smrt-bs methylation quantitation.figure  <dig> smrt-bs utility and multiplexing.  heat map of smrt-bs methylation quantitation results for four cpg island amplicons  and  <dig> hematological malignancy cell lines. cdkn2a deletion is illustrated by grey bars.  smrt-bs methylation results of  <dig> cpg sites for the k <dig> cell line were compared to available rrbs data from the encode project  <cit> , revealing a correlation of  <dig> .



CONCLUSIONS
many techniques have been developed to measure cpg methylation, which differ widely in their chemistry, sample requirement, resolution, capacity for quantitation, throughput, accessibility and cost . although genome-wide sequencing approaches are often desirable, the immediate benefits in cpg coverage can be offset by high per sample costs, a low throughput, and the need for computational expertise. consequently, targeted approaches to detect cpg methylation are still widely used and continually developed, now often coupling bisulfite conversion with next-generation sequencing  <cit> . however, the paucity of targeted bisulfite sequencing techniques capable of examining amplicons longer than the typical bisulfite pcr size range   <cit>  prompted our development of smrt-bs.

although smrt sequencing is capable of directly detecting modified nucleotides by their unique polymerase kinetics without bisulfite conversion  <cit> , the introduction of an amplification step abolishes its ability to detect any epigenetic modifications of template dna. a key component to the development of smrt-bs was the optimization of bisulfite conversion and pcr, which resulted in amplicons up to ~ <dig> - <dig>  kb from bisulfite-converted dna. subjecting these amplicons to multiplexed smrt-bs indicated that the technique was reproducible and highly concordant with other lower throughput quantitative cpg methylation methods. however, the increased variability observed with smrt-bs of intermediately methylated regions must be acknowledged as a potential limitation that may be mitigated by increased sequencing depth. similarly, as has previously been reported for amplicon bisulfite sequencing  <cit> , it should be noted that smrt-bs of intermediately methylated regions may also be influenced by pcr bias towards unmethylated dna. to account for this known problem inherent to amplicon bisulfite sequencing, calibration strategies using standard curves of methylation controls have been reported if needed  <cit> .

as a targeted amplicon sequencing method and an extension of previous bisulfite sequencing techniques, smrt-bs is capable of a high degree of multiplexing and sequencing depth for accurate methylation quantitation with negligable clonal pcr artifacts. importantly, this technique also takes advantage of the long read lengths achievable with smrt sequencing, which allows for more thorough regional cpg methylation assessment and increases the capacity for studying the relationship between phased single nucleotide variants and allele-specific cpg methylation. additional potential applications of smrt-bs include targeted panels for diagnostic cpg methylation detection, and multiplexed interrogation of candidate cpg methylation sites for epigenome-wide association study   <cit>  replication analyses. notably, the size distribution of all cpg islands in the hg <dig> human genome reference sequence  suggests that the ability of smrt-bs to measure dna methylation across ~ <dig>  kb amplicons could theoretically interrogate ~91% of all the cpg islands in the human genome.

