BACKGROUND
for decades, evolutionary and quantitative geneticists have suspected that genetic interactions are important for phenotypic evolution. in numerous empirical studies, genetic interactions  have implied important contributions to differences among and within species for various quantitative traits, such as plant morphology and growth  <cit> , animal behavior and physiology  <cit> , metabolism  <cit>  or fitness  <cit>  . it is now fairly well acknowledged that biological systems rely on complex networks of interacting genes ; however, the extent to which genetic polymorphism in these networks contribute to phenotypic variation remains to be shown.

there is an almost complete lack of insight on mechanistic contributions of genetic interactions to phenotypic change. thus, it is important to identify such mechanisms empirically and utilize them as realistic starting points for in-depth theoretical explorations of the importance of genetic architecture on phenotypic evolution. for instance, an expectation from theoretical models is that certain forms of epistatic interactions may promote sustained long-term responses to selection, reaching an ending point that is much higher than what could be predicted from the observable genetic variation in the initial population . recent support for this idea comes from studies  <cit>  that reported that strong interactions were important in two of the most famous long-term artificial selection experiments: the century long illinois corn selection for oil and protein concentration  <cit>  and the 50-generation body weight selection experiment in the virginia chicken lines  <cit> .

the availability of high-quality datasets with good estimates of the phenotypes corresponding to each genotypic combination of a genetic architecture of interest  facilitates explorations of the link between genetic interactions and phenotypic evolution, by providing functional estimates of epistasis independent from allelic frequencies in the population  <cit> . data from an intercross between the virginia high and low selected lines used by carlborg et al  <cit>  provided a unique example of a biological system where strong genetic interactions were involved in the phenotypic change of a quantitative character under strong artificial selection . a network of four interacting loci explained nearly half of the eight-fold body weight difference between the chicken lines, and these data provided direct estimates for the phenotypes corresponding to any genotypic combination among these four loci. in this paper, we use individual-based computer simulations to explore the dynamic properties of this gene network when subjected to divergent phenotypic selection resembling that of the original selection experiment. the results from the study are used to highlight the impact of radial genetic network architectures on phenotypic evolution and lead to a discussion of the impact of epistasis on the possibility to dissect the genetic architecture of complex traits.

RESULTS
genetic modeling and network architecture
in traditional statistical genetic models, epistasis describes the multiple locus genetic effects that cannot be explained by additivity and dominance  <cit> . however, these statistical interaction effects are only valid in the population where they have been estimated. therefore, they are not useful for inferring unambiguous biological relationships between loci or their potential contribution to the selection response for a population over time. a more useful tool for studying responses to selection from genetic data is the genotype-phenotype map, i.e. a high-quality dataset associating a phenotypic value to each genotype. in this paper we use the dataset from which carlborg et al  <cit>  observed strong epistasis affecting body weight . in the four-locus genotype-phenotype map, alleles inherited from the high line  and the low line  are combined to form   <dig> diploid genotypic combinations in the f <dig> population. the data allowed direct estimation of phenotypic means for  <dig> of these  <dig> genotypes.

further analysis shows that the effect of the central locus of the network  is very different from the effects of the three other 'radial' loci . figure  <dig> illustrates how h alleles at the three radial loci increase or decrease the phenotype depending on the genetic background at the central locus growth <dig>  in homozygous growth <dig> hh individuals, h alleles lead to a heavier body weight, while these same h alleles decrease body weight in a growth <dig> ll genetic background. each of the radial loci thus reveals  the genetic effect of growth <dig>  in the studied f <dig> population with intermediate allelic frequencies at all loci, only part of the maximum effects of the network can be described using marginal additive effects. this explains why growth <dig> was the only genome-wide significant quantitative trait locus  in a standard analysis  <cit> : on average, the three radial loci had much smaller additive effects and, hence, could not be detected in a one-dimensional qtl analysis.

genetic network and response to selection
the evolutionary properties of the four-locus genotype-phenotype map were explored using computer simulations. each individual in the simulated population is represented by its genotype and by its phenotype, calculated as the sum of the genotypic value from the genotype-phenotype map and a random environmental effect . artificial populations were submitted in silico to arbitrary selection pressures, designed to mimic the artificial selection performed in the original selection experiment to generate the high and low body weight selected chicken lines.

highly variable response to selection
the rate of phenotypic change, as well as the final outcome of the selection process, depends on the initial h-allele frequency f <dig> . as the radial loci display a similar effect in their interactions with growth <dig>  they have been assigned the same initial allelic frequency. we found several divergent dynamics, which differ depending on the initial allelic frequencies of the central and/or radial components of the network. an intermediate f <dig> leads to symmetrical responses during bi-directional selection  <cit> . low h frequencies in the radial loci  correspond to a buffered  system on which selection is not efficient: the response to selection is very slow, and the system can be trapped in local sub-optimal states. in contrast, decanalization owing to h alleles at the radial loci  leads to very rapid selection responses. the dynamics that lead to the most symmetric and progressive selection responses occur with intermediate initial frequencies in both central and radial loci .

response to directional selection
the dynamics of f were studied for each of the four loci in the network under upward and downward directional selection . at any point in the genotype-phenotype map, the central locus in the network  displays the largest individual additive effect with the same sign in all genetic backgrounds. as a result, growth <dig> is systematically fixed first, for h and l alleles in the high and low lines, respectively, in all evaluated scenarios. the effects on the phenotype  from the radial loci  are gradually revealed by increases in growth <dig> f and as a result they are fixed after growth <dig>  under directional selection, growth <dig>  growth <dig> and growth <dig> are fixed for h alleles in both the high and low lines. this result is rather surprising, given that, by definition, l alleles were called 'l' owing to their origin in the low line.

according to standard quantitative genetics theory, genetic variance consists of additive, dominance and interaction components  <cit> . the additive genetic variance describes the main resemblance between parents and offspring and is thus the best predictor of the immediate selection response in a population. figure  <dig> shows the dynamics of these genetic variance components in the simulated populations selected for increased phenotypes, illustrating how interaction  variance present in the initial population is progressively turned into additive variance. this induction of additive genetic variance sustains the selection response much farther than could be expected given the small amount of additive genetic variation available at the initiation of the selection experiment. this clearly illustrates how dependent the amount of additive genetic variance is on the allelic frequencies in a selected population and also shows the advantage of modeling epistatic effects when aiming at addressing the evolutionary properties of genetic architectures.

stabilizing selection
a general observation in selection experiments for decreased body weight is that the response ceases after a number of generations owing to physiological constraints. in the virginia lines, the response in the low line has been small since generation  <dig> . the resulting balance between natural and artificial selection resembles stabilizing selection with an intermediary optimum. in simulations with stabilizing selection in the low line, we show that this can lead to fixation of the l allele for all four loci in the network . this illustrates the unconventional manner in which genetic network architectures influence phenotypic evolution and that this could make it difficult to detect such patterns in line-cross experiments between selected lines.

linear responses to selection
many empirically observed selection responses where genetic interactions are implied, e.g. the virginia chicken lines, the illinois corn lines and others  <cit> , are nearly linear . the expected response to selection from the radial four-locus network is, however, slightly sigmoid . in actual biological systems under selection, the response most likely results from a genetic architecture composed of a mixture of loci with marginal effects of varying size as well as loci with interaction effects. to explore how the contribution of other components of a more complex genetic architecture affect selection response, we made simulations where several minor genetic factors were included in addition to the four-locus epistatic network. this is a clearly realistic scenario as the four-locus networks contributes to half the selection response in the virginia lines, and thus other genetic factors need to contribute as well. the result is that the selection response is increasingly linearized when the number of additional qtls increases . moreover, because random fluctuations, most likely a result of genetic drift , observed responses from the four-locus network do not systematically exhibit the slightly sigmoid pattern. simulations confirm that even if the average response to selection is not linear, individual realizations can range from linear to sigmoidal, with many being too noisy to show a clear pattern .

discussion and 
CONCLUSIONS
qtl-based approach of the population history
artificial selection experiments generally provide dynamic data, such as heritability, changes in response to selection and estimates of environmental perturbations. combining these empirical data with the results from a qtl analysis based on an intercross between selected lines is likely to enhance the understanding of the genetic architecture underlying the dynamical properties of the population. unfortunately, several details of the selection will always remain unknown and thus preclude attempts to directly fit the output of the simulations with the observed selection response.

explanatory power of detected genetic architectures
advances in analytical methods for qtl detection has made it possible to unravel gene interaction networks affecting complex traits  <cit> . qtl studies will, however, fail to uncover genetic factors with small individual or interaction effects that segregate in the original lines or that display genetic inheritance patterns that do not conform to the genetic models used in the analysis . consequently, although the four-locus network detected in the virginia chickens explains nearly half of the original difference between lines, other factors contributed about 75% of the phenotypic variability among the informative individuals in the f <dig> population. as illustrated in additional file 1: supfig <dig>  minor genetic factors of weak effects that cannot be detected  may modify the expected responses to selection significantly.

the genotype-phenotype map that is the foundation of our study may itself contain some statistical uncertainties. the estimates of genotypic values are based on a finite-size f <dig> population and will thus be affected by sampling effects, in particular for the completely homozygous genotypes. the sampling could have an impact, in particular, on the selection limit, but less of an effect on the overall dynamics . furthermore, as the loci were detected in a qtl experiment, their effect might be overestimated owing to the beavis effect  <cit> . however, because the major focus in our study was on the dynamic properties of selection on a radial network genetic architecture, the negative impact of overestimated qtl effects should be minor, as these properties will hold even if the magnitude of the effects of the network was biased.

in a selection experiment, intrinsically random factors, such as genetic drift or environmental noise, are eventually likely to interfere with the theoretically expected selection response. owing to randomness , it appears that the empirically measured phenotype sometimes evolves in the direction opposite to the selection pressure . these factors can be accounted for in simulations, and we used an effective population size resembling that used in the production of the virginia lines, as well as an environmental effect based on the amplitude of the non-genetic effects measured in the f <dig> population. theoretical results  <cit>  predict that genetic drift in small or fragmented populations can have a large impact on the evolution of epistatic characters, and simulated replicates of the same selection pattern evidence the potential impact of genetic drift on the overall shape of the phenotypic evolution .

benefits of combining qtl and empirical selection data
it is widely acknowledged that the link between the genetic architecture and responses to selection is not direct  <cit> , and that inferences about genetic factors from the output of selection experiments remain largely speculative. however, considering both molecular  and phenotypic  data, as suggested in this work, provides additional insights into the genetic mechanisms involved in the response to selection of these lines of chickens, and more generally in long-term sustained selection responses.

the state of the initial population, which remains one of the main unknowns when parameterizing the simulations, can also be successfully addressed. we know that the base population of the original selection experiment was formed by the crossing of seven partly inbred chicken lines. there are, however, no empirical estimates of the initial frequencies of the h and l alleles in these lines. we have therefore explored the dynamics in the selection response for a large range of initial states of the base population. the results show that the expected dynamics of the network changes dramatically depending on the initial frequencies of alleles, from almost no phenotypic improvement  to very fast  fixation of the best genotype. none of these extreme dynamics correspond to the regular response to selection observed empirically during the artificial selection process, and can therefore be ruled out: the allelic frequencies of h and l alleles were probably roughly even in this particular initial population. this also suggests that, in a polymorphic genetic background, no allelic marginal effect seems to be sufficiently high to allow spread  in the time scale of the selection experiment. it is thus unlikely that new mutations, i.e. alleles that were not present initially, would have had a major impact on the selection response in this particular case, and the initial population was probably already polymorphic for all loci of the network.

furthermore, theoretical in silico explorations of the reconstructed gene network by submitting it to directional selection facilitates a better understanding of the respective roles of the different components of the genetic architecture. the simulations show that the effects of the major genes in the network were probably rather weak at the beginning of the selection experiment, and that responses during the very early generations were likely to be partly a result of minor genetic factors. in all simulations, the central locus was the first fixed, and its fixation enhanced the effects of the other loci, which then subsequently contributed to the selection response. our results therefore suggest that the selection response is composed of different stages that lead to the observed linear phenotypic change when they overlap. dissecting genetic architectures and identifying their ability to contribute in the short or long term to selection response may represent an important step towards a better understanding of the genetic bases of complex traits and, consequently, of the evolutionary properties of populations.

selection response from genetic networks
genetic networks can be defined at any interaction level, from molecular to high-level complex phenotypes, such as, in our example, body weight. the evidenced gene network has been defined through significant epistatic interactions that were detected by a qtl analysis. one cannot deduce whether these four loci correspond to genes that are part of the same metabolic pathway or, on the contrary, participate in independent high-level functions  involved in a complex way in the expression of body weight. in any case, the fact that each of the radial components of the network has a similar effect on the phenotype, both in nature and in amplitude, through similar interactions with a unique central component  remains particularly striking, and strongly supports the hypothesis of the biological meaning of this network.

although qtl detection experiments are generally not powerful enough to detect networks as large as those deduced from metabolic studies  <cit> , they can confirm that the complexity of a biological system is higher than the sum of its components . as shown in this paper, an important difference in the realized response to selection from radial network architectures compared with selection responses from individual loci per se is the dependence on the initial allelic frequencies at other loci to achieve the full genetic potential for phenotypic change. furthermore, as the effects of the network components are in the same direction, there are likely to reinforce each other and to lead to clearer patterns. for instance, the genetic network described in our study shows positive epistasis  when selected towards heavier body weights, where the effects of the h alleles reinforce each other. such directional epistasis is known to induce a different response to selection than that expected from the traditional additive model , and the theoretical resulting selection curve is a sigmoid , with a slow response in the first generations  followed by a 'burst' of additive variance when the favorable genotypic combinations become more frequent. it is not clear whether such an effect might have been detected  if only two components  would have been involved.

qtl detection of genetic networks
studying crosses between divergently selected or evolutionary distant populations remains a powerful way to infer the genetic architecture underlying selection response to natural or artificial selection . one of the strongest assumptions in this approach is that the original populations are fixed for alternative alleles or at least segregating for multiple different alleles. if, however, the same allele is fixed in both populations owing to the underlying genetic architecture, one will fail to detect these loci.

a surprising, but intriguing, result in our study is that the genotype-phenotype map contains several genotypes that display lower phenotypes than the genotype of the selected 'low line'. the lowest weights are obtained for the genotype with ll homozygosity for the central locus and h alleles at the radial loci. the low line illustrates a scenario where the artificial selection experiment was disturbed by natural selection that eliminated extreme phenotypes: the smallest chickens in the low line were often unable to reproduce or even to survive until reproductive age  <cit> . this can be observed in figure  <dig>  because the response to selection ceases in the low line after approximately  <dig> generations despite a reasonable amount of remaining genetic variation. this unexpected selection pattern might explain why the l alleles fixed in the low line do not lead to the lowest phenotype; they rather lead to the optimal phenotype selected through stabilizing selection.

it is often assumed that the part of the genetic variability that cannot be detected in the experiment is a result of numerous minor qtls, qtls in a repulsion phase or epistasis. minor effect qtls and, to a lesser extent, epistasis could potentially be detected by increasing the quality of the data . here we indicate a genetic architecture that no line-cross-based qtl experiment, regardless of the accuracy of the statistical tools or the number of sampled individuals, would be able to evidence as the same allele is fixed in all lines; only the central locus will be found and implied to have a major additive effect. indeed, if natural selection would have been bypassed in the experiment, then the final fixed genotype would likely have been the same in both high and low lines for growth <dig>  growth <dig> and growth <dig> and the conclusion from the qtl experiment would have been that a single qtl, growth <dig>  was the major factor of the selection response in both lines. consequently, the complexity of the genetic architecture that has contributed to the phenotypic evolution would remain unknown and, furthermore, as the effect of this locus is entirely dependent on its context, this could be a problem in future efforts to clone the underlying gene or use it, for example, in marker-assisted selection.

