BACKGROUND
the position, shape, size and orientation of organelles varies among differentiated cells, thereby allowing distinct cell types to be recognized. the approximately spherical nucleus itself generally is near the center of the cell and in yeasts the spindle pole body  provides a landmark at one pole of the nucleus, thereby allowing one to witness changes of nuclear orientation during the cell cycle  <cit> . related to these observations is the question of whether all portions of the nuclear envelope  are necessarily inherited by the daughter nucleus at mitosis – an issue which bears directly on the ability of cells to cope with the impact of damage or change accrued during a single generation. the present investigation shows that a novel landmark of the perimeter of the yeast nucleus is not inherited.

the nuclear lamina in higher eukaryotic cells governs nuclear morphology and serves as a scaffold for the organization of the nucleoplasm, where it anchors heterochromatin and can affect both dna replication and transcription. the best-characterized proteins of the lamina are the intermediate filament lamins, which self-associate via coiled-coil domains, generating a compact meshwork at the nuclear periphery  <cit> .

alterations in the structure, organization, and composition of the nuclear lamina are likely to account for aberrant shapes of the nuclei of malignant cells, as well as the distinct nuclear morphology of neutrophils. moreover, the increased titer of mutant lamins can have major consequences for the shape and integrity of the nuclear surface  <cit> . lamin orthologs are absent from yeast, and it is not known whether a structural or functional equivalent of the lamina exists in s. cerevisiae. when higher eukaryotic lamin b <dig> or its receptor is expressed in s. cerevisiae, these proteins concentrate at the periphery of the nucleoplasm  <cit> .

several non-membrane proteins that normally localize to the periphery of the nucleoplasm in yeast possess coiled-coil domains   <cit> . esc1p , contains three equally spaced coiled-coil domains, can function as an anchor for chromatin, interacts with rap1p and sir4p, promotes targeted silencing at telomeres and hmr, is needed for proper organization of the "nuclear baskets" of nuclear pores, and promotes nuclear retention of unspliced transcripts  <cit> . esc1p is larger than lamins  and lacks the c-terminal isoprenylated caax motif present in a and b-type lamins.

the present study demonstrates that accumulation of esc1p at the nuclear periphery causes dramatic modifications of the nuclear envelope. these modifications are structurally distinct from those which have been reported in a screen of deletion strains  <cit>  or upon deletion of an er/ne membrane phosphatase  <cit> , mutation of components of the nuclear pore complex  <cit> , proteins which function in the early secretory path  <cit> , or acc1p, which reduces very long-chain fatty acids  <cit> . interestingly, the titer of esc1p affects levels of several transcripts, only some of which originate from telomere-proximal loci. the structural abnormalities of the ne which are caused by esc1p are not passed on to daughter cells, showing that inheritance of components of the nuclear perimeter can be selective.

RESULTS
to learn whether the composition of the nuclear periphery influences nuclear shape, and to extend previous observations on esc1p  <cit> , we have induced synthesis of gfp-tagged esc1p in s. cerevisiae. after 3– <dig> hrs we observe the progressive elaboration of fin- and ring-like "escapades" that extend from the surface of > 80% of nuclei. ~6% of nuclei also have bright patches of gfp-esc1p at the nuclear periphery. after overnight induction, rings and patches predominate . similar observations have been made with both haploid and diploid strains. equivalent observations have also been made with untagged esc1p, in which case we visualize a gfp-tagged er membrane protein to define the perimeter of the nucleus . judging from estimates of transcript levels presented below, the titer of esc1p could increase as much as 20–30x over controls upon overnight induction.

images of cells which express nup49p-gfp  show that escapades include nuclear pores . ultrastructural examination also detects nuclear pores in the escapades and demonstrates that escapades are double-membrane sheets  of constant width . since escapades are limited by two layers of ne it is reasonable that – in cells expressing gfp-esc or er membrane proteins – their fluorescent intensity can exceed that of the rest of the ne . time-lapse observations show that the position and contour of most escapades remains essentially constant for tens of minutes; however the fin-like structures occasionally fuse back to the nucleus and generate rings . examination of cells which express a tagged histone  as well as gfp-ec1p shows that escapades include little or no chromatin .

to learn whether excess of other proteins of the nuclear periphery causes similar changes, we have compared the impact of excess esc1p to that of the non-membrane protein, mlp1p  which colocalizes with esc1p  <cit> , the tail-anchored inner membrane protein, prm3p  <cit>  , and the integral membrane proteins of the inner membrane, heh1p and heh2p  <cit>  . excess mlp1p is known to distribute throughout the nucleoplasm  <cit> . as shown, mlp1p has no obvious effect and prm3p causes changes of the ne roughly comparable to those caused by esc1p. by contrast, the heh proteins are much more perturbing, with heh1p not even leaving the quasi-spherical shape of the chromatin mass intact. induction of either esc1p or mlp1p allows continued growth, while induction of heh1p, heh2p, or prm3p is toxic . we therefore have not pursued these membrane proteins further.

relation of escapades to intranuclear structures
in cells which express the nucleolar marker, sik1p-mrfp, and can be induced to express gfp-esc1p, systematic examination of through-focal series after  <dig> hr induction shows that > 90% of escapades contact the perimeter of the nucleus at or immediately adjacent to the nucleolus . the nucleolus is not however present within the escapades themselves. the yeast spindle pole body  is embedded in the ne at a position which is usually opposite the nucleolus  <cit> . consistent with the observed nucleolar association, the localization of escapades and karmellae does not coincide with the tagged spb protein, spc42p . systematic counting of through-focal series of cells which exhibit escapades shows that only ~10% of the tagged spbs contact escapades. another modification of the ne, the "karmellae" which result from overexpression of hmg-coa reductase, also associates with the nucleolus  <cit>  and avoids the spb . a third instance of association with the nucleolus is that of the "flares" which appear upon deletion of the er/ne membrane proteins, nem1p or spo7p. in this case, the flares define a pocket which encloses the nucleolus  <cit> .

since centromeres are close to the spb during most of the cell cycle  <cit> , we also studied their relation to escapades, using cells which express lac operator arrays integrated near a centromere and gfp-tagged lac repressor. no obvious association is seen between this centromere and escapades . equivalent experiments to localize a telomere again show no obvious association . in both cases, systematic counting of through-focal series of cells which exhibit escapades shows that only ~10–12% of the tagged loci contact escapades. a functional gfp-tagged form of the telomere-associated protein, rap1p, which binds esc1p  <cit> , also is not detected outside the chromatin mass, as would be expected if it were in escapades . this is also the case for sir4p  <cit> .

formation of escapades-relation to cytoplasmic structures
following the separation of sister chromatids at the onset of anaphase, the nucleus of the mother cell quickly extends into the bud, generating a dumbbell-shaped structure with a narrow bridge of ne connecting the two nuclei  <cit> . fission of the bridge leaves protruding membrane remnants that are normally resorbed by the two resulting nuclei. escapades superficially resemble these remnants and therefore might be derived from them. nevertheless, time-lapse microscopy of cells which exit mitosis shows that gfp-esc1p-positive remnants are efficiently resorbed, as in control cells . moreover, cells treated with α-factor   or hydroxyurea   can generate escapades when esc1p expression is induced in the absence of cell cycle progression.

the formation of escapades does not appear to depend on the integrity of the tubulin or actin cytoskeleton, judging from experiments in which they are induced in the presence of doses of nocodazole or latrunculin a which effectively depolymerize the corresponding cytoskeletal structures .

like the surface of the yeast nucleus  <cit> , escapades are intimately associated with vacuoles, as detected with the membrane dye, fm4- <dig> . live-cell imaging reveals that escapades can originate at or near the nucleus-vacuole junction , prior to extending along the surface of the vacuole . nevertheless, small ring-like escapades and patches of esc1p can be induced in pep3-Δ cells which lack conventional vacuoles  <cit>  .

inheritance of escapades
the distribution of escapades was examined as cells pass through anaphase. intriguingly, they are excluded from > 95% of daughter nuclei . the asymmetric distribution is especially conspicuous in a mob1- <dig> mutant which makes it possible to maintain cells in late anaphase for hours   <cit> .

the percentage of tagged escapades that remain at the maternal nucleus during mitosis was determined  in control strains mata  and matα ,  in the mitotic exit mutant, mob1- <dig> ,  in septin mutants, cdc3- <dig>  and cdc10- <dig> , and  in the absence of an organized vacuole, due to deletion of pep <dig> . all cells carry the integrated gal-gfp-esc <dig> cassette, except for the septin mutants, which were transformed with a centromeric plasmid expressing gfp-esc1p under control of a methionine-repressible, met <dig>  promoter. typically, cells were synchronized in g <dig>  during induction for  <dig> hrs at 23°c and were then allowed to reenter the cell cycle at 23°c under repressing conditions. ts strains were shifted to the restrictive temperature one hour after α-factor release and examined after  <dig> hrs. the matα control strain  was used without synchronization.  <dig> mitotic cells were examined in at least three replicate experiments for each condition and the distribution of escapades between mother and daughter nuclei was scored. as shown, ~95% of the escapades are always retained in the maternal nucleus in all cases.

why are escapades not present in daughter nuclei ?
escapades could be actively retained by the maternal nucleus, excluded from the daughter nucleus, or could simply not be able to diffuse in the plane of the membrane. since septin filaments at the bud neck can restrict transfer of proteins between mother and bud  <cit> , we have examined inheritance in strains that carry mutations in septin subunits and disorganize the septin collar at the restrictive temperature . in these mutants, escapade exclusion from daughter nuclei is again seen . karmellae are also restricted to the mother in wt and in septin mutants . consistent with the suggestion that there is no structural impasse at the bud neck, most escapades which remain in the mother do not accumulate at the neck. moreover, electron microscopic examination shows that a significant space separates the outer nuclear membrane from the inner aspect of the plasma membrane at the bud neck during anaphase  <cit> .

to evaluate the maternal retention model, we have studied the distribution of escapades in cells for which nuclear division does not require traversal of the bud neck. for this purpose, we have disrupted actin filament integrity with latrunculin a, which allows the spindle to deviate from the mother/bud axis, with the result that nuclear division can occur entirely within the maternal cytoplasm. strikingly, escapades are restricted to a single nucleus in such binucleates . this finding led us to investigate whether association with the vacuole could account for maternal retention; however, escapades are overwhelmingly retained in a pep3Δ strain .

to inquire whether escapades and karmellae are intrinsically immobile, we have examined the constancy of their position when the nucleus with which they associate fuses with a conventional nucleus during karyogamy. as shown in fig.  <dig>  they show no tendency to migrate into the trans nucleus over a period of time greater than that required for anaphase. nevertheless, tagged nuclear pores are able to access the trans nucleus  <cit> . note the rapid transit of gfp-esc1p to the trans nucleus. at least at this level of expression, it has considerable mobility.

functional consequences
despite dramatic changes in nuclear shape, cells that express excess esc1p or gfp-esc1p are not seriously growth impaired in liquid culture or on solid media. furthermore, they show a distribution of dna content comparable to wt, and can mate . the maternal restriction of escapades may direct most physiological consequences of their presence to the mother and thereby contribute to the lack of a major growth phenotype, as each cell division produces progeny which initially lack escapades.

it is therefore of interest that a differential effect at the level of cell cycle progression is evident. normally, when a mother cell gives rise to a daughter, the mother will rebud quickly, while daughters must grow to a critical size before budding  <cit> . by contrast, when pre-induced gfp-esc1p-expressing cells are observed, the bud interval is slowed in mothers  and accelerated in daughters. as a result, the difference in timing of budding between mothers and daughters is reduced by more than 50% . the net impact of these events could account for the modest reduction of relative growth rate which can best be detected in mixed cultures in which isogenic wt and gfp-esc1p-expressing cells are both present. pure cultures of cells which can be induced to express gfp-esc1p remain fluoresecent for days of culture in galactose medium, while addition of an equal number of wild type cells prior to culture is followed by a gradual and progressive reduction in the proportion of fluorescent cells.

to further investigate the consequences of excess esc1p, we initiated microarray analysis of poly+ mrnas of a pair of isogenic strains grown in galactose medium, only one of which allows esc1p induction from a gal <dig> promoter . upon overnight growth in galactose medium, there is a ~20–30x increase in the signal corresponding to esc <dig> mrna and only  <dig> other changes which exceed  <dig> x fold. both positive and negative changes are seen. considering that gfp-esc1p concentrates at the extreme periphery of the nucleoplasm along with telomeres, it is of interest that both the increases and decreases  are enriched within  <dig> kb of telomeres, i.e. even though this region accounts for only ~ <dig> % of the length of the average yeast chromosome, it accounts for ~30% of these changes. nevertheless, ~70% of the changes are not in this region. no notable changes in mrna levels were seen for genes whose products associate with esc1p, such as rap <dig> and sir <dig>  since deletion of esc <dig> does not obviously affect nuclear morphology , we have not investigated corresponding transcriptional changes.

comparison of gfp-esc1p cells which were induced overnight and control cells grown in galactose medium. the list includes those genes whose microarray signals change by at least  <dig> x. interestingly, only two of the entries in this table are among the  <dig> loci identified as putative esc1p-binding sites in a genome-wide screen  <cit> .

discussion
the morphology of organelles is intimately related to their function and deviation from normal morphology can have profound physiological consequences. it is thus plausible that ne shape alterations contribute to events which cause cellular malfunction in disease.

nevertheless, radical changes of the composition of the nuclear periphery can be compatible with cell survival, as in a variety of yeast deletion strains lacking transmembrane proteins which localize to the ne and er , nucleoplasmic proteins , or nucleoporins   <cit> . none of these proteins normally are restricted to the periphery of the nucleoplasm itself.

interestingly, the shape of the nucleus is not affected by deletion of esc1p or deletion of two other proteins which normally localize to the periphery of the nucleoplasm, mlp1p and mlp2p  <cit> . moreover, the growth of nem1-Δ, seh1-Δ, spo7-Δ, ssh1-Δ and thp1-Δ  <cit>  is not obviously affected by overexpression of esc1p .

mutations in nuclear lamina constituents, most notably lamin a and c, cause a diverse spectrum of diseases, the laminopathies. laminopathies caused by excess pre-lamin a at the nuclear periphery are characterized by bleb-like expansions of the nuclear surface  <cit> . the dependence of the shape of the yeast nucleus on both nuclear membrane proteins and proteins that concentrate at the periphery of the nucleoplasm is reminiscent of a distinct laminopathy , which can result from either mutation of the inner nuclear membrane protein, emerin, or mutation of lamin a  <cit> . moreover, overexpression of a gfp-tagged form of the inner membrane protein, prm3p, distorts the shape of the ne in much the same fashion as esc1p, and excess heh1p and heh2p  <cit>  grossly distort the ne and chromatin mass, while mlp1p induction has no obvious impact. these differential effects may signify that the heh proteins have a high affinity for chromatin, that esc1p and prm3p are more closely linked to the inner nuclear membrane per se than to chromatin, and that mlp1p is relatively independent.

the characteristic structure of escapades and distribution of excess gfp-esc1p are compatible with the hypothesis that excess esc1p forces enlargement of the ne due to end-to-end association of the protein, that chromatin has an intrinsic coherence which tends to preserve a roughly globular shape, and that the inner aspect of the ne  can also self-associate laterally . indeed, although there has never been an experimentally accessible model for investigation of this latter issue, the ne of malignant cells – like escapades – is frequently characterized by focal self-apposition of the lamina and/or the nucleoplasmic surface of the inner nuclear membrane  <cit> .

there is no reason to expect that esc1p is fully comparable to higher eukaryotic lamins. for example, unlike lamins, tagged esc1p  expressed from its own promoter does not completely encircle the nucleus, being absent from beneath the nucleolus  <cit> . moreover, the observation of rapid diffusion of gfp-esc1p upon karyogamy shows that at least the overexpressed protein is mobile.

the transcriptional consequences of overexpressing esc1p emphasize the importance of this protein  for gene expression. since both negative and positive changes are seen, esc1p appears to be a complex regulator, not only an enhancer of silencing. in this regard, it resembles many transcriptional regulators including rap1p  <cit> . it is also notable that ~70% of the changes which we detect occur at loci which are further than  <dig> kb from telomeres . in addition to their intrinsic interest, these microarray data provide a possible prototype against which to evaluate the transcriptional characteristics of laminopathies, which presumably account for their cell type-specific effects.

daughter cells differ from mothers in several regards  <cit> . escapades are not transferred to daughter cells, apparently due to their immobility. these structures – and karmellae – are thus part of a "lagging" domain of the nuclear perimeter. the nucleolus may also be part of this domain, judging from its association with escapades and karmellae, as well as the observation that it is one of the last nuclear components to reach the bud during anaphase  <cit> . extra rdna circles  <cit>  and ars plasmids  <cit>  are also retained.

CONCLUSIONS
this study demonstrates the extreme structural plasticity of the yeast nucleus and shows that the unusual "escapades" which can be generated are essentially immobile and therefore are not inherited. their lack of inheritance provides a striking example of the exclusion of epigenetic change. such mechanisms – coupled with equivalent normalization of phenotype at the molecular level – are likely to sustain cell identity through mitosis. higher eukaryotic cells may cope with such issues by extensive disassembly and reassembly of the ne during mitosis, which could provide an opportunity to avoid incorporation of structurally aberrant components.

