BACKGROUND
natural vertebrate populations are chronically exposed to multiple infections and experience a range of environmental stressors. the vertebrate immune system will have evolved in ancestral populations subject to these pressures. given that our understanding of mammalian immunology is largely based on rodents reared under highly unnatural pathogen- and stress-free conditions, analysing immune responses in wild populations may give crucial insights into how the immune system functions in its natural context. there may be fundamental implications for how we understand immunological dysfunction observed in modern humans. across recent generations, humans in developed countries, much like laboratory mouse strains, have been exposed to a very different profile of infections to that encountered by their ancestors. at the same time there is evidence of a continuing breakdown of immune regulation in humans in industrialised societies, manifested by increases in allergic  <cit>  and autoimmune disorders  <cit> . a putative functional link between reduced infection exposure and immune hyperactivity in human populations  has long been proposed  <cit> . a more recent refinement of this idea is that metazoan infections may lead to the healthy development of immunoregulatory networks due to their ability to stimulate expansions of regulatory t-cells  <cit> . the evolutionary basis for this is that strong immunomodulatory stimuli from metazoan parasites have been a constant presence during vertebrate history, and that the immune system is now maladapted to a situation where these organisms are absent  <cit> . this is consistent with the considerable evidence that helminth infections of humans stimulate immunosuppressive effects and increased t-regulatory activity  <cit> . however, support for the evolutionary role of parasite-induced immunoregulation would be strengthened if immune suppression by metazoan parasites could be shown to also be a general phenomenon in wild vertebrate populations. studies in wildlife systems might also give greater insight into the range of parasitic organisms involved and the ecological context in which immunosuppression occurs.

the analysis of immune responses in wildlife has been hindered by a lack of specific reagents for the measurement of immunological molecules in non-model organisms  <cit> . here we take advantage of conservation in the murine pro-inflammatory signalling molecule tumour necrosis factor alpha  to develop a novel assay of innate toll-like receptor -mediated immune responsiveness in a wild rodent population. tlrs are pattern-recognition receptors  that detect conserved molecular patterns associated with certain types of pathogenic organism or with endogenous 'danger' signals  <cit> . currently, tlrs are thought to be the most important family of prrs in initiating innate immunity and the activation of antigen presenting cells that trigger adaptive responses. their central role in the immune system gives a number of potential advantages in assays which seek to provide an overall measure of immune function. as there is a diversity of tlrs  <cit>  with differing ligand specificities, responses for a panel of different receptor-ligand combinations may give indications of immune responsiveness towards a broad range of infections. in addition to triggering and influencing the phenotypic trajectory of innate and adaptive immunity, tlr responses are also themselves influenced by signals from many other elements of the immune system, including signals from regulatory adaptive responses  <cit> . the assay that we describe below may therefore offer a relatively holistic index of overall immune activation.

we used this assay of innate immune responses to analyse a cross-sectional natural population sample of the wood mouse, apodemus sylvaticus, in the uk and test hypotheses of covariation between innate immune activation, parasitic infection and other host variables. on the basis of our results we suggest that a subset of metazoan parasites can have strong suppressive effects on innate immunity that over-ride effects due to individual body condition or reproductive status.

RESULTS
tlr-response profile
we measured ex vivo tnf-α accumulations in splenocyte cultures exposed to a panel of defined ligands for tlrs  <dig>   <dig>   <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> . for each animal these stimulatory assays provided a profile of pro-inflammatory responses mediated by individual tlrs that might reflect the underlying phenotype of innate immune activation. great inter-individual variability in responsiveness was detected . across the sample of  <dig> a. sylvaticus, the strongest mean responses were against ligands for tlr <dig> and tlr <dig>  for which most  individuals showed above-control responses. above-control responses were seen against tlr  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> ligands  in, respectively,  <dig>   <dig> and 51% of all individuals. for all tlr ligands examined, tnf-α production was significantly elevated in treated compared with control splenocytes at the level of the entire sample of a. sylvaticus .

positive covariation amongst tlr-mediated responses
amongst individual a. sylvaticus there was strong positive intercorrelation between responses mediated through different tlrs . the first component  extracted from a principal components analysis  of the six tlr-response variables showed large coefficients of the same sign and accounted for 48% of total variation. pairwise spearman's correlation coefficients  for individual variables were also all positive and highly significant , with rs of between  <dig>  and  <dig> . these significant positive relationships were maintained when pairwise relationships between tlr-response variables were examined in linear mixed models in which the fixed model component was used to account for confounder variables and the random model component was used to account for data non-independence introduced by the immunological assaying procedures  .

parasite community structure
quantitative infection variables are summarised in figure  <dig>  correlational structure amongst these was relatively weak and mainly linked to host size. the first component from a pca analysis  of the common species, although highly significant , only explained 20% of total variation. pc1p was dominated by large coefficients of the same sign for heligmosomoides polygyrus, calodium hepaticum and polyplax serrata , indicating a pattern of positive covariation between these species. to a lesser extent, a moderate negative coefficient for eimeria faecal oocyst count  indicated a tendency for eimeria spp. fecundity to covary negatively. however, when pairwise species associations were assessed by non-parametric correlation coefficients, there were only significant positive relationships between h. polygyrus and c. hepaticum , h. polygyrus and p. serrata  and c. hepaticum and p. serrata . further analysis by generalised linear models  suggested that no significant inter-species associations remained when spatio-temporal and host variables were accounted for, except for a marginal positive relationship of p. serrata to c. hepaticum infection . most correlative structure amongst the infection variables appeared to be related to svl , which might reflect changes in susceptibility and/or exposure with host age. there were positive trends with svl for skrjabinotaenia lobata , c. hepaticum , h. polygyrus  and p. serrata  and a negative trend for laelapids . some species showed seasonal variation: ixodes trianguliceps increased during the autumn  and brachylaemus recurvum decreased . other features in the data were tendencies for h. polygyrus to occur more often within some spatial trap groups  and  for syphacia stroma to occur more frequently in males .

associations between infection variables and tlr-mediated responses
to test our main hypothesis, that innate immune responsiveness is related to infection variables, we initially used summary variables  derived from the pcas described above to represent the strongest patterns of multivariate variation in the immunological and parasitological datasets. given the tendency for different tlr responses to co-vary positively, first component scores  from the pca of tlr responses were used to represent overall innate immune responsiveness. a limited simplification of the parasite data was also possible by using first principal component scores  to reflect positive covariation between p. serrata, h. polygyrus and c. hepaticum infection and a tentative contrasting trend in eimeria spp. oocyst shedding. general linear mixed model  analysis, accounting for confounder variables and correlations introduced by the immunological assaying procedures, indicated that pc1i was very highly significantly negatively related to pc1p  . post-hoc analysis  of all individual infection variables for common parasite species  suggested a significant negative relationship of pc1i to log-transformed h. polygyrus individual counts  and p. serrata infection grade  . pc1i was significantly positively related to eimeria spp. prevalence  but was not associated with b. recurvum, s. lobata, s. stroma, c. hepaticum, laelapids and i. trianguliceps. analysis of individual infection variables with respect to individual tlr-response variables in lmms or generalised linear mixed models  suggested that there was a highly significant negative relationship of h. polygyrus abundance to tlr2/zymosan response  and weaker negative relationships to tlr2/heat-killed listeria monocytogenes  response , tlr <dig> response  and tlr <dig> response . analysis of total tnf-α response summed across all receptor-ligand combinations  also suggested a significant negative association of h. polygyrus abundance and overall tlr responses  . for eimeria spp. prevalence there were significant positive associations with tlr <dig> response , tlr <dig> response  and tir  that were maintained if log-transformed eimeria foc was analysed instead of prevalence. louse infection grade showed highly significant negative association with tlr <dig> responses to hklm  and zymosan , tlr <dig> response   and tir . pairwise analyses of the relationships of the remaining individual parasite variables  to individual tlr-response variables found no significant relationships.

effect sizes of louse infection grade on the most intense responses  and on total tnf-α , tir, were striking . in lmms with untransformed tlr variables as the response, the predicted reductions in tnf-α production in mice in the highest louse infection category in relation to mice uninfected with lice were 49% for tlr2/hklm, 55% for tlr2/zymosan, 59% for tlr <dig> and 56% for tir .

results for model: untransformed tumour necrosis factor alpha   ~sex + snout-vent length + season + trap group; random model, trap day/process day/assay plate.

†the tlr2/zymosan general linear mixed model for untransformed tnf-α was a relatively poor fit to the data, but results for this model, which are highly consistent with model predictions for the other variables, are presented to maintain direct comparability. tir = total tnf-α  response summed over all receptor-ligand combinations. standard errors are given in parentheses.

‡percentage change between the uninfected and heaviest infection categories.

associations between host variables and tlr-mediated responses
in lmms excluding parasite variables there was no significant relation of pc1i to sex , svl , or post-capture body weight  . a factor reflecting distinct life stages  that would be expected to show differing hormonal backgrounds  was also unrelated to pc1i . there was no relationship of pc1i to residuals of bw   and liver weight   from regressions on svl. no other significant associations were found between individual tlr variables and svl, bw, bwresid, lwresid or lh. whilst there was a marginally non-significant positive link between packed blood cell volume  and pc1i  this was principally due to a strong relation of pcv to tlr9-mediated responses  but not responses mediated through other receptors .

discussion
our analysis provides compelling evidence for strong negative associations between some members of the metazoan parasite community and the level of innate immune activation. these were detectable for the nematode h. polygyrus and, very strongly, for the louse p. serrata but not for other abundant community members. it has long been known from studies of the heligmosomoides bakeri-mus musculus laboratory model that h. bakeri can exert non-specific immunosuppressive effects  <cit>  that may enable other parasites to survive better in the face of host immunity  <cit> . more recent studies show it to stimulate expansion of regulatory t-cell subsets  <cit> . given that tlr-responsiveness can be influenced by regulatory signals from the adaptive immune system  <cit>  and that some helminth products, including h. polygyrus products, also direct the maturation of dendritic cells  with muted pro-inflammatory properties and down-regulated tlr function  <cit> , our current data are consistent with an h. polygyrus-dependent depression of innate immunity. perhaps more surprising is the observation that louse infection is even more strongly associated with innate immune activation. the quantitative effect of this infection was large, with modelling results indicating that the highest levels of louse reproductive activity  were associated with approximately 50% reductions in tlr <dig> and tlr9-mediated tnf-α responses. this suggests that some ectoparasites that are in contact with the host immune system merely through feeding and attachment at the body surface may exert a stronger influence on the immunoregulatory environment in their host than endohelminth infections. although p. serrata has not been a major focus of recent immunological research, older studies have reported it not only to generate protective immunity in m. musculus  <cit> , but also to mediate in vivo suppressive effects on t-cell proliferation in some inbred strains of this host  <cit> . immunosuppressive effects are well documented in other ectoparasitic arthropods  <cit> . for example, the salp <dig> protein secreted in ixodes scapularis saliva can interfere with dc function to reduce tlr-mediated pro-inflammatory cytokine release  <cit>  and directly inhibit cd4+ t-cell activation  <cit> . it might be predicted that p. serrata may also secrete substances into the host that interfere directly with innate immune function or, perhaps by analogy with gastrointestinal nematodes, stimulate expansions of regulatory t-cells. however, a further possibility is that unidentified microbial pathogens , for which lice might act as a vector, could be responsible for immunosuppressive effects.

apart from heligmosomoides and lice, no other common metazoan parasites appeared to be associated with variation in innate responsiveness. this may indicate that these species lack immunomodulatory properties in a. sylvaticus or occurred at levels too low for the detection of such effects. the cross-sectional study design may also have been unable to detect time-lagged correlations, depending on the relative dynamics of the parasite infrapopulations and immune processes. in the case of b. recurvum, s. lobata and c. hepaticum no experimental data on infection duration and immunology are available to assess this. ixodes ticks, which are known to have immunomodulatory effects in laboratory models , occurred at relatively low levels and the inherently transient nature of host-parasite contacts in these organisms could have compromised the detection of immunological influences. syphacia spp. live and feed in the gut lumen at all stages in the life-cycle and perhaps have less contact with the immune system than nematodes that feed on tissues or have a histozoic phase in their life history. despite this less intimate association, syphacia obvelata is known to stimulate vigorous th <dig> immune responses and down-regulate allergic responses  <cit>  in m. musculus. as generation time  and adult lifespan are very short in syphacia spp.  <cit> , instantaneous population size might not reflect the recent history of infection, compromising the ability to detect covariation between worm counts and immune effects.

in contrast to the metazoan parasites, there was a positive association between tlr-mediated tnf-α responses and the presence of microparasitic coccidian infections. this is consistent with a th <dig> response and with the immunostimulatory effects reported for eimeria spp. in rodent and avian laboratory models, in which primary infection is typically associated with the production of pro-inflammatory cytokines such as il- <dig>  tnf-α, il- <dig> and ifn-γ  <cit> . furthermore, a defined eimeria antigen is known to up-regulate pro-inflammatory cytokine production in mice by a myd88-dependent mechanism, consistent with the involvement of tlrs  <cit> .

the parallels between our present immuno-epidemiological results and the parasite-mediated immunosuppressive effects reported in relevant laboratory model studies are suggestive that the patterns we report above are due to parasite causal effects on host immunity. we considered the alternative possibility that stressed individuals in poor condition  <cit> , or individuals in active reproductive states, might make a weaker immune response and therefore have more parasites. under some circumstances nutritional status can affect immunity and resistance to parasites  <cit>  . glucocorticoids, produced in individuals experiencing high environmental stress, and sex hormones are sometimes  <cit>  associated with effects on immunity  <cit> . however, we generally found no associations between the host status variables that we measured and tlr-mediated tnf-α responsiveness. there were no significant relationships with body size, or with indexes of general condition including bw residuals on body length, liver weight  residuals on body length and pcv. this was with the exception of an isolated significant positive association between pcv and tlr9-mediated response. nor was there any association of tlr-mediated responses with life history stage. it therefore seems unlikely that the causality for the patterns reported above was a tendency for weak or reproductively active animals to make weaker immune responses leading to higher infection levels. whilst other authors have reported synergistic links between declining condition, infection and immunity in wild rodents  <cit> , our failure to link tlr-mediated tnf-α responses and condition may be due to relatively benign environmental conditions over the sampling period, or to a lack of sensitivity of our cross-sectional survey when compared with longitudinal or interventional studies. a further possibility is that inter-host variation, independent of the measures of condition that we utilised, may have caused the observed link between tnf-α responses and parasitism. perhaps the most likely source of such variability would be genetic polymorphisms affecting the intensity of tlr-mediated responses. whilst mutations in individual tlr genes have sometimes been reported to affect cytokine responsiveness and resistance to infection  <cit> , the strong positive covariation amongst different tlr responses in our study population would more likely relate to polymorphism in mediators affecting shared myd88-dependent signalling pathways  <cit> , or governing the expression of tnf-α  <cit> . if genotypic variation in wild mammal populations underpinned key phenotypic variation in the innate immune response and this, in turn, determined susceptibility to parasitism, then pinpointing the loci involved would be of fundamental interest.

CONCLUSIONS
tlr-mediated responses represent attractive measurements for ecological studies in immunology because of their central importance in initiating innate and adaptive immunity and their modulation by signals from regulatory elements of the immune system  <cit> . in practice, many individual a. sylvaticus produced measurable tlr-mediated tnf-α responses, and there was considerable variation in responsiveness between individuals. viewed in the context of published experimental studies on infections in m. musculus, the present results in a natural a. sylvaticus population suggest that a subset of the metazoan parasite community may be important mediators of the level of innate immune activation. a systemic down-regulation of tlr activity by parasite-induced dc-driven treg expansions seems a plausible mechanistic explanation for the current observations, although immunomodulation by other routes cannot be discounted. one other possibility might be modulated tlr function  induced by greater exposure to ligands during chronic infection states. whatever the mechanism, the existence of parasite-driven effects on innate mediators that trigger immune responses against a spectrum of different infectious agents provides strong, albeit indirect, evidence that pathogen/parasite communities may be structured by cross-species effects on innate immune function. this is highly relevant to the current interest in the importance of interspecies interactions in pathogen community dynamics  <cit> . the profound dampening of innate immune responsiveness associated with some metazoan parasite infections in a. sylvaticus also supports a view that modern parasite-free human and domesticated vertebrate populations may exist at levels of innate immune activation much greater than would have been typical during their recent evolutionary history. the operation of immune systems in this unnatural configuration may uncover maladaptations in control networks that were neutral in the historical context of high metazoan parasite exposure/high regulatory activity  <cit> . our results are consistent with recent observations that gastrointestinal nematodes have regulatory effects on adaptive responses in laboratory models  <cit>  and exposed human populations  <cit> . importantly, we also make the novel observation that lice may be a strong source of immunoregulatory stimuli that is absent in many modern human populations.

