BACKGROUND
legionnaires’ disease  is an acute pneumonia of low incidence, comprising 3-6% of community-acquired pneumonia, depending on the study population  <cit> . the causative bacterium belongs to the genus legionella, an accidental human pathogen that can replicate in alveolar macrophages, although it normally replicates as an intracellular parasite in protozoa. legionella needs an aquatic environment to survive and is therefore cultured from natural or man made waters as well as from wet soil and sewage sludge. not all environmental legionella bacteria seem to have the potential to infect humans. from all known species and serogroups, strains that are typed as l. pneumophila serogroup  <dig> are the most prevalent in clinical isolates. several studies  <cit>  suggested a further division into strains that do or do not react to monoclonal antibody mab3/ <dig>  with the former group supposedly more virulent. in these studies, virulence was explored by comparing causative strains derived from immuno-competent and immuno-compromised ld patients. heterogeneity in virulence has also be studied by comparing the genotype distributions of environmental strains with those of clinical legionella isolates. several studies have found large differences between these distributions, suggesting that different virulence factors exist  <cit> . for example, in the netherlands 50% of the ld patients is caused by three genotypes that represent 4% of the patient-related environmental distribution  <cit> . using genomotyping to identify virulence markers, a recent study described four markers that could discriminate clinical isolates and environmental strains in a systematic collection of  <dig> dutch legionella strains  <cit> .

in the present paper, we report on the genomotyping of a systematic collection of  <dig> french strains

using the same techniques. we evaluate the performance of a logistic regression model based on the four dutch markers to adequately predict the origin of  <dig> clinical legionella isolates and  <dig> environmental strains from france. furthermore, based on the genetic data from the french strains, using the random forest algorithm and logistic regression, we identify predictive markers for french clinical versus french environmental origin and compare these to the four dutch markers that were identified earlier.

RESULTS
the prediction model with the four dutch markers, when applied to the french strains, had a sensitivity , specificity, npv and ppv prediction of 78%, 54%, 70% and 65%, respectively . as this indicates that the predictive value of the dutch makers is much lower for the french strains, an optimized novel marker set for the french strains was selected.

abbreviation: ppv positive predictive value, npv negative predictive value.

the development of a new prediction model, based on the genetic data from the french strain collection resulted in a model that consisted of four genetic markers, three of which differ from the four dutch markers. in order to maximize the sensitivity of the model , while minimizing the loss of specificity, we used an arbitrary probability  cut-off value of  <dig>  to classify the alternative outcomes. the  <dig> strains in the eleventh “test dataset”  were predicted by the model with a sensitivity of 96%, a specificity of 38%, a ppv of 63%, and a npv of 91% .

abbreviation: ppv, positive predictive value ; npv, negative predictive value.

three of the four french markers that were selected differed from the dutch markers, although some of them were strongly correlated . this indicates that although there is a limited overlap  between the selected dutch and french predictive markers, some markers are strongly related to each other  .

correlation coefficients are based on the hybridization ratios of the individual markers.

* p-value <  <dig> , **p-value <  <dig> .

french marker 19d <dig> has substantial overlap with dutch marker 15d <dig> )  <cit> . the difference in marker hybridization ratio between clinical isolates and environmental strains is shown in table  <dig>  the effect sizes  for markers 33 f <dig>  and 27b <dig>  were relatively small compared to the other  <dig> markers, suggesting a limited influence of these markers in the calculated prediction of the final models . the sequence analyses of the four selected markers showed that all markers were present in one or more of the completely sequenced legionella isolates .

n/a = not applicable.

data represent mean hybridization ratios . effect size was calculated as the difference in ratio between clinical isolates and environmental strains, divided by the within group standard deviation  of the ratio in the total sample. sd = standard deviation.

marker 19d <dig> is encoding for a structural toxin protein rtxa. this function is proposed to play a role in both adherence and entry into acanthamoeba castellanii similar to that observed in human monocytic cells. furthermore, it was found that rtxa is involved in intracellular survival and trafficking  <cit> . when comparing the nucleotide sequences of french marker 19d <dig> and dutch marker 15d <dig> with the ncbi nucleotide database by megablast for highly similar sequences, the only hit is a region in the l. pneumophila lorraine genome  described as the rtxa toxin. in the region, ranging from nucleotides 711260– <dig>   <dig> hits are obtained, clearly indicating the repeat character of this sequence which has also been described by gomez-valero et al.  <cit> . changing the blast settings for more dissimilar sequences and somewhat similar sequences does not result in additional hits, indicating the unique presence of this sequence in a specific subset of l. pneumophila strains. comparing sequences with the ncbi nucleotide database by blastx, in which the provided sequence is translated in all reading frames which are then compared to the translated nucleotide database, additional information is obtained. the only high homology hits again are related to the l. pneumophila lorraine genome , but also low homology hits can be observed. these include bacterial genera such as methylobacterium, pseudomonas and rhizobium and at an even lower homology level also other legionella strains such as the philadelphia and paris strains.

marker 8d <dig> is associated with homospermidine synthase: this function is mainly encountered in bacteria which are involved in interactions with eukaryotic organisms, especially in plant pathogens and symbionts. homologues of this sequence are mainly encountered in alpha proteobacteria and apart from l. pneumophila, pseudomonas syringae/aeruginosa are the only gamma proteobacteria containing this function. horizontal gene transfer to alpha proteobacteria is proposed  <cit> .

the sequence of marker 12h <dig> is predicted to encode an atp dependent dna helicase/uvr/rep helicase, an enzyme that makes single stranded dna from double stranded dna. this function is better represented within gamma proteobacteria than 8d <dig> 

marker 27b <dig> is encoding for tyrosyl trna synthetase. this function is commonly present in gamma proteobacteria and its standard function is related to trna production. in enterococcus species this gene however is also part of the tyramine biosynthesis cluster  so other functions for this gene cannot be excluded  <cit> .

we have demonstrated that the predictive markers derived from a dutch strain collection insufficiently predict the strain origin in a similar collection from france. we thus developed a “french” prediction model for predicting the origin  of french l.pneumophila strains, based on four different markers. the npv of this model  seems insufficient to justify its use as a reliable test in the public health field in france, for this purpose the npv should be higher. npv’s should be well above 95%, similar to recently published screening tests for methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus  and extended-spectrum-beta- lactamase-producing enterobacteriaceae   <cit> .

it is interesting that the predictive markers for the netherlands and france differ as only one of the four dutch markers showed substantial overlap with one of the four french markers, although some of them showed significant correlations. this finding suggests genetic differences in legionella strains between geographically distinct entities. this is in line with earlier studies showing differences between northern and southern european countries in the occurrence of l. pneumophila serogroup  <dig> strains that are positive for the virulence associated monoclonal antibody mab 3/ <dig> from the so called dresden panel  <cit> .

the overlapping markers encode for a structural toxin protein rtxa, that has been described for l. pneumophila as a factor involved in virulence and entry in both human cells and amoebae  <cit> . furthermore, more detailed analyses of rtxa proteins in l. pneumophila have been published elsewhere  <cit> . although there appear to be highly homologous regions in the sequences of this protein our data clearly show that the lorraine strain and related dutch and french strains contain a significantly different rtxa protein which probably is involved in the increased virulence of these strains.

there may be several reasons why our approach for identifying predictive markers for clinical isolates was more successful in the netherlands than in france. one of them is that our original shotgun library was exclusively derived from dutch strains, thus insufficiently reflecting the genetic diversity in france. to avoid such bias, it may well prove necessary to develop region specific mixed-genome microarrays.

perhaps also, genotypic differences between clinical legionella isolates and environmental strains could differ between the netherlands and france. differences that may well have been introduced by selection biases, as the dutch environmental strains were collected within the national legionella outbreak detection programme  and only derived from patient-related sources during source investigations, while the french environmental strains, although partly collected similarly, also included strains that were collected differently, and are not directly related to ld patients.

another reason could be that, in view of the modest sample sizes included, the combination of genomotyping with the subsequent statistical method is not sufficiently reproducible or robust as stochastic factors play a major role in the identification of strains used for classification.

CONCLUSIONS
the combination of a mixed-genome micro-array and statistical analysis using a random forest algorithm has identified virulence markers in a consistent way. we identified four genetic markers that can be used to predict the patient or environmental origin of french l. pneumophila strains. at least one of the markers, encoding for structural toxin protein rtxa, had previously already been identified as being associated with virulence. our data clearly show that the lorraine strain and related dutch and french strains contain marker that encodes for a significantly different rtxa protein which probably is involved in the increased prevalence in clinical isolates. the npv of a potential test using these four markers is high, but inadequate for use as a public health screening tool in france. our results suggest that genetic differences in legionella strains exist between geographically distinct entities. it may be necessary to develop region-specific mixed-genome microarrays that are constantly adapted and updated.

