BACKGROUND
aging seems paradoxical from an evolutionary perspective. why is aging, which is detrimental for the individual, not eliminated by natural selection? evolutionary theory provides an answer. mutations that lead to aging are not efficiently removed by selection and can thus accumulate in populations over evolutionary time. selection against these mutations is weak because under natural conditions, most individuals die for other, external reasons before aging manifests itself. this explanation hinges on two assumptions. first, such mutations must be detrimental late in life, but neutral  <cit>  or beneficial  <cit>  early on. if they were also detrimental early in life, they would be removed by selection. second, the negative effects of age must be confined to old parents and to the progeny of old parents  <cit> , while the progeny of young parents emerge rejuvenated. rejuvenation refers to the fact that progeny are composed of newly synthesized organs, tissues, cells, and subcellular structures. as a consequence, they are less affected by the phenotypic deteriorations experienced by their aging parents. without rejuvenation, negative effects would accumulate from generation to generation, and aging lineages would disappear  <cit> .

mutations with a negative effect that is specific for late age and can be rejuvenated in the progeny play a pivotal role in the evolution of aging. any organism in which such mutations occur should evolve aging, whereas organisms in which such mutations do not occur should not age and should be potentially immortal. initially, it was thought that such mutations can only occur in organisms with a distinction between soma and germline  <cit>  where the negative effect of age would be confined to the soma and not be passed on to the progeny produced from the germline. then, as anticipated by weismann  <cit>  the criterion for aging was expanded to any organism where the individuals emerging from reproduction are systematically different  <cit> . aging has now been shown in unicellular eukaryotes  <cit>  and even in bacteria  <cit> . as in other organisms, aging manifests in bacteria as decreasing performance with age. in bacteria, it is difficult to disentangle survival and reproduction, and it is thus not possible to use increasing mortality with age as an indicator for aging. aging is thus quantified as a decline in the product of survival and reproduction  <cit>  or as a decreasing growth rate with age  <cit> .

according to the evolutionary explanation of aging, finding aging in bacteria suggests that mutations with deleterious effects specific to late life do occur in bacteria, and that they invaded populations over evolutionary times because selection late in life is weak. however, the existence of such mutations has yet to be demonstrated. that they do not necessarily occur is indicated by the failure to find them in viruses  <cit> .

a second issue with such mutations is that they tie the evolution of aging to environmental conditions. one prediction is that fast aging should evolve if the strength of selection declines quickly with age, and slow aging if the strength of selection declines slowly. this prediction has been supported by a laboratory evolution experiment with fruit flies  <cit> . in this experiment, the decline in the strength of selection with age was varied by adjusting external mortality imposed by the experimenters. another recent experimental study investigated the evolution of aging in natural populations of guppies living with or without predators  <cit> . the surprising outcome was that guppies in the presence of predators evolved slower aging. one plausible explanation for this result is that high extrinsic mortality does not always lead to weak selection late in life, because it may also cause a reduction in population density. if reduced population density benefits older individuals more than younger individuals, then increased extrinsic mortality might indeed improve the prospect of older individuals and thus lead to a slower decline in the strength of selection with age  <cit> . an alternative explanation is that if mutations with age-specific effects are rare, extrinsic risk does not easily modulate intrinsic aging.

here, we used experimental evolution with bacteria to test the evolutionary theory of aging at a basic level of biological organization: populations of unicellular organisms. initially clonal populations were allowed to evolve under conditions where selection late in life was very weak. we then tested whether those populations would evolve earlier aging. this experiment is a stringent test of both the assumptions and the predictions of the evolutionary theory of aging. it tests both the assumption that mutations with a negative effect that is specific for late age and is subject to rejuvenation do occur, and the prediction that such mutations can increase in frequency under conditions where selection late in life is weak. if the assumptions of this theory are met in these asymmetrically reproducing bacteria, one would expect them to hold in all cellular organisms where reproduction is not completely symmetrical.

RESULTS
we worked with c. crescentus, a bacterium where the two cells emerging from reproduction can be distinguished, and where one can be regarded as a mother and the other as a daughter. the life cycle of c. crescentus  <cit>  begins with a motile swarmer cell . after dispersal the swarmer differentiates into a stalked cell, which can attach to a solid surface by means of a polar holdfast. it then initiates an asymmetric cell division that results in a motile swarmer progeny cell and in the sessile stalked mother cell. stalked cells of c. crescentus age, manifested as a decrease in progeny production after many rounds of division  <cit> .

to investigate the evolution of aging, we created conditions where the age-distribution was biased to young age, and most cells died before reaching advanced age. populations of c. crescentus were cultured in liquid medium under conditions of exponential growth. every  <dig> hours, small aliquots of cells were transferred to a fresh batch of medium, and the cells that were not transferred were discarded. the amount transferred was adjusted so that resources never became limiting and the populations grew continuously. under this demographic regime, the population reached an age-distribution strongly biased to young age classes with about half of the cells being new-born, a quarter one division old, an eighth two divisions old, and so on. the populations contained very few cells that were several divisions old, because most cells were killed at transfer, and the populations were expanding exponentially between transfers.

we used a simple mathematical model from life history theory to calculate the strength of selection under these conditions as a function of an individual's age . we calculated the fitness cost of hypothetical mutations that would lead to cell death at a given age, and plotted this cost as a function of the age at death. this analysis showed that selection was very strong early in life, and very weak late in life . specifically, performance after an age of about  <dig> hours was virtually free of selection. under these conditions, mutations with a deleterious effect specific to late age are close to neutral. also, large negative effects at later age could be compensated for by a small advantage early in life. as an example, consider a mutation that would lead to cell death at an age of  <dig> hours. under the conditions of our experiment, the fitness cost of this mutation is so small that it could be compensated for by a decrease in the age at first division of one second . we thus expected mutations that improve early performance to sweep through the populations, leading to an increase in population growth rate reflected in a decrease in doubling time. if any of the mutations fixing in the experimental populations had costs at later age, we would expect to observe an evolutionary change towards faster aging.

evolutionary changes
we evolved three populations of c. cresecentus under these conditions. every day, we determined the doubling time of every population . at regular intervals, samples were taken from these populations and stored at -80°c. after  <dig> generations, we revived aliquots from the frozen stocks as well as from the ancestor and measured population doubling times. these measurements showed that during  <dig> generations of experimental evolution, population doubling time decreased by more than a factor of two . this finding was supported by an analysis of the daily measurement of population doubling time . the daily measurements showed that population doubling time did not change substantially during the first  <dig> divisions, and then showed a rapid, marked decrease. this pattern is characteristic of the selective sweep of a beneficial mutation in asexual populations of microorganisms  <cit> . this and the fact that the changes in doubling time were stably inherited even after freezing and reviving strongly suggest that the decrease in population doubling time is a consequence of mutations that fixed in the experimental populations, and not simply a physiological adaptation to the new conditions by means of gene regulation.

most of the reduction in population doubling time occurred during the first  <dig> generations and resulted from a marked decrease in age at first division . a decrease in the age at first division is synonymous with a shortening of the period spent as a motile swarmer cell. in the natural environment, the motile swarmer cells disperse  <cit> , and this might select for a long swarmer phase. in the homogenous environment used for experimental evolution, dispersal is no longer beneficial, and the swarmer phase thus presumably dispensable. the interval between two divisions of young stalked cells, in contrast, decreased only marginally . this result confirms that these conditions lead to the evolution of improved performance early in life and suggests that the length of the inter-division interval is constrained by cell cycle processes.

next, we looked for changes late in life. we analyzed five clones from each population isolated after  <dig> generations of evolution. for each clone, a cohort of individual stalked cells was followed for  <dig> hours with direct observation in a microscopy flow chamber  <cit> , and division events were recorded. in this system survival and reproduction cannot be disentangled because the viability of cells can only be assessed when they reproduce. thus, we cannot use measures of aging that rely on that distinction  <cit> . instead, we used a measure for age-specific performance that combines these two fitness components: the reproductive function  <cit> , i.e. the number of progeny produced per member of the cohort per hour, as a function of the age of the cohort. we measured the rate of aging as the rate at which the reproductive function decreased with age. to extract this quantity from the division record of individual cells, we used logistic regression to estimate the change with age in the probability that a member of the cohort produced a progeny per unit time.

contrary to expectation, populations  <dig> and  <dig> evolved slower aging than the ancestor, as indicated by a slower decrease in the reproductive function with age . a slower decrease in the reproductive function means that stalked cells survived better to late age or reproduced at a higher rate late in life than the ancestor. in these populations, the number of progeny contributed by old stalked cells, which were almost completely free of selection, increased more than the number of progeny contributed by young stalked cells, which were under stronger selection .

in population  <dig>  the five clones isolated after  <dig> generations showed striking variation in the rate of aging . we repeated the measurements with each clone, and found that one clone showed slower aging and three showed faster aging than the ancestor . this result suggested that in population  <dig> at least one mutation that led to faster aging had become frequent, either because it conferred a benefit early in life and was thus selected for, or because it was neutral early in life and drifted into the population. the first scenario corresponds to the evolution of earlier aging by means of antagonistic pleiotropy  <cit> , the second by means of mutation accumulation  <cit> .

a mutation that leads to decreased performance in older cells can only reduce its negative impact if its deleterious effect is confined to a mother cell whose progeny is born rejuvenated. we tested for rejuvenating reproduction in one of the clonal isolates from population  <dig> that showed earlier aging. we recorded the reproductive output of stalked cells at the beginning of life and at an age of  <dig> hours, when they already showed a declining reproductive function. we then measured the reproductive output of daughters born to these aging mothers . the daughters had a higher reproductive output than their aging mothers, indicating that they were rejuvenated . there was a tendency for the reproductive output of the daughters to be lower than the reproductive output of their mothers measured early in life, but the difference was not statistically significant . such a fitness reduction in progeny born to old parents has been reported for organisms ranging from bacteria  <cit>  to humans  <cit>  and can be understood as consequence of weak selection on old parents  <cit> . as long as this effect only manifests in old parents and does not accumulate over generations, it does not lead to a successive deterioration of the aging lineage  <cit> .

because the negative effect of this mutation that led to earlier aging in population  <dig> was confined to late age, and performance at late age was inconsequential for fitness under these conditions, we expected that this mutation would not have an adverse effect on the growth rate. we measured the growth rate of the five isolates from population  <dig> and found no evidence for a fitness difference between the isolates with faster aging and the one isolate with slower aging . importantly, these isolates all grew much faster than the ancestor, indicating that the isolates that showed faster aging were not generally defective. the fact that the growth rates were indistinguishable means that we cannot tell whether the mutant with faster aging was in the process of rising to fixation, or whether it was close to or at fixation and about to be replaced by another mutant with slower aging.

inference of the stage-specific risk encountered by the ancestors in nature
in the caulobacter wild-type strain used as ancestor for the evolution experiment, the performance of stalked cells declines only slowly with age; some cells produced up to  <dig> divisions in  <dig> hours  <cit> . this indicates that the ancestor does not contain alleles leading to aging as early as observed in population  <dig>  what prevents such alleles from invading natural populations of c. crescentus? to answer this question, one has to try to understand how selection acts in the natural environment of these bacteria.

the age-specific strength of selection in nature depends on extrinsic risks of mortality for juvenile swarmer and adult stalked cells. if extrinsic risk in the wild is exactly equal for swarmer and stalked cells, then most stalked cells would die before dividing many times. this is a consequence of the fact that, due to density regulation, natural populations do not grow without limit; in the long run, out of two cells that arise through division, one will die before dividing again . if swarmer and stalked cells were equally likely to die, then only about one in  <dig> stalked cells would reach an age of  <dig> divisions . as the total number of bacteria  on earth has been estimated to be around  <dig>  <cit> , such great age would never be realized by c. crescentus. it would therefore be surprising that, when measured in the laboratory, stalked cells can still function at ages of  <dig> divisions and more if their mortality rate in the wild had been as high as that of swarmer cells.

one explanation for this puzzle is therefore that extrinsic risk in nature is much higher for juvenile swarmer cells than it is for adult stalked cells. under those conditions, many cells would die during their swarmer phase; the few that would survive to become a stalked cell, however, would live a relatively safe life. consequently, a substantial fraction of the cells that survive the swarmer phase would continue to survive for many divisions and reach a relatively high age. this would increase the importance of the stalked phase and would select for cells that are still able to reproduce even at an advanced age. this would explain why stalked cells of c. crescentus have such a long maximal lifespan  <cit> .

quantitative estimates of extrinsic risk in the natural environment of c. crescentus are not available, and it is thus not possible to quantify the scenario described above. however, observational data suggests that it might be qualitatively correct. direct observation  <cit>  and microcosm studies  <cit>  indicated that stalked cells are resistant to protozoan grazing, while swarmers presumably are susceptible  <cit> . we used a simple mathematical model to investigate how differences in extrinsic risk between swarmers and stalked cells determine the age-specific strength of selection in the wild . this analysis confirms that if external risk is higher for swarmers than for stalked cells, the strength of selection decreases only slowly with age, and mutations with a deleterious effect that manifests after a few dozen divisions would be eliminated by selection. if this view is correct, it would mean that we shifted c. crescentus from the natural environment where stalked cells were relatively safe, and selection against early aging thus substantial, to an artificial environment where most stalked cells were killed early on, and selection against early aging was thus weak.

the two main insights
our results lead to two main insights. the first concerns the question, which organisms should age? aging should evolve in any organism where mutations can negatively affect performance late in life without correlated costs early in life. here, we show that a mutation with such an effect occurred in an experimental population of bacteria and rose to high frequencies under conditions where selection late in life was weak. while our results indicate that such mutations might be rare, the fact that they do occur in bacteria suggests that they might occur in all cellular organisms. this raises the question whether any cellular organism is immune to the accumulation of such mutations over evolutionary time, and thus to aging.

the second insight from this study pertains to how aging and lifespan evolve in response to external conditions. we tested the central prediction of the evolutionary theory of aging, that fast aging should evolve under conditions where selection late in life is weak. while we did find faster aging in one population, the dominant response was slower aging: the part of the life history under strong selection improved less than the part of the life history where selection was almost absent . similar discrepancies have been reported earlier  <cit> . interestingly, here the reasons previously advanced to explain such discrepancies – that increased extrinsic mortality does not necessarily lead to weak selection late in life  <cit>  – do not apply. the simplicity of our experimental system allows us to calculate the strength of selection as a function of age directly, and this analysis shows that during our evolution experiment the strength of selection indeed dropped very quickly with age .

the most likely explanation for our result is different, namely that mutations had unexpected phenotypic effects. we can draw two conclusions about the phenotypic effects of the mutations associated with the evolutionary changes in these populations. first, the mutations that increased growth rates by improving early life did not typically entail costs later in life. second, some of the mutations that went to fixation had the correlated effect of leading to slower aging, even though selection late in life was very weak. these results echo conclusions drawn from experiments on fruit flies, which suggest that deleterious mutations with age-specific effects might be rare  <cit>  and that in novel environments mutations can improve several fitness components simultaneously  <cit> . our results go a step further. that the reproductive function shows a slower decrease with age in populations  <dig> and  <dig> than in the ancestor suggests the fixation of mutations that improved performance of stalked cells late in life even more than their performance early in life. it remains possible that continued selection in this novel environment might eventually reveal trade-offs between performance early in life and longevity, and lead to the evolution of faster aging in all populations.

CONCLUSIONS
we conclude that mutations that contribute to aging can occur in bacteria, and that they can reach high frequencies if selection late in life is weak, as predicted by the evolutionary theory of aging. this suggests that this theory is generally valid for all cellular organisms. and we support previous findings that the evolution of aging can take unanticipated turns when mutations have unexpected phenotypic effects. theory cannot reliably predict what kind of mutations should occur; it only predicts the fate of mutations with given effects. understanding the evolution of aging requires experiments that provide information about mutational effects on aging. the experimental evolution of aging in a bacterium demonstrates that such model systems yield insights into fundamental aspects of aging.

