BACKGROUND
allopolyploidy combines the processes of hybridization with genome doubling, and together, these provide a potential avenue for instantaneous speciation  <cit> . whole-genome sequencing efforts have revolutionized our thinking about the significance of polyploidy, as it is clear that paleopolyploidy is a common phenomenon. ancient whole-genome duplications have been detected in many eukaryotic lineages, including angiosperms, vertebrates, and yeast  <cit> . polyploidy has been particularly prevalent in flowering plants, where previous estimates indicated that 30–70% of angiosperm species had polyploidy in their ancestry . in the last decade, the view of polyploidy in angiosperms has changed, and it is now appreciated that perhaps all angiosperm lineages have experienced at least one round of polyploidy, with many lineages undergoing two or more such episodes  <cit> . on more recent timescales, molecular data have also revealed that most extant polyploid plant species have formed recurrently  <cit> . in fact, very few examples of a single unambiguous origin of a polyploid species have been documented; these include peanut, arachis hypogaea, the salt marsh grass spartina anglica, and arabidopsis suecica  <cit> .

following allopolyploidization, several evolutionary outcomes are possible for the genes duplicated by polyploidy . both copies may be retained in the polyploid and remain functional, one copy may accumulate mutations and either diverge in function or become silenced, or one copy may be physically lost  <cit> . the fate of these duplicated gene pairs seems to vary depending on the system under investigation and the loci involved  <cit> . over longer evolutionary timeframes, gene loss, genome downsizing, and, ultimately, genetic 'diploidization' appear to be common phenomena  <cit> . homoeologous recombination appears to play an important role in the loss of small genomic fragments during the early stages of polyploid formation  <cit> , which contributes to gene loss and genome downsizing in allopolyploids  <cit> . wolfe  pointed out that within a species, some loci may remain 'tetraploid', while others are diploidized; evidence from whole-genome analyses supports this idea . although polyploidy is clearly a recurrent process on both recent and ancient timescales, we know very little about the evolutionary fate of genes duplicated by polyploidy in independently formed allopolyploid populations. specifically, are homoeologs consistently retained or lost in a repeated manner among individuals from independently formed polyploid populations?

the allopolyploids tragopogon mirus and t. miscellus  are textbook examples of speciation following polyploidy and provide an ideal system to investigate the evolutionary fate of duplicated genes in independently formed populations. these allopolyploids formed recently in the palouse region of the western united states  following the introduction of three diploid species  from europe in the early 1900s  <cit> . tragopogon mirus formed independently several times from t. dubius and t. porrifolius, while t. miscellus formed multiple times from t. dubius and t. pratensis  <cit> . only t. miscellus has formed reciprocally in nature, and these reciprocally formed individuals can be distinguished morphologically. the 'short-liguled' form has t. pratensis as the maternal progenitor, while the 'long-liguled' form has t. dubius as the maternal parent . today, only one long-liguled population exists ; all other populations of t. miscellus are short-liguled  <cit> . molecular data have confirmed that the populations of t. mirus and t. miscellus in the palouse have arisen independently .

in this study, we examine ten populations of t. miscellus for  <dig> loci to investigate the fate of homoeologous loci in natural populations of tragopogon miscellus. our previous study  <cit>  revealed that t. miscellus individuals from two populations  had experienced loss of one parental homoeolog for seven of ten loci examined. this loss was not fixed within or between populations, nor was homoeolog loss 'fixed' for any particular locus examined. three of these loci were retained in duplicate for all individuals examined. another recent study has also demonstrated loss of homoeologous loci for five t. miscellus populations for a different set of ten genes  <cit> . in addition to loss, homoeolog silencing has also occurred in these recent allopolyploids  <cit> . because multiple origins typify most allopolyploid species  <cit> , we extended these previous studies of t. miscellus to examine the extent to which parental homoeologs might be lost from individuals from several natural populations and to assess if recurrent patterns of homoeolog loss or retention could be detected in these independently formed populations.

RESULTS
genomic caps analyses
two hundred individuals  from  <dig> populations  were screened for  <dig> markers table 2). variation in the restriction digestion patterns of tragopogon dubius was evident for a single marker  . no variation was observed in t. pratensis based on the present sampling. two individuals, each grown from a seed collected from a t. dubius plant in the field , apparently were hybrids, as the individuals possessed both t. pratensis and t. dubius fragment patterns in the genomic restriction digests for all markers screened . because t. pratensis does not occur in either locality, these individuals likely represent hybrids between t. miscellus and t. dubius.

* soltis and soltis collection numbers; **long-liguled population

combining the new data generated here with data from tate et al. , for the  <dig> loci examined,  <dig> showed loss of a homoeolog in at least one of the t. miscellus individuals surveyed . for two genes , both parental homoeologs were retained in all individuals examined. some genes showed loss more frequently than others. for example, a t. pratensis homoeolog of tdf <dig>  was lost in only one individual, while for tdf <dig>   <dig> individuals lost either the t. dubius or t. pratensis copy. for the genes that showed losses,  <dig> losses were from the t. pratensis genome, while  <dig> were from the t. dubius genome . considering the genic patterns across populations, none of the genes showed loss in every population. one gene, tdf <dig> , showed loss in at least one individual from all but one population .

forty of the  <dig> t. miscellus individuals surveyed showed loss of a homoeolog for at least one locus, with  <dig> of these showing loss for multiple loci . for example, individual 2693- <dig> from spangle lost the t. dubius homoeolog for both tdf <dig> and tdf <dig> and lost the t. pratensis homoeolog for tdf62; individual 2625- <dig> from albion lost the t. pratensis copy for tdf <dig>  tdf <dig>  tdf <dig>  tdf <dig> , tdf <dig> , and cry <dig>  for individuals that lost a homoeolog at more than one locus, the same parental homoeolog was lost more often than different homoeologs . of those that lost the same parental homoeolog, nine cases were losses of t. dubius, while two were losses of t. pratensis. considering all populations, regardless of the parental origin, the loss of one homoeolog was the most common scenario , followed by homoeolog losses at two loci in eight individuals, three loci in six individuals, and six losses in one plant . for these multiple losses, no clear pattern emerged .

at the population level, differences in the number of losses were also evident, but without a clear genomic, genic, or geographical pattern . the albion and moscow populations showed the greatest number of total homoeolog losses , followed by oakesdale , pullman , spokane- <dig> , garfield , spangle , troy , rosalia , and spokane- <dig> . the number of individuals  that showed the same pattern of loss varied by population. the spokane- <dig>  spangle, rosalia, garfield, moscow, and troy populations did not have any individuals that shared patterns of loss. spokane- <dig> and pullman each had three individuals with shared patterns, while oakesdale and albion each had two individuals. shared losses among individuals within a population may represent inheritance of a loss that occurred in a common ancestor.

discussion
homoeolog loss in independently formed populations
our extended survey of  <dig> loci for ten populations of tragopogon miscellus indicates that some genes are maintained in duplicate in all populations, while others show loss among some individuals from the independently formed populations. this result is consistent with our previous finding of loss in two populations  for ten of these same genes  <cit> . although homoeolog loss is not unique to tragopogon, the present study represents the largest survey of individuals from natural populations conducted thus far. homoeolog loss appears to be a common phenomenon in polyploids and may occur rapidly following their formation. for example, synthetic polyploids of wheat  <cit>  and brassica  <cit>  show loss of homoeologous loci in early generations. in tragopogon, we have not detected loss in f <dig> hybrids or first-generation synthetic polyploids  <cit> . thus, homoeologous loss does not appear to occur instantaneously upon hybridization or polyploidization in tragopogon, at least based on the loci examined thus far.

given that genome downsizing and other processes may ultimately contribute to genetic 'diploidization' in polyploid organisms  <cit> , what impact does homoeolog loss have on recently and independently formed polyploid populations? our data indicate that homoeolog loss in tragopogon miscellus is stochastic among individuals from polyploid populations that are less than  <dig> years old . almost half  of the individuals surveyed here showed loss of a homoeolog for at least one locus, with some populations showing loss more frequently than others. five of these same populations were examined for a different suite of ten genes by buggs et al. , and a similar result was found. the moscow population showed the greatest number of losses , followed by oakesdale , garfield , spangle , and pullman . some of the same individuals were examined here and as part of that study, but again, no clear pattern of loss among individuals and populations could be identified. given the ecological success of t. miscellus, which is widespread in the palouse and whose range is expanding  <cit> , this loss does not appear to negatively affect the individuals or populations. when ownbey  <cit>  first described t. miscellus and t. mirus, he found that fertility  averaged 52–66% in the natural populations, but with a great deal of variation outside this range among individuals. more recent surveys of the natural populations indicate that fertility  is high, averaging 95–100% , which suggests that following their initial formation the polyploid individuals experience some genomic instability, but eventually become more stabilized. recently, we resynthesized allopolyploids of both t. miscellus and t. mirus  <cit> . the initial s <dig> plants exhibited slightly reduced pollen stainability and fruit set; but successful lineages that have survived to the s <dig> generation exhibit high fertility. through homoeolog loss, perhaps the polyploid individuals from natural populations are still sorting out potential genomic incompatibilities resulting from hybridization and genome doubling  <cit> . it will be important to follow the synthetic polyploids through successive generations to determine when homoeolog loss occurs and if this loss contributes to increased fertility.

one consistent pattern among the populations that has emerged from the present study is that t. dubius homoeologs appear to be lost more often than those of t. pratensis, particularly when two or more loci undergo loss, and this difference in losses is statistically significantly different  . combining the data presented here with those from tate et al. , we find that loss of a t. dubius homoeolog represents 67% of the total losses, while loss of the t. pratensis copy represents 33% of the total losses. why the t. dubius copy is eliminated more frequently is not known. significantly, other allopolyploids, including wheat  <cit>  and brassica  <cit> , also show biased elimination of one parental genome over the other. the loss of t. dubius homoeologs is especially evident for nrdna  and is consistent with previous studies of nrdna evolution in natural populations of t. mirus and t. miscellus  <cit> . matyášek et al.  found that although the allopolyploids had fewer t. dubius nrdna copies, these were preferentially expressed over the alternative parental copies . in the present study, we also identified a few individuals that have reduced t. pratensis nrdna copy numbers relative to t. dubius. these individuals were from both short- and long-liguled t. miscellus populations . this bi-directional concerted evolution of nrdna copies has also been demonstrated in more ancient allopolyploids, such as gossypium   <cit> .

the loss or retention of certain classes of genes appears to be a recurrent pattern when ancient whole-genome duplication patterns are examined, although the classes that are retained in duplicate differ depending on the lineage under study  <cit> . for example, in asteraceae, barker et al.  found that genes associated with structural components and cellular organization were retained in duplicate, while genes involved with regulatory  and developmental functions lack duplicates. in arabidopsis  and rice , however, genes involved with transcription were retained in duplicate  <cit> . in tragopogon miscellus, the two genes that were retained in duplicate  in all individuals did not fall into the category of significantly enriched  when compared to the barker et al.  study. similarly, the genes that were lost did not match gene ontology  slim categories that were significantly either underrepresented or enriched. tdf <dig> is a putative protein phosphatase 2c family protein that functions in the plasma membrane, and tdf <dig> is a putative β-fructosidase that acts in the vacuole. as additional genomic resources are developed for tragopogon and these genes are analyzed in the polyploid species, it will be imperative to determine whether certain gene classes are consistently lost or retained following allopolyploidization.

mechanism for homoeolog loss
studies of brassica  <cit>  allopolyploids have revealed a significant role for homoeologous recombination in dna loss, although this process does not appear to affect wheat allopolyploids  <cit> . a recent karyological study using fluorescent and genomic in situ hybridization  of natural and synthetic tragopogon allopolyploids identified extensive chromosomal changes, including monosomy and trisomy, intergenomic translocations, and variation in nrdna loci  <cit> . importantly, the same study  <cit>  showed that some chromosomal changes occurred in the first synthetic generation of t. mirus . ownbey  <cit>  observed multivalent formation in individuals of t. mirus and t. miscellus from natural populations and also noted univalents and a ring of four chromosomes in f <dig> hybrids between t. dubius and t. pratensis. we have also observed frequent multivalent formation in synthetic lineages of t. mirus and t. miscellus  <cit> . these prevalent meiotic irregularities suggest a mechanism for the homoeolog losses observed here. that is, through homoeologous recombination in early generations following polyploid formation, genome reshuffling and gene loss could act to stabilize the new polyploid genome  <cit> . perhaps in tragopogon a combination of factors acts over time to stabilize the new polyploid genomes. for example, some chromosomal changes could happen immediately following polyploid formation, with homoeolog loss acting gradually over successive generations. the study of additional genes and comparisons with synthetic t. miscellus lineages  <cit>  over several generations will be important for establishing the overall pattern of genome change in this system.

CONCLUSIONS
our survey of  <dig> homoeologous loci in individuals from ten populations of tragopogon miscellus represents the most extensive survey of the fate of duplicate genes in allopolyploid genomes from independently formed natural populations. in this species, loss of a parental homoeolog has occurred for several loci in individuals from these populations. some loci are consistently maintained as duplicates in all individuals from these populations. other genes consistently show evidence of homoeolog loss across populations of independent origin; significantly, the t. dubius homoeolog is typically lost. hence, some aspects of genome evolution appear to have been repeated in these new polyploids. in these young  allopolyploids, genomic incompatibilities may be resolved, in part, through loss of a parental homoeolog for some loci. as polyploidy and genome downsizing are recurrent processes in many lineages, other polyploid groups should be investigated to determine if similar patterns emerge for the loss and retention of genes duplicated by polyploidy.

