BACKGROUND
single-cell rna sequencing  allows unprecedented resolution for studies of gene expression. since its introduction in  <dig>  <cit> , this approach has been used to identify and classify cell types, characterize rare cells, and study expression variation across cell populations . in this method, the rna content of a single cell is captured, reverse transcribed to generate cdna, amplified and sequenced, providing measurements of the transcriptomes of single cells with nucleotide-level resolution. compared with methods to sequence bulk rna, scrna-seq requires substantial molecular amplification and consequently, additional handling and enzymatic reactions. this has the potential to introduce additional experimental errors and molecular biases, such that analytic methods designed for bulk rna sequencing may not be appropriate for single-cell measurements. despite substantial experimental methods development , the effects of rna amplification methods remain complex and poorly characterized. though measurement characteristics likely depend on the specific experimental protocol used, there has been limited dissection of factors that affect input–output relationship across methods. 

here, we first describe our model-based approach to dissect the factors that affect the amplification step of scrna-seq and then we characterize expression measurements generated by three scrna-seq methods in terms of sensitivity, precision and accuracy. we find that all methods perform comparably overall, but that individual methods demonstrate unique strengths and biases.

RESULTS
method overview
our approach was to dilute bulk total rna  to levels bracketing single-cell levels of total rna  in replicates and amplifying the rna to levels sufficient for rna sequencing. here, we analyzed the performance of scrna-seq methods in terms of sensitivity , precision , and accuracy . we note that expected replicate precision depends on the exact sequence of dilutions that lead to the final set of replicates. for example, if a single “master” dilution mix is made from which n replicate final dilutions are created, the expected number of molecules for each replicate will be based on the master dilution, not the original bulk. each replicate value in relation to the bulk will be comprised of two terms, the variance term due to the final dilutions and a bias term, which is the deviation of the master dilution from the bulk. different experimental protocols  require attention to the expected variation. we employed a general linear model framework to dissect the factors governing measurement performance. in particular, we observed that certain genes, or even control ercc probes, have a tendency for large deviations from expectations and we created a list of problematic gene models for future reference. we add the caveat that our results are not reliable outside the range of experimental values from which we fitted the models and the inferences should be interpreted with care.

rna-sequencing datasets
we performed replicate transcriptome amplifications of universal human reference rna  and human brain reference rna  that were diluted to single-cell and ten-cell abundances  total rna or ~ <dig>  and  <dig> million mrna molecules, respectively) and were amplified using three single-cell rna amplification methods . methods included the antisense rna ivt protocol , a custom c <dig> smarter protocol  performed on a fluidigm c <dig> 96-well chip, and a modified nugen ovation rna sequencing protocol . bulk ribo-depleted uhr and hbr rna were sequenced and served as a reference. the general experimental scheme was consistent for all dilution replicates; however, there were differences across experimental groups in the specifics of experimental protocols, necessitated by particular methodologies . because of these experimental differences, head-to-head comparison of methods is not appropriate and our goal is to provide quantitative analyses of factors affecting individual methods. current results should be used in experimental planning, data analysis, and method optimization rather than as a performance test of any particular method.fig.  <dig> experimental design and rna sequencing statistics by experimental group. a dilution experiment summary. see methods for detailed information. b single cell amplification methods used. protocols involve two key steps: conversion of rna  to cdna , and amplification of cdna. arna targeted poly-adenylated mrna by using an oligo-dt t <dig> primer for initial cdna synthesis. after generating double-stranded cdna, molecules were amplified using in vitro transcription with t <dig> polymerase. this amplification procedure was designed to minimize exponential expansion of errors. cdna generation and amplification were repeated two additional times before library preparation. smartseq plus targeted total rna using a mixture of poly-t and randomized primers for initial cdna synthesis. full-length transcripts were captured through the template-switching capacity of reverse transcriptase. double stranded cdna molecules were amplified using  <dig> rounds of pcr. all cdna and amplification reactions were performed on a 96-well fluidigm c <dig> chip, intended to reduce experimental variation by performing reactions in small volume. nugen targeted total rna through use of proprietary primers for initial cdna synthesis. second strand cdna synthesis was generated using an rna primer, which was subsequently degraded from the second strand cdna copy, resulting in linear amplification by dna replication. this method was designed to minimize exponential amplification of error. c sample sizes and rna sequencing statistics by experimental group. includes color key used in all figures. for analysis based on combined hbr and uhr dilution replicates, solid colors were used. abbreviations: human brain reference , universal human reference , university of pennsylvania , university of california san diego , university of southern california , picogram , base pair , contamination , average , standard deviation , amplification 




data processing
briefly, all samples were aligned to the human reference genome  using star aligner  <cit>  and splice-site annotations from gencode <dig>  uniquely aligned reads were assigned to gencode <dig> gene annotations using htseq and htseq-counts  <cit>  and then were depth normalized  <cit> . ribosomal genes and genes with short isoforms  were excluded because of differences in sequencing protocols across groups , leaving  <dig>  genes for analysis. . to avoid artifacts caused by alignment or quantification ambiguities, we generated a stringently filtered gene list containing  <dig>  genes to which reads can be uniquely assigned and referred to these genes as “computationally unambiguous” throughout . reference rna were aligned and quantified with rsem   <cit> . estimated abundances were concordant with publicly available primepcr measurements and with poly-a rna sequencing measurements .

for each gene, we calculated the expected number of input molecules in a diluted replicate. we did this in three steps . briefly, first we estimated the mass of targeted input rna in diluted replicates as in brennecke et al.  <cit> . second, we estimated the total number of molecules in a diluted replicate using the mass of targeted input rna and the average transcript mass for each hbr and uhr transcriptome . third, we found the expected number of molecules for each gene in a diluted replicate by multiplying the relative frequencies of gene expression and the total number of molecules in a diluted replicate. for each hbr and uhr, transcript lengths and relative expression levels were estimated by rsem using bulk sequencing data. this approach relies predominantly on bulk sequencing data for estimation, with the exception of estimating the mass of targeted rna in a dilution replicate. because of this, we expect these estimates to be relatively robust to unknown biases in scrna-seq measurements. in particular, these estimates do not depend on the choice of length normalization method for scrna-seq data. arna selectively targeted poly-adenylated  mrna . we calculated the expected number of input poly-a molecules using publicly available bulk hbr sequencing measurements.

on average, replicates were sequenced at a depth of  <dig>  ±  <dig>  million reads .  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of reads were discarded due to primer contamination.  <dig>  ±  <dig> % of retained reads aligned to the genome,  <dig>  ±  <dig> % uniquely . to examine the coverage distribution of each method, we quantified the frequency of mapped reads over several genomic regions of interest . this distribution differed for the three single-cell amplification methods. the majority of aligned reads for arna dilution replicates originated from non-mitochondrial exons , a substantially larger proportion than that recovered by smartseq plus or nugen. rrna genes, pseudogenes and repeats encoded by the nuclear genome comprised a small fraction of reads in all amplified libraries . rrna and mrna encoded by the mitochondrial genome  constituted a substantial percentage of reads . mitochondrial recovery differed substantially across methods. this difference may translate into a method-specific effect on depth normalization and for this reason mitochondrial genes have been excluded from the subsequent analyses. the distribution of reads across genomic features also differed substantially across replicates for arna and nugen .table  <dig> coverage selectivity by method

average percent of aligned reads assigned to genomic regions for each method. nuclear rrna includes rrna genes, pseudogenes and repeats. see methods for definitions of genomic regions




gene detection sensitivity
we calculated the number of detected genes as a measure of detection sensitivity  and compared this statistic to the number of genes expected to be present initially in a diluted replicate . while ~ <dig>  genes were expressed in each bulk hbr and uhr sample , a diluted replicate should contain many fewer genes because of the sampling that occurs during dilution. for this reason, detection sensitivity should be assessed with respect to the number of genes expected to be present in the diluted replicate, rather than the number of genes observed in the bulk . briefly, to calculate the expected number of genes in a diluted replicate, we assumed that the number of molecules in a tube for a given gene is poisson distributed with mean equal to the expected number of molecules for that gene in a diluted replicate, and that genes are sampled independently during dilution. the presence or absence of a given gene in a diluted replicate follows a bernoulli distribution, with the probability of success equal to the probability that at least one molecule for the gene is in the diluted replicate. the number of genes in a diluted replicate is then drawn from a poisson-binomial distribution. see methods for further details.fig.  <dig> single-cell rna sequencing sensitivity. a number of detected genes. each point represents a single sample. horizontal black lines indicate group mean. boxes indicate ±  <dig> sd.. gray horizontal lines indicate 95% ci for the expected number of genes in a diluted replicate, assuming total  or poly-a  rna. see methods. b probability of gene detection as a function of the expected number of input molecules estimated using logistic model . horizontal lines indicate 50% and 90% probability. vertical lines indicate  <dig> and at  <dig>  molecules . bands indicate 95% ci. black line indicates probability of ≥  <dig> molecule present in a diluted replicate. c odds ratio for gene detection as a function of sequencing depth . horizontal line indicates an odds ratio of one . band indicates 95% ci. d odds ratios for differences in biophysical trait values. error bars indicate a 95% ci. “*” indicates significant difference across pairs of methods . the odds ratio for length and secondary structure are shown for the increase from 25%ile length  in the hbr and uhr transcriptomes to 75%ile length . e odds ratio for an increase of  <dig>  in gc content. bands indicate 95% ci. f boxplot of gene mappability, or the fraction of the gene body that can be aligned to uniquely  for computationally ambiguous gene detection outliers  and background genes . both undetected  and detected  outliers are shown. “*” indicates significant difference . g as in f, but for the fraction of the gene body that overlaps in genomic position with a separate gene annotation. h nucleotide coverage. observed over expected coverage normalized for expression level as a function of absolute 3' to 5' position. see methods. i comparison of nucleotide coverage with uniform distribution. empirical cdf is of normalized per nucleotide coverage. black diagonal line indicates uniformity. kolmogorov-smirnov  statistic for difference from the uniform distribution is in the bottom right, with larger values indicating greater difference between the distributions. j coverage for genes with different expression levels. relative 5' to 3' coverage, calculated over  <dig> equally spaced bins for four expression level categories . see methods. abbreviations: confidence interval ; cumulative distribution function 




all methods demonstrate comparable high gene detection, detecting greater than 70% of the number of genes expected to be present in a diluted replicate. smartseq plus demonstrated the highest detection ; smartseq plus ; nugen ). with respect to poly-a rna, arna detected  of expectation. variation across samples within each method was substantially larger than expected due to dilution suggesting additional loss during cdna and amplification . to see whether gene detection sensitivity depended on sequencing depth, we generated random low-depth in silico samples by randomly sampling  <dig>  genic read counts for each dilution replicate. this represents approximately a 20-fold lower sequencing depth and a comparable depth to many recent studies. significantly fewer genes were detected at this lower sequencing depth ; smartseq plus ; nugen ). we note that this lower sensitivity is due to a difference in sequencing depth only, not the single-cell rna amplification methods.

detection of a given gene may depend on parameters such as the input number of molecules, gc-content, presence of internal adenosine monophosphate  hexamers, length, strength of molecular secondary structure, and sequencing depth. to estimate the contribution of these factors to gene detection, we fit a logistic regression model to the 10 pg. gene detection data with gene detection as the dependent variable, considering only computationally unambiguous genes to focus on experimental sensitivity.  all methods had a 50% probability of gene detection at ~2– <dig> expected input molecules, controlling for the remaining covariates . we calculated a molecular recovery rate as the predicted probability that a gene with  <dig> expected input molecule will be detected, scaled by the probability that at least one molecule of such a gene will be in a diluted replicate. molecular recovery rates were greater than  <dig>  for all methods , smartseq plus , nugen ). with respect to poly-a rna, arna recovery rate was .

despite the small number of total  rna molecules in a single 10 pg. dilution replicate , sequencing depth had a highly significant effect on gene detection . fig. 2c shows the odds ratio of increasing sequencing depth by  <dig>  reads. an odds ratio significantly greater than  <dig> indicates an increase in the odds of gene detection with increasing depth. the odds of gene detection increased substantially with sequencing depth until a depth of ~15– <dig> million reads or ~ <dig> reads per input molecule. as sequencing depth increases, the odds ratio approaches one, indicating progression towards saturation in gene detection with increasing depth. here, increasing sequencing depth from  <dig> to  <dig> million reads translated into an expected gain of  <dig> % in detected genes. the influence of remaining covariates on gene detection differed across methods . the odds of gene detection increased with gene length for all methods . the odds of detecting a gene with a length of  <dig>  kilobases  were at least  <dig>  times greater than the odds of detecting a  <dig>  kilobase gene  for all methods. nugen demonstrated a significantly stronger length effect than arna or smartseq plus . for nugen, the odds of detecting a gene with 75%ile length were  <dig>  times greater than the odds of detecting a gene with 25%ile length. the presence of an internal a-hexamer positively influenced the probability of gene detection for all methods, with strongest effect for arna. for arna, the odds of detecting a gene containing an internal a-hexamer was  <dig>  times greater than the odds of detecting a gene without one. decreased strength of secondary structure increased the odds of detection for all methods, with significantly smaller effect for arna than for smartseq plus or nugen. for arna, the odds of detecting a gene with a secondary structure strength of − <dig>  kcal/mole  was  <dig>  times greater than the odds of detecting a gene with a strength of − <dig>  kcal/mole . for nugen and smartseq plus, the odds of detecting a gene with 75%ile strength was at least  <dig>  times the odds of detecting a gene with 25%ile strength. while gc content influenced detection probability in a complex manner, smartseq plus demonstrated the strongest gc effect .

a small fraction of computationally unambiguous genes had poor fit by the logistic model . each outlier was categorized as “detected” if the gene was unexpectedly observed and “undetected” if it was unexpectedly missing. nearly all identified outliers  were method-specific. a larger proportion of computationally ambiguous genes were poorly fit by the model  with a sizable fraction  that fit poorly for all methods. these outlier genes had significantly lower fraction of the gene body that could be aligned uniquely than background genes . this was the case for both detected and undetected outliers, indicating that alignment ambiguities likely generate both false positives and false negatives. outliers also significantly differed from background in the fraction of the gene body that overlaps with another gene annotation, with lower overlap among detected outliers and greater overlap among undetected outliers .

to characterize read coverage at the scale of individual base positions, we calculated the observed/expected nucleotide coverage as a function of absolute 3′ to 5′ basepair position within a gene . briefly, to examine the effect of absolute position on coverage, genes were aligned from the 3′ end. for each gene, per nucleotide coverage was normalized such that a uniform distribution of reads along a gene would be assigned a value of one at all positions . figure 2h–i are plotted from 3′ to 5′ to reflect the alignment of transcripts by their 3′ end due to common 3′ anchoring in amplified mrna. coverage for all methods was significantly different from uniform ; however, nugen demonstrated the greatest uniformity  with similar positional coverage distribution for 10 pg. and 100 pg. dilution replicates. arna preferentially covered the 3′ terminal and demonstrated greater 3′ bias for 10 pg. dilution data. smartseq plus showed an intermediate degree of bias. segregated by expression levels, we found preferential recovery of the 5′ and the 3′ gene ends for low abundance genes and preferential 3′ coverage for high abundance genes .

precision
we next consider the similarity of measurements across dilution replicates, within methods and across methods. the correlation measurements indicate the degree of linear relationship  or consistent ordering  over replicate pairs. though we avoid direct comparison across methods , the results will be applicable to experimental design and analysis for each method. for example, these values may serve as benchmarks for methods optimization, or they may serve as a reference point for new adopters of these protocols to ensure the protocol is being performed adequately. the average within experimental group pairwise correlation coefficient  was  <dig>  ±  <dig>   and  <dig>  ±  <dig>   for 10 pg. replicates and  <dig>  ±  <dig>   and  <dig>  ±  <dig>   for 100 pg. replicates .fig.  <dig> single-cell rna-sequencing precision. a pairwise correlations for all samples. upper triangle: pearson correlation. lower triangle: kendall correlation. zeros treated as missing values. each row and column is an individual sample. experimental group is indicated by color bars at edge of plot. b relationship between standard deviation  and mean characterized by least squares regression . all estimated coefficients were highly significant . c–f enrichment of biophysical traits in experimentally precise  and variable  genes with respect to background genes . error bars indicate 95% ci. “*” indicates significant difference . numbers at bottom indicate sample size .  median difference in gene length estimated by hodges-lehman statistic. significance: wilcoxon rank sum two-way test.  relative risk of containing an internal a-hexamer. significance: fisher’s exact test.  as c for % gc content.  as c for strength of local secondary structure. g–j pca projection of dilution data on pc  <dig> and  <dig>  plots were centered so that bulk uhr or hbr was positioned at the origin. points represent individual dilution replicates. colored ovals represent bivariate normal 95% confidence ellipses. % sd. explained by a pc is indicated in axis label. see methods.  hbr 10 pg.  uhr 10 pg.  hbr 100 pg.  uhr 100 pg. k–n as g–j, but using only abundantly expressed genes . axis scales differ from g–j, with axes in equivalent to the purple-boxed region in g–j.  hbr 10 pg.  uhr 10 pg.  hbr 100 pg.  uhr 100 pg. abbreviations: standard error ; confidence interval ; kilobases ; kilocalories ; mole ; principal components analysis ; principal component ; standard deviation 




to describe the dependence of precision on expression level, we performed least-squares regression of the empirical standard deviation on the empirical mean  for 10 pg. experimental groups with sample size > <dig>  the mean was an excellent predictor of standard deviation . to test whether there was systematic bias in variability, we classified a subset of genes to be less precise than expected  and another subset to be more precise than expected . genes that were less precise than expected differed little from background in their biophysical characteristics , suggesting limited systematic bias in experimental variability. biophysical characteristics enriched among unexpectedly precise genes with respect to background differed in a method-specific manner . for arna and smartseq plus, enriched biophysical characteristics were concordant with reduced probability of gene detection , suggesting technical dropouts might play a strong role in replicate precision. nugen demonstrated the opposite trend suggesting that amplification bias might play a stronger role. genes with highly atypical precision  are listed in additional file  <dig>  we recommend that the expression values of these gene models should be interpreted with caution.

separate principal components analysis  of each hbr and uhr for 10 pg. dilution data demonstrated that average displacement between single cell and bulk measurements predominate over differences between single cell methods ; however, there were clear differences across methods in the multivariate covariance structure of experimental variation. differences across methods were also apparent for 100 pg. dilution replicates , and, though these measurements were more similar to bulk measurements, differences between dilution replicates and bulk measurements persisted. we note that average displacement between single cell and bulk measurements represent both a bias component from utilizing a master dilution mix  and technical bias. we repeated pca on a subset of genes with greater than  <dig>  expected input molecules . on highly abundant genes, dilution replicates were substantially more similar to bulk measurements  and differences across methods were substantially smaller. however, in all cases, the within method pattern of covariation  and the bias dispersal around the bulk expected value  differed for both source rna and individual methods. . these samples demonstrate larger spread than matched samples in other experimental groups; however, because the number of replicates is small  some of this difference may be attributed to sampling noise.)

accuracy
we calculated pairwise correlation coefficients of dilution replicates with bulk as a metric of overall accuracy . for this and the below, only non-zero gene counts were considered in order to focus on quantitation rather than sensitivity. 10 pg. dilution replicates demonstrated an average pairwise correlation with reference of  <dig>  ±  <dig>   and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . 100 pg. replicates showed greater similarity with reference  and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  . methods demonstrated similar overall accuracy for 100 pg. dilution replicates. for 10 pg. dilution replicates, smartseq plus demonstrated slightly higher correlation with the bulk than the other methods by both correlation metrics. correlation with reference had a modest association with percent unique alignment .fig.  <dig> single-cell rna sequencing accuracy. a average pairwise correlation of diluted replicates with bulk hbr or uhr. zeros treated as missing values. error bars indicate ± 2 s.e.m. b–c relationship between % unique alignment and similarity with bulk hbr or uhr. “r” indicates pearson correlation of x and y.  10 pg.  100 pg. d–f distribution of fold deviation across genes. wide boxes represent measurements in individual replicates. narrow boxes represent average measurements across replicates. y-axis was truncated for visualization and 99%ile values for wide boxes are in panel descriptions below, ordered to match plot. “*” indicates significant difference between individual and average measurements .  arna. 99%ile values: 2066; 1442; 514;  <dig>   smartseq plus. 99%ile values: 877; 770; 553;  <dig>   nugen. 99%ile values: 2332; 1766; 784;  <dig>  g–j enrichment of biophysical traits among underestimated  and overestimated  genes with respect to remaining genes. see methods. plot notation and statistics are as in fig. 3c–f.  median difference in gene length.  relative risk of containing an internal a-hexamer.  as g, for % gc content.  as g, for strength of local secondary structure. k–m density scatter plots of normalized read counts in individual 10 pg. replicates vs. expected number of input molecules. see methods. red indicates high density. solid line indicates expected read count and hashed lines indicate ±  <dig> fold.  arna.  smartseq plus.  nugen. n–p density scatter plots of average normalized read counts vs. number of input molecules.  arna.  smartseq plus.  nugen. gene filtering: d–f and k–p considered computationally unambiguous genes and excluded gene detection outliers. d–j considered genes with greater than 95% probability of presence in a diluted replicate. abbreviations: confidence interval ; kilobases ; kilocalorie ; mole 




to assess the accuracy of individual gene estimates, we calculated the fold deviation of normalized read counts with respect to bulk hbr or uhr measurements . for all methods and input amounts, the median fold deviation was less than  <dig> but a subset of genes was extensively overestimated. overestimated genes  were substantially longer than remaining genes and more frequently contained an internal a-hexamer . for nugen and smartseq plus, these genes also had lower gc content and weaker local secondary structure than remaining genes. underestimated genes  demonstrated the opposite tendencies: compared to background genes, they were shorter, less frequently contained internal a-hexamers, had higher gc content and stronger secondary structure than background, as might be expected . overall, arna demonstrated less systematic bias than nugen or smartseq plus. highly inaccurate genes  are catalogued in additional file  <dig> 

smoothed density scatter plots demonstrated method-specific transfer functions between the expected number of input molecules and the number of read counts in an individual replicate . this relationship was quantitative at expression levels greater than ~5– <dig> expected input molecules up to at least ~ <dig> input molecules, the highest expression level examined for 10 pg. replicates, giving a quantitative dynamic range of at least 100-fold. this relationship was qualitatively similar for low-depth in silico samples . at this range of expression levels, the relationship between the average number of read counts and the expected number of input molecules is roughly linear . at low to mid expression levels measurements were frequently underestimated expanding the apparent range of measured abundances, particularly for arna and nugen .

protocol variations
we evaluated the effects of several protocol variations on measurement quality . the arna protocol used for the primary analysis includes cdna purification before initial amplification, and  <dig> rounds of ivt amplification followed by dilution of amplified cdna before library preparation . elimination of initial cdna purification significantly improved sensitivity and accuracy, as did reduction to two rounds of ivt amplification and elimination of dilution prior to library generation . an optimized protocol incorporating both changes, demonstrated substantial improvements in the number of detected genes and pairwise correlation with the bulk .table  <dig> evaluation of protocol variations

comparison of dilution replicates generated using modified protocols with control dilution replicates. sample information can be found in additional file  <dig> and protocol information in methods. # genes detected only considers genes observed in bulk hbr or uhr. kendall correlation was calculated excluding zeros in either sample. unpaired comparisons were made using wilcoxon two-way rank sum test for difference in medians. paired comparisons were made using wilcoxon two-way rank sign test for difference in medians. the null hypothesis of no difference was rejected at p <  <dig> . median difference between groups, with 95% ci, was calculated using the hodges-lehman statistic




the addition of ercc spike-in transcripts provides an internal control  <cit> , but it raises the concern that addition of synthetic rna to a sample may decrease biological sensitivity. we found no significant difference in sensitivity, precision or accuracy across matched dilution replicates with and without the addition of erccs  up to the spike-in level of  <dig> % of reads. individual ercc transcripts were found to be problematic, consistently inaccurate, for smartseq plus and arna in a method specific manner .

strand-specific rna sequencing may improve detection sensitivity and reduce false positive detection. stranded quantification of arna replicates detected slightly fewer genes than non-stranded quantification; however, it also detected significantly fewer genes that were not observed in the bulk, and genes that were detected only by stranded quantification were supported by significantly more reads than genes detected only by non-stranded quantification .

discussion
several other publications have reported on similar dilution experiments to assess scrna-seq methods, where bulk rna was diluted to small input amounts and amplified in replicate, and the sequencing results of amplified replicates were compared to sequencing results of the bulk material  <cit> . in comparison to these earlier studies, our study uses a smaller amount of input rna  and a larger number of technical replicates  as well as a set of parametric models to dissect the factors affecting statistical characteristics of amplified rna measurements. despite these differences, some results presented here are consistent with earlier findings. of particular interest, both adiconis et al.  <cit>  and shanker at al.  <cit>  reported large differences between nugen and smart-seq measurements in the proportion of reads aligning to rrna, with a large proportion of nugen reads aligning to mitochondrial rrna. because of the larger number of replicates used here, we were able to further observe large variation across replicates generated by the same method in the proportion of reads assigned to mitochondrial rrna .

in contrast with previous studies, we evaluated method performance in terms of the number of input molecules and considered the variance introduced by dilution. when these factors are ignored, it may appear that methods perform more poorly for lower input amounts but this is not necessarily the case. for example, fewer genes were detected in 10 pg. dilution replicates compared to 100 pg. replicates . ignoring the effect of dilution, one may conclude that detection sensitivity is lower for smaller input amounts of rna; however, because of dilution, fewer genes are expected to be present in 10 pg. dilution replicates than 100 pg. replicates. with this in mind, we cannot conclude that detection sensitivity is lower for smaller input amounts of rna. more generally, measurement sensitivity  depends critically on the method’s efficiency of capturing individual molecules , which requires careful calibration to match different input level treatments.

our study, like those described in  <cit> , provides an assessment of scrna-seq methods with respect to the rna amplification component of the protocol . additional experimental factors will be present in biological applications that are expected to affect the performance of these methods, such as variability across biological samples in the efficiency of cell lysis or an effect of cell debris on cdna capture, amplification or sequencing. biological characteristics, such as the amount of lipid contained in a cell, may also affect the efficiency of molecular reactions and introduce further technical variability in resulting measurements. further study using carefully controlled populations of cells of a variety of cell types as input would extend the analysis performed here.

in light of the results presented here, we briefly discuss a few topics related to experimental planning, method optimization and data analysis.

though the goal of this study and our experimental design is not meant to select “the best method,” some results may be helpful in selecting an appropriate method for a particular project. the enriched coverage of exons in arna may be beneficial for studies of mrna, and the retention of transcript strand information is unique to arna at this point. smartseq plus and c <dig> microfluidic device generate reproducible replicates and high detection sensitivity, presumably due to more uniform liquid handling and retention of material due to lack of vessel transfer. the uniformity of coverage provided by nugen  may be beneficial for studies of isoform use and splicing. we note that, in our hands, nugen reactions were inconsistent and we had repeated amplification failures, or amplification of non-template directed products with this method, especially at the 10 pg level where the method appears to be reaching the limits of its sensitivity.

in selecting sequencing depth, there is a trade-off between gene detection sensitivity and cost. typically, a small number of genes comprise the bulk of rna molecules in a transcriptome. sequencing at low depths should be sufficient to reproducibly detect and quantify these abundant genes; however, the majority of genes in a typical transcriptome are at low abundance. because of this, the number of genes detected in the mixtures of rnas used here depends heavily on sequencing depth . the dynamic range limit due to sequencing depth is a function of the relative frequency distribution, which will vary for an actual single cell. our results suggest that increasing the number of reads per cell may produce richer transcriptome measurements and should be considered carefully in the context of a specific experimental plan.

missing values due to lack of sensitivity and the presence of large valued outliers may cause complications for depth normalization methods. large variation across samples and substantial differences across methods in the fraction of reads assigned to mitochondrial rna  will propagate to sample and method differences in relative read counts. more generally, we observed large variation in the distribution of reads across broad genome annotation classes . because each genomic annotation class accounted for a substantial number of reads and input molecules, the observed differences across methods, and within methods, cannot be simply explained by sampling error. similarly, variation across samples in the number of detected genes cannot be easily explained by dilution . this behavior might be explained by global differences in reaction efficiencies across samples, as suggested previously  <cit> ; however, the experimental sources of such differences in a controlled experiment are unclear. we found certain subsets of genes to be problematic for gene detection, accuracy, and precision, in a method-specific manner . we recommend that genes on these lists be treated with caution, filtered before analysis, or interpreted with care. we similarly found several ercc spike-in transcripts to be problematic , and recommend selecting a subset of reliable ercc transcripts for use as reference measurements.

some scrna-seq quantification challenges might be reduced through further experimental optimizations, for example by increasing detection sensitivity and reducing amplification biases. eliminating the initial cdna purification, reducing the extent of amplification required, and limiting sample dilution may be productive avenues, as suggested by our data. methods to experimentally deplete highly abundant and variably recovered mitochondrial rna, if not of experimental interest, may also be of use.

CONCLUSIONS
single cell rna measurement methods have become increasingly robust and automated systems have made the technique broadly more accessible and efficient. all methods examined here demonstrated good gene detection and a quantitative relationship between input molecular abundances and measured expression levels at mid- to high-expression levels or greater than ~5– <dig> input molecules. this corresponds to ~ <dig> – <dig>  reliably measured genes for the reference transcriptomes examined here. we propose that single cell rna measurements have come of age and this level of resolution for gene expression measurements has and will continue to facilitate biological discovery.

