BACKGROUND
bovine tuberculosis , caused by members of the mycobacterium tuberculosis complex , is a zoonotic disease affecting cattle worldwide  <cit> . test and slaughter programs, mostly based on skin testing using bovine ppd  and in some countries also avian ppd , have reduced btb incidence and even achieved its eradication in certain countries and regions  <cit> . however and despite great efforts and resources invested in the fight against the disease, including eradication campaigns in place for >20 years, btb is yet to be eradicated from many countries in the world  <cit> . certainly, eradication programs face several challenges that impair their progress even in developed countries, including limitations on the sensitivity and specificity of the routine diagnostic tests, large herd sizes, animal movements, and the presence of wildlife reservoirs  <cit> . herd type also seems to influence the risk for the disease, with dairy herds being at the highest risk, probably due to a combination of high within-herd animal density, which increases the frequency of animal contacts, and management practices that promote disease transmission  <cit> , although contradictory results have been also reported  <cit> . studies of btb dynamics in infected herds are complicated by the disease’s long incubation period. for this reason, epidemiological models have been developed to quantify the within-herd transmission rate as a prerequisite to evaluate the impact of alternative control strategies in cattle  <cit>  and deer  <cit> . however, epidemiological studies aimed at assessing the evolution of btb control programs in a region and considering the impact of control strategies in different herd types have not been published in the peer reviewed literature.

in spain, herd prevalence has decreased since the implementation of the national eradication program from  <dig> % in  <dig> to  <dig> % in  <dig>  <cit> . however, such improvement has not been homogeneous throughout the country and herd prevalence may be as low as < <dig> % and as high as >5% depending on the region; for example, btb herd prevalence in the autonomous community of madrid  was  <dig> % in  <dig>  <cit> , being the third largest prevalence recorded in the country. acm, located in central spain, currently holds a cattle population of approximately  <dig>  herds and  <dig>  animals including all productive types present in the country  of which all are exposed to a variety of epidemiological factors typically observed throughout spain.

the study here was aimed at assessing the association between herd type and metrics of evolution of the btb control program in acm, including time to recover btb free status and transmission rate, using data collected over >10 years. the influence that use of new diagnostic tests for identification of positive animals has had in such metrics has been also assessed. results will help to clarify the dynamics for disease transmission in acm and to estimate the impact of alternative control strategies in one of the regions of europe in which the disease is yet to be eradicated.

RESULTS
study population
through the twelve-year period  under study,  <dig>  herd tests and  <dig>  individual tests were performed in  <dig>  farms of acm. most of the tested herds were beef herds , whereas the remaining herds were categorized as dairy  and bullfighting . median number of tested animals per round was  <dig>  although it varied with the herd type .

*after removal of outliers.

btb data
at the beginning of the study-period overall herd prevalence in acm was  <dig> %, while in  <dig> herd prevalence was  <dig> %. there were  <dig> btb outbreaks reported in  <dig> herds, of which  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  outbreaks were reported in  <dig> ,  <dig>  and  <dig>  beef, dairy and bullfighting herds, respectively . median duration of outbreaks was 456 days and the median number of herd tests to obtain otf status was  <dig>  it is noteworthy that the time to obtain otf status after an outbreak depended on the initial status of the farm; in farms that had just been included in the program and thus had never reached otf status, median time to obtain the otf was 568 days, whereas median time to recover otf status in outbreaks that occurred in otf herds was 344 days. median number of reactors detected per positive herd test and outbreak was  <dig> and  <dig> animals, respectively. data depending on herd type are detailed in table  <dig> 

proportions of positive herds through the 12-year period, recurrently infected herds, and outbreaks declared in otf herds were significantly higher  in dairy cattle  compared to beef  and bullfighting  cattle .

within-herd transmission indicators/coefficient
median number of reactors per positive herd-test and outbreak were higher in dairy herds  than in beef  and bullfighting  herds. the value of βt was computed using information from herd-tests in which date of the previous btb test was available . at the test level, the impact of the introduction of ifn-γ assay in positive herds yielded a statistically significant  increase in the values of βt for every herd type compared to those calculated when only the sit test was performed, although this increase was less evident in dairy herds .

the βf values computed for  <dig>  of the  <dig> positive herds in which this parameter could be estimated were identified as outliers and therefore excluded from the analysis. nevertheless, their inclusion did not affect the results presented here . the computed values of βf fitted log-normal distributions for each herd type . significantly  higher values of βf were observed in dairy herds compared to beef and bullfighting herds, which showed equivalent βf values .

survival analysis
eighteen and  <dig> out of the  <dig> outbreaks detected in the period of study were not included in the survival analysis due to anomalous length values  or because they were resolved by stamping out respectively. from the remaining  <dig> outbreaks used for fitting the two univariable cox proportional hazards models, otf status had been obtained in  <dig>  of the affected herds and btb outbreaks were still ongoing in the remaining  <dig>  herds at the time of the analysis.

herd type was significantly associated with time to recover otf status, with outbreaks in dairy herds showing significantly shorter lengths  compared to beef and bullfighting herds , and an increased probability of resolving the outbreak faster, as indicated by the hazard rates .

na non-applicable.

outbreaks managed after implementation of ifn-γ assay in infected herds in  <dig> had also significantly shorter duration  and increased probability of recovery than those declared before  <dig>  .

the number of reactors disclosed in the first positive herd test was significantly and inversely associated with the length of the outbreak  in the multivariable cox model, whereas hazard ratio for the other two significant variables  did not substantially differ , compared to the coefficients obtained in the bivariate analyses .

schoenfeld residuals indicated that the assumption of proportional hazards was violated for outbreaks in which time to recover otf status was shorter than 240 days. cox models were re-run after elimination of those outbreaks; subsequently, the proportional hazards assumption was met  and results of the hazards ratios remain unchanged as indicated by the overlapping 95% ci.

discussion
eradication of btb at a herd level, which is prerequisite for disease eradication at a region and country level, has been impaired by the chronic nature of the disease that can lead to relatively long periods of “silent infection” in infected animals, especially at low infectious doses  <cit> . this feature of the disease, together with limitations in accuracy of the diagnostic techniques, can substantially extend the time needed for declaring a herd btb free. several studies have been published dealing with the identification of risk factors at an individual or herd level associated with btb  <cit>  or with the detection of predictors of future herd breakdowns in btb free herds  <cit> , but longitudinal studies aiming at elucidating the disease dynamics in infected herds under a strong eradication pressure such as the one presented here have not been published in the peer reviewed literature. here, we analyzed data from all cattle herds in acm included in the spanish btb eradication program, therefore providing information on its situation without sampling-biases. acm was selected for this study due to its high herd-prevalence, its relative small size  and the presence of most epidemiological situations described in the rest of the country; these include different herd types, presence of wildlife reservoirs, and extensive and intensively managed herds. thus, results here are likely to be representative of other spanish regions. our data suggest that herd type influences the probability of success of the btb control program in acm, and perhaps, in other btb-infected regions of spain and europe.

the median value of βt, estimated here was similar to the values reported in argentina  <cit> , new zealand  <cit>  and the netherlands  <cit> , suggesting that, on average, every infectious animal led to 2– <dig> infections per year. however, the value of βt was significantly higher for dairies compared with other herd types. dairy farms were at higher risk for btb than beef and bullfighting herds, as indicated by the larger values of βt, proportion of outbreaks, and proportion of recurrently infected farms observed in dairy herds compared to other herd types. this finding may be related to a combination of factors that favor disease spread in these herds including, for example, high contact rates, high density, and presence of stressors associated with the intensive management of animals, as previously suggested  <cit> . arguably, some animals may have been culled before becoming positive, which would result in an underestimation of beta ; however, animals culled prior to detection were, consequently, not considered as sources of infection at the subsequent estimation of beta, which would result in an overestimation of the parameter. in addition, animals from btb-infected cannot be moved to other herds, therefore decreasing the likeness of removal of infected animals from the herd before detection. imperfect sensitivity was also incorporated to estimate the number of true infected animals. therefore, estimates here would be, on average, accurate. the number of herd tests required to obtain otf status was not influenced by the herd type; however, the time to achieve otf status was shorter for dairy herds compared to beef and bullfighting herds, probably as a consequence of a short duration of the between-test period in dairy farms. in addition, the occurrence of occasional individual infections due to contact with infected wildlife could also contribute to extend duration of outbreaks in extensively managed herds . these results suggest that a possible herd-type effect should be taken into account when measures for btb eradication are being implemented.

introduction of the ifn-γ assay for the identification of infected animals in positive herds resulted in an increase on the values of βt , likely as a consequence of an increase in the sensitivity of the detection, as expected when this technique is used as an ancillary test  <cit> . consequently, use of the ifn-γ assay also decreased significantly the median time to recover otf status after an outbreak . misclassification of still-infected farms as otf due to the change in the regulations implemented in  <dig> does not seem likely, as only  <dig>  of the  <dig> farms that achieved otf status after  <dig> were reinfected by  <dig>  these findings suggest that incorporation of the ifn-γ was beneficial for the control program in acm, accelerating btb eradication at a herd-level.

interestingly, results of the multivariable model suggest that the larger the number of btb-positive animals detected at the first herd test, the shorter the time to eradicate the disease from the farm. a large number of positive animals at the first herd test may be interpreted as an indication of low probability of false negative results, thus, decreasing the time of eradication. this finding is consistent with the results obtained by the use of ifn-γ, which most likely increases the sensitivity of the detection.

outliers were removed from the dataset before the survival analysis  and before identifying the theoretical distribution that best fitted the within-herd transmission data  because of the uncertainty related to the accuracy of such estimations. there are a number of factors that could lead to unusual lengths of outbreaks and high values of βf  including, for example, recording bias, introduction of infected animals, or participation of wildlife reservoirs in the maintenance and transmission of the disease . still, from the decision making perspective, identification and further investigation of such outliers is of interest, because they may represent farms with particular epidemiological conditions that truly increase the risk for the disease, or, alternatively, misreporting of data related with disease identification. nevertheless, if outliers were not excluded from the analyses the results obtained did not change significantly as shown by the overlapping 95% ci in all estimates .

arguably, the formulation used here to compute the transmission rate is relatively simple, because certain factors that may affect transmission, such as absence of random contact among susceptible and infected animals, management practices, or the potential role that certain wildlife species may play in disease transmission, were not considered in the formulation. increasing model complexity would require quantitative knowledge on the value that certain epidemiological factors took in the study population that was not available to the authors including, for example, number and distribution of wildlife species or rate of contact between cattle per herd. most important, it is uncertain whether inclusion of such information in the model formulation would result in significantly different estimates for the transmission rate compared to those presented here. in the absence of such information, estimates presented here may be useful approximations of the true value values of the transmission rate of bovine tuberculosis in spain that allow to compare the estimates between different herd types and other epidemiological factors. this could aid in the evaluation of the impact of control strategies for different production systems. in any case, the methodological approach presented here may help the administration of control programs to identify and further investigate those farms in which unusually high transmission rates suggest the occurrence of an anomaly in the pattern of disease transmission.

CONCLUSIONS
results presented here show that herd type influenced the likelihood of success of a btb control program in an infected region of spain and that use of the ifn-γ contributed to the success of the control program as a complementary tool in infected herds. estimates and analytical approaches presented here will help in the design, implementation and evaluation of btb control programs in acm and other infected regions of spain.

