BACKGROUND
protein secondary structure was first predicted on the basis of stereo-chemical principles to adopt α-helical and β-strand conformations due to the periodicity of their inter-backbone hydrogen bonds  <cit> . subsequent experimental determination of protein structures confirmed these predictions revealing the presence of α-helices and β-strands as the predominant secondary structure elements  in proteins. other minor sses such as 310-helix  <cit> , π-helix  <cit> , β-turns   <cit> , γ-turns  <cit> , and β-bulges  <cit>  have been defined based on the stereochemistry of the polypeptide chain. however, deviations from ideal geometry in experimentally determined structures due to interactions between the elements and possible errors in coordinates can make an algorithmic definition that is consistent with manual assignment challenging.

the first algorithm for the automatic delineation of secondary structure was proposed by levitt and greer  <cit> . they defined secondary structures based on peptide hydrogen bonds . a more comprehensive algorithm, dssp, was subsequently developed and is based on a careful analysis of backbone-backbone hydrogen bond energies and geometrical features of the polypeptide chain  <cit> . it is very accurate in its residue-based definition of the available coordinates and does not attempt to interpret the data in any predictive way. another well-known secondary structure definition program is stride  <cit> . like dssp, this program also uses hydrogen bond energy as well as main chain dihedral angles φ and ψ. in addition, it relies on a database of derived recognition parameters that uses the crystallographer's definition of secondary structures as the standard. other programs to assign the secondary structure states of proteins exist. xtlsstr defines secondary structure in the same way a person assigns secondary structure visually  <cit> . it uses two angles and three distances computed from the protein backbone atoms. sstruc is a reimplementation of the classic dssp method . the p-curve algorithm allows the helicoidal structure of a protein to be calculated starting from the atomic coordinates of its peptide backbone  <cit> .

secondary structures in experimentally determined protein coordinate data often deviate from the ideal geometry and thus methods of secondary structure assignment that use different logic and cutoffs can vary significantly in their assignments. maximum variation is seen near the edges of sses and consensus secondary structures defined by different algorithms have been proposed in order to define sses accurately  <cit> . attempts have been made to define secondary structures consistently and in agreement with visual inspection by recognizing errors in protein coordinates. in the stick algorithm, line segments become the primary data elements and can then be used to define secondary structure. by contrast, previous approaches have used secondary structure definitions to specify line segments  <cit> . our algorithm retains the former approach, as cα geometry allows locating breakpoints in both α-helices and β-strands and allows generation of residue based pairing information helpful in determining edges of β-sheets.

a strong correlation exists between hydrogen bonding patterns and cα distances and torsion angles  <cit> . algorithms such as those described by levitt  <cit> , define_s  <cit> , votap  <cit>  and p-sea  <cit>  assign secondary structure not on the basis of actual hydrogen bonding patterns, but using an interpreted residue pairing based on the cα coordinates of the protein structure. however, most of these programs assign secondary structure properties to individual residues of a protein chain. for the purpose of vector-based structural similarity searches, a secondary structure definition of the linear segments  that can be used to approximate the protein structure in a simplified form as a set of interacting sses is required. using dssp  <cit>  assignments to define sses for protein structure comparisons may lead to problems in identifying linear elements and element edges  <cit> . our analysis of dssp assignments reveals that they are not well adapted to the definition of sses for several reasons. dssp finds a secondary structure state for every individual residue in a protein chain. when these states are found, the consecutive residues that belong to one state can be unified to form a sse. such a strategy of element definition has several disadvantages. first, one might wrongfully unify two consecutive elements into one. alternatively, if there is a gap in the secondary structural state of a residue inside an element, due to disorder, refinement error or some other irregularity, this element will be unjustifiably split into two. residue coverage for dssp assignments is poor when the structure is not well refined or not well ordered and the stringent criteria set for hydrogen bonds are not met. dssp misses some short helices and β-strands in which hydrogen bonding criteria are violated. moreover, the edges of elements are not always defined accurately. thus, although dssp can identify a secondary structure state as a property of each residue, it not well suited to outline sses.

here we describe a method "predictive assignment of linear secondary structure elements " to identify sses from the three-dimensional protein coordinates. the method is intended as a reliable predictive linear secondary structure definition algorithm that could provide an element-based representation of a protein molecule. our algorithm is predictive in that it attempts to overlook isolated errors in residue coordinates and is geared towards defining sses of proteins relevant to vector-based protein structure comparison. for the purpose of similarity searches, use of just the major sses, namely the α-helix and the β-strand that can be approximated by vectors will suffice, as they typically incorporate the majority of the residues in a protein.

our program delineates α-helices, and β-strands participating in β-sheets. helices are broadly defined to include right-handed α-helices,  <dig> helices, π-helices and turns that show a helical propensity. we do not distinguish between these helices since many linear helical elements in proteins combine  <dig> or more helical types. for example, the first turn of a α-helix might be a  <dig> helix and the last turn could be a π-helix. if one would like to differentiate between the three types of helices, dssp  <cit>  or stride  <cit>  should be used. similarly, the β-strand elements are broadly defined by our program to include β-strands, β-bridges, β-bends and the residues of β-hairpins.

RESULTS
brief overview of the algorithm
α-helices and β-strands are the predominant and most distinct types of secondary structures observed in proteins  <cit> . using only cα coordinates, our algorithm delineates two types of secondary structural elements, namely helices  and β-strands .

our method was developed for predictive assignment of linear sses. preliminary helix and β-strand categories are assigned to residues, based on i, i+ <dig> cα distance and i, i+ <dig>  i+ <dig>  i+ <dig> cα torsion angle . next, probable helix and β-strand elements are generated by selecting consecutive residues that belong to the same category . quadruplets of residues, formed by two pairs of hydrogen-bonded consecutive residues that satisfy criteria of distances and angles , are constructed from residues that do not meet the strict criteria for helix definition in step  <dig>  a quadruplet is the smallest unit for defining potential β-sheets and is formed from a set of four cα atoms that are linked with two covalent bonds and two pseudo-hydrogen bonds . the quadruplets are joined together, end-to-end in the direction of covalent bonds, to form ladders of consecutive pairs of residues . the ladders of paired residues are joined to form paired β-strands. helices defined previously are split, using root mean square deviation  of constituent residues about the helix axis, so that they can be represented as linear elements . β-strands are split using various geometrical criteria and pairing of neighboring residues .

the program's main output is in the pdb  <cit>  file format. helix and strand records are added or substituted by our definition.

defining and extending core α-helices and β-strands
cα-cα distance  and torsion angle  are used to select core regions of secondary structures. the parameters are then made less restrictive to identify and assign residues that do not follow the idealized pattern of α-helices and β-strands. residues that individually might fail the test for a secondary structure state, due to either hydrogen-bonding criteria or φ and ψ angles, or both, may be placed in an element if the geometric parameters and pairing conditions of the neighboring residues support the inclusion. this makes the algorithm predictive in nature; therefore helices and β-strands might be defined in regions that show a helical tendency or have neighboring β-strands respectively, even if the polypeptide model at that region is erroneous. we have found the criteria of a minimum of  <dig> residues with at least  <dig> residues pairing with a neighboring β-strand  <cit>  to perform well in identifying β-sheets that match human judgment. thus, anti-parallel pairs of β-strands with two residues each never arise from loop regions. a method based on quadruplets of residues linked with two covalent bonds and two hydrogen bonds, approximated using a set of three parameters based on distances and angles between the residues, have been used as the seed unit for β-sheets. a quadruplet-based approach has also been used by levitt  <cit> . β-strands are defined only when one or more neighboring paired β-strands are available, thus reducing the chance for errors in our predictive definition of β-strands. the smallest helix by our definition has a length of  <dig> residues, which is a single turn of a α-helix. our algorithm assigns small 5-residue turns showing helical propensity as helices. other programs that are cα-based also fail to distinguish between such turns and helices  <cit> . as shown in fig. 1a, only a few of these assignments are actually incorrect.

definition of linear elements
our method attempts to provide a definition of sses that can be approximated using vectors. it is possible for edges of elements to overlap, leading to more than one secondary structure state for a particular residue. if required, these elements are broken using geometric criteria and directionality changes over a stretch of residues, including pairing for β-strands, to obtain linear elements. specialized algorithms to detect curved, kinked and linear helices based on local helical twist, rise and virtual torsion angle are known  <cit> . we have used simpler rule-based methods to improve computational speed. single residues existing between two bent helices fail cutoffs for cα distance and torsion angles. bent helices thus remain separate even though their edges might overlap. gently curved helices are not broken unless the angle between vectors representing the broken sections is greater than 20°. the broken sections are chosen using an approach  to minimize the number of acceptably linear elements, while retaining the maximum number of residues from the original helix. a similar breaking angle of 25° has been observed by richards and kundrot  <cit> . this angle and rmsd are used to break kinked helices correctly. kinked helices, however, are retained if the angle between their representative vectors is less than 20°.

reliability of secondary structure definitions
the reliability of secondary structure definition by our algorithm was checked by plotting the main chain torsion angles φ and ψ  <cit> , individually for all helix and β-strand regions defined by dssp  <cit>   and defined only by our program when compared with dssp . examples of helices  and β-strands were inspected manually.

most of the φ and ψ angles  are found to be in the regions of the ramachandran plot commonly accepted to be representative of α-helices  <cit> . an example from the region bounded by -150°<φ-125° and 50<°ψ<100° is shown as a red dot in figs. 1c and 1e. residues with φ and ψ angles in this region occur mostly at overlaps between two helix elements. residues with φ and ψ angles in the region -50°<φ<-75° and 100°<ψ<150°  are mostly edge residues of helices. secondary structure for residues with φ and ψ angles in the -100°<φ<-125° and 125°<ψ<150° region  are not immediately obvious. these are mostly at the edge of helices and could potentially be part of a β-strand or extended region. however, for the examples that we studied, it would not be wrong to define these residues as belonging to part of a helix as no consecutive β-strands were present and the edge residues showed helical tendency. the region of the plot at 50°<φ<100° and -50°<ψ<50° consists of residues taking part in 310-helices.

nearly all φ and ψ angles for β-strand residues over-predicted by our method  fall in the same regions as that of dssp  <cit>  defined β-strands, and most were found to fall in the commonly accepted region of the ramachandran plot for β-strands  <cit> . examples of β-strand residues with φ and ψ angles outside this region were inspected manually. a large number of residues with angles in the region -100°<φ<-50° and -50°<ψ<0° were found to be at overlaps between helices and β-strands. residues with angles in the region 50°<φ<100° and -50°<ψ<50° are mostly bulges and regions of overlap between two β-strand elements. some residues were found to be included in our element definition but would not be assigned a secondary structure by a residue-based method. these had angles in the region 50°<φ<150° and -180°<ψ<-125° and also 50°<φ<150° and 150°<ψ<180°. these residues are rare in β-strands and were not found to occur successively. they sometimes form part of bulges or element edges.

residues that fail strict secondary structure assignment when explicit hydrogen-bonding criteria are considered, cannot be used to properly form sses. therefore, predictive assignment with our algorithm is preferred. the following reasons may account for the necessity of predictive assignments. protein structures are intrinsically flexible. hydrogen bonds that are present in some family members might be absent in other homologues. domain interactions, loops, insertions and deletions can all influence the secondary structure around them. crystal packing and solvent interaction can also account for changes observed in residue coordinates. further, models based on x-ray data are not always as accurate as they are believed to be  <cit> . therefore, the absence of a strictly defined hydrogen bond does not mean that the hydrogen bond is actually absent in the molecule in all its accessible conformations.

robustness towards coordinate errors
our algorithm shows a higher degree of robustness than either dssp  <cit>  or p-sea  <cit>  when input data contains errors of up to  <dig> Å deviation for individual residues . secondary structure definition, by dssp, using main-chain atoms deteriorate sharply when coordinates are non ideal for α-helices or β-strands. other methods based on recurrence quantifications have been proposed  <cit>  that aim to replicate dssp definitions while being more robust to coordinate errors. these results are meaningful only at high residue coverage. our algorithm is able to delineate more helical regions, than dssp or p-sea, even when the coordinates are randomly shifted by as much as 2Å . close to 80% of all residues are assigned to sses by our method. defining a core of strict α-helix and β-strand forming regions and extending these with neighboring residues to obtain elements ensures that residues are not lost from sses when they fail strict definitions, like in low-resolution x-ray and nmr structures.

keeping the above results in perspective, the amount of secondary structure missed by the two other programs with respect to each of dssp, p-sea and our method was studied . our program is able to assign about 14% more residues as helices and 13% more residues as β-strands when compared with either dssp or p-sea. dssp assigns less than 1% residues that differ from our definition. p-sea assigns less than 3% residues that differ from our definition. most residues defined by dssp but not assigned by our algorithm did not contribute to long sses.

comparison with other programs
definitions from our program were compared with assignments by dssp  <cit> , p-sea  <cit> , dsspcont  <cit> , sstruc , stride  <cit> , define_s  <cit> , stick  <cit>  and pross  <cit> . a numerical comparison of residue assignment between secondary structure delineation methods, irrespective of whether they define elements or are residue-based, is not very useful. element lengths may not be optimum or elements may be too curved for representation by vectors. residues assigned to α-helix or β-strand regions may not overlap between different programs, thus leading to a wrong comparison if only numbers are used.

in this article, we show two examples of our study , with the secondary structure definitions colored cyan or yellow respectively for helices and β-strands. two-residue β-strand definitions have not been considered as β-strands for this comparison. figs. 3a–d are obtained by processing the coordinates of an averaged nmr structure  containing an immunoglobulin sandwich made up of  <dig> β-strands in two β-sheets. figs. 3e–h are from a low-resolution  x-ray structure  which has a ferredoxin-like fold made up of two β-α-β units.

our algorithm shows a marked difference as compared to other programs when low-resolution and nmr structure coordinates are processed. residue coverage is greater for our definition when compared with dssp  <cit>  and p-sea  <cit> , and is also correct with respect to identified elements when used for a similarity search. fig. 3a shows that our method has been able to correctly identify all  <dig> β-strands of the immunoglobulin fold, compared to only  <dig> by dssp  and  <dig> by p-sea . our method has also been able to correctly identify all  <dig> β-strands and  <dig> helices in the ferredoxin like fold , compared to only  <dig> α-helices and parts of  <dig> β-strands by dssp. a vector-based similarity search system will produce incorrect results with the dssp assignments shown, as the β-strands will be found to be located too far away. assignment by p-sea shortens the helix and incorrectly adds a β-strand to the definition. our interpretation of helix and β-strands from pdb files 1ahk and 1fjg  by various programs are respectively colored in figs. 3d and 3h. it is interesting to note the wide variation in assignments of secondary structures by different programs. the only other program that compares favorably in residue coverage to p-sea and our program is define_s. however, define_s sometimes misses helices and wrongly defines parts of helices as β-strands. we have not found the dsspcont  <cit>  output to be any different from that of dssp, unless the results are interpreted using probability scores in the output file. stride  <cit>  results are not significantly different from that of dssp for the examples shown, even though the stride algorithm attempts to improve upon dssp definitions using a common criterion of hydrogen bonding energy as well as cα distances. results from sstruc  are clearly different and residue coverage is poor when compared with other programs for the average nmr structure "1ahk". residue coverage and element identification for sstruc is similar to that by dssp and stride for "1fjg". residue coverage for helix and β-strand definition by pross  <cit>  is low and it fails to identify all elements.

CONCLUSIONS
the algorithm developed by us can assign linear helix and β-strand sses, from only cα atoms. our method is predictive in nature and sses defined by us can include residues that do not form ideal α-helices and β-strands. assignments are similar to helix and β-strands defined by a residue-based approach, like dssp  <cit> , for high-resolution x-ray structures, although our elements include more edge residues. for nmr and low-resolution x-ray structures, our predictive algorithm delineates more sses than is possible with a residue-based approach. elements defined by our method can be approximated using vectors, and we have retained longer elements wherever possible.

this method has been developed for simplified representation of protein structures for similarity searches with other proteins. it should not be used if an accurate residue level definition is necessary. compared to other programs, we have found our algorithm to perform well in terms of defining linear elements reliably for both helices and β-strands and yet yield a high residue coverage. visual judgment of results supports our definitions.

the algorithm has been implemented as a computer program "palsse" . it is written in python and c and has been tested on the gnu/linux platform on the i <dig> processor architecture. the software is available online  <cit> .

