BACKGROUND
we have observed mammalian cells, in a variety of tissues, transform into individual tubular straw cells in response to desiccation related stress and also occur naturally in live blood and tissues  <cit> . the transformation event is characterized by a dramatic cellular deformation process which includes: condensation of certain cellular materials into a much smaller tubular structure, synthesis of a tubular wall, growth of filamentous extensions, and the interconnection of tubes to form a tubular network. this tubular transformation occurs constantly and ubiquitously in every tissue we examined, suggesting that this "distinctive trait" involves multiple conserved pathways.

certain features of the tubular transformation resemble events in apoptosis . the apoptotic process begins with a change in the refractive index of the cell  <cit>  followed by cytoplasmic shrinkage and nuclear condensation. the cell membrane begins to show blebs or spikes , and eventually these blebs and spikes separate from the dying cell and form "apoptotic bodies". at the biochemical level, dna degradation by a specific endonuclease during apoptosis results in a dna ladder composed of mono- and oligonucleosomal-sized fragments with  <dig> base pairs  <cit> . so far no mutation in the nematode c. elegans, which has long been used in studying apoptosis, has been found to disrupt apoptosis completely  <cit> , suggesting the presence of multiple conserved pathways for the same downstream event.

caspases constitute a large protein family that is highly conserved among multicellular organisms. they are constitutively expressed in most cell types as inactive zymogens that are proteolytically processed before they gain full activity. because caspases exist as zymogens, their activity is thought to be regulated primarily post-translationally. inhibition of apoptosis to treat diseases has shown some success  <cit>  using sphingosine 1-phosphate  <cit>  and caspase inhibitors  <cit>  in animal models. many diseases including cancers, autoimmune disorders and neurodegenerative conditions, including alzheimer's and huntington's, are believed to be either a failure of apoptosis to eliminate harmful cells or the inappropriate activation of apoptosis, leading to the loss of essential cells.

the production of straw cells from diseased or stressed tissues could conceivably be associated with loss of organ function. the accumulation of a filamentous network of straw cells could also potentially interfere with aspects of the circulatory system. therefore we undertook a study to more fully characterize straw cells in blood, as well as the mechanisms of tubular transformation in response to stress. specifically, we wanted to investigate if tubular transformation shares the same signaling pathway as apoptosis. more importantly, the unknown regulation and the number of molecular players in the tubular transformation signaling pathway provides the potential for subsequent development of therapeutics to modulate a variety of human diseases. in fact, we have tested leading small molecule candidates in a screening program to inhibit this type of transformation in both cell lines and in mouse models to help shed light on possible approaches.

RESULTS
straw cell morphologies and straw blood cell count  in mice and humans
at least five different types of straw cells can be grouped according to their size and morphology. these types include: large straw cells , small straw cells with short extensions , straw cells covered with microscopic hairs , straw cells with a smooth surface  and straw cells stacked with nodules on the surface . in solution straw cells are visible as virtually round shaped dark dots around  <dig> μm . the structure of a straw cell is composed of three major parts: the tubular center with a few filaments and numerous hairs on the surface of filaments . straw cells without extensions are shown in figure 1h.

after analyzing blood drawn from the tail artery of young female mice weighing approximately 30-grams, using  <dig> mice per experiment in triplicate, we calculated a sbc of  × 106/ml. in human adult male blood, we calculated a sbc of  × 107/ml . the half-life of straw cells  in blood is  <dig> hrs at 37°c . therefore, at any given time there are approximately 50– <dig> billion straw cells, that have transformed from regular cells, in human blood , among which straw cells of lymphocyte origin  account for 40%.

* body weight was from measurement of individual animals; **lifespan uses average animal lifespan taken from literature.

straw cell properties
straw cells have different properties than the rest of the cells in blood. these cells are extremely hydrophilic and stay intact in a hypotonic buffer. they have filamentous extensions that are often covered with numerous microscopic hairs. depending on their size and the degree of filamentous extensions, they can be separated from the blood matrix by differential centrifugation and filtration. straw blood cells from chickens, dogs, rats, and cattle have a large amount of filaments compared to those from sheep, pigs, and horses. straw cells from humans, mice, and rabbits are the least filamentous. when centrifuged, the hydrophilic interaction with surrounding water keeps straw cells floating at  <dig>  rpm. naked tubular centers  precipitate to the bottom at  <dig>  rpm . the amount of straw cells in blood by weight was estimated for  <dig> mammals and one bird , with a range from  <dig> % for sheep to  <dig> % for pigs with an average weight of 3%. the average sbc for the  <dig> domestic mammals, along with birds and humans was  <dig> million/ml, with humans and rats leading the counts at approximately  <dig> and  <dig> million/ml, respectively.

elongation of filaments and enlargement of synchronized straw cells in vitro
rabbit straw cells isolated from other cells in the sera by differential centrifugation with the addition of methanol  and vortexed vigorously typically lost their fragile filamentous extensions. when viewed under light microscopy these straw cells contained only the tubular center with dimensions just less than  <dig> μm . straw cells isolated from rabbit sera stored at -20°c for over one year were incubated in just sterile water  and they grew new filaments . there was a 5-day threshold for the straw cells to grow back into new generations of fully viable straw cells  as well as regular cells . based on the number of newly formed straw cells, these were likely the product of old straw cells containing just the tubular center, not the result of regular cells that were left from isolated straw cell populations. the formation of new straw cells from old straw cells leads us to believe that straw cells are not only the product of regular cells but can be formed from other straw cells as well. treating straw cells with 4% trichloroacetic acid followed by  <dig> minutes sonication removes their ability to regenerate.

synchronized straw cells incubated at 22°c and 37°c in 10% medium  showed a filament elongation rate of  <dig>  μm/hr for the floating straw cells and an elongation rate of  <dig>  μm/hr for those straw cells that were attached to the bottom of the plate . the enlargement of tubular centers attached to the bottom of the plate, were seen to grow at a rate of  <dig>  μm3/hr over five days. in two weeks, spherical shaped cells derived from synchronized sbcs without extensions were observed to occupy the bottom of the 4-well chambers . this regeneration of spherical cells agrees with our reported observation that caco <dig> cells grow back from straw cells to form regular spherical cells during the 30-day incubation period  <cit> .

minute tubes can be seen aggregating around places where synthesis of new filaments may be happening . in the zoom-in view, intact straw cells and long stretches of filaments are clearly established in day  <dig> of rabbit sera incubation. in solution, aggregations of newly emerged spherical shaped cells are seen .

morphological comparison between apoptotic bodies and straw cells
in vitro, transformed straw cells in solution have a typical apoptosis phenotype in the early stage with the observed membrane blebbing . however, in the later stages straw cells begin to differ from apoptotic bodies in the following aspects:  they have a continuous tubular structure as opposed to small separate pieces of lower density;  growth of filament extensions are invisible in solution but become visible when solution is dry ;  condensation of chromatin in the tubes but not in the remaining cellular debris. the extensions produced during tubular transformation are covered with minute microscopic hairs . in solution these tubular extensions also appeared to form an interconnected tubular network . the completion of the tubular transformation is marked by the separation of the discarded plasma matrix from the tube. in apoptosis, the early stages and late stages are marked by an increase in caspase activity, prpp cleavage, and condensation of chromatin.

the exposure of phosphatidylserine  on the cell surface is a general marker of apoptotic cells  <cit> . cell surface lipids in transforming cells were analyzed by mass spectrometry and compared to controls of surface and total lipids in regular cells. lipid profiling reveals that tubular transformation is a dramatic deformation process. during deformation, the integrity of the plasma membrane is altered so much that free fatty acids, fa 16: <dig>  and fa 18: <dig>  which were absent from the outer leaflet in controls, were detected on the transforming cell's surface. however, changes of phosphatidylserine species, such as ps 36: <dig> , were inconclusive between treatment and controls.

signaling pathway comparison between apoptotic body and straw cell
despite some morphological similarities to apoptosis, the tubular transformation is likely regulated by different pathways in producing the final product. when straw cells are mostly transformed  no dna ladder was observed . compared to dehydration conditions which produced no straw cells but instead produced mostly apoptotic bodies , a dna ladder was observed . observation of this dna ladder indicates that in tubular transformation dna molecules are translocated entirely, opposite to that in apoptotic bodies where dna molecules are degraded. caspase 3/ <dig> activity during a successful tubular transformation decreased with the dehydration time , whereas in apoptosis caspases 3/ <dig> activities increase. in addition, caspase inhibitor  exerted no inhibition in tubular transformation in vitro/vivo either alone or in combinations with other apoptosis inhibitors. at  <dig> mg/kg body weight, it had no inhibitory activity against tubular transformation and the number of straw cells in vivo was not changed compared to controls . a ceramide antagonist, sphingosine 1-phosphate, competing for ceramide mediated apoptosis, had no activity in vivo at  <dig> mg/kg body weight/day and in vitro at  <dig> ppm . collectively, several lines of evidence suggest that the pathway that leads to tubular transformation in straw cell production diverges from that of apoptosis in apoptotic body production, at least in the late stage. however, the molecular players involved in the signal transduction have not been identified, but the signals are very likely to start at plasma membrane. study by exerting osmotic stress with peg , which causes cells to shrink and plasma membranes to separate from the rest of the cell bodies, interrupts the signal and produces no tubular transformation  <cit> .

sbc may play a role in animal aging
from nine animals  sbcs are found to correlate with the animal's average lifespan in an inverse relationship with the coefficient of correlation r <dig> =  <dig>  . animals with more straw cells have shorter life spans, suggesting sbc may measure an intrinsic stress level specific to each animal. it was noticed that straw cell production/day/body weight appears independent of age of a given species , which agrees with the notion that aging starts at birth and continues at a constant pace  <cit> . the direct connection between straw cells and the lifespan of an animal suggests that the production of straw cells may cause a loss of cell/organ function in individuals. we speculate this accumulation of straw cells along with the loss of cell/organ function may play a role in many aging related diseases and eventually lead to the death of the individual.

inhibition of a stress inducible mapk reduced straw cells in vitro/vivo
p <dig> mapk inhibitor interrupts an environmental stress signal from the cell surface to the nucleus via inhibition of p <dig> kinase activity. in addition to its promising anti-inflammatory usage  <cit> , we found that it may be involved in the straw cell development pathway. administration of  <dig>  mg/kg body weight/day in vivo and  <dig> ppm in vitro, of a pyridinyl imidazole , which inhibits an inducible p <dig> mapk, reduced mice sbc by 30%  in double blind, triplicate experiments with both the test and control using over  <dig> individual mice. the effects of treatment by three small molecular inhibitors together with controls on sbc are given in figure 3c  and table  <dig>  the p <dig> map kinases are a family of serine/threonine protein kinases that play important roles in cellular responses to external stress signals  <cit> . the resulting reduction in sbc from a treatment with a single dose of sb  <dig> suggests that the protein kinase cascade, mediated through il- <dig>  tnf, il- <dig> to mekk <dig>   <dig>  nik, to mkk <dig>   <dig> plays a role in tubular transformation.

identification of protein involved in the tubulargenesis and regeneration
after performing multiple purifications using two types of cancer cell lines, we have purified a unique protein from a culture medium containing an abundance of filaments and bovine albumins . we then performed de novo peptide sequencing using a data-dependent acquisition method from digestions of samples with trypsin and chymotrypsin as well as peptide mapping using tryptic peptides and high stringency scores . using these methods we have tentatively identified a match to a human  <dig> kd protein known to be a component of the walls of ciliary and flagellar microtubules . during regeneration of regular spherical cells from straw cells, three proteins at  <dig>   <dig> and  <dig> kd appear to be abundantly expressed in the early stages of this regeneration . micro-sequencing and peptide mapping using tryptic peptides found significant alignment with 80% coverage to a human  <dig> kd protein .

discussion
mammalian blood contains three visible layers when centrifuged. the plasma forms at the top, accounting for ~55% of the volume, then a thin cream-colored layer forms below the plasma consisting of white blood cells and platelets, followed by a final layer consisting of red blood cells, forming the heavy bottom portion of the separated mixture, which accounts for ~45% of the volume  <cit> . we found straw cells in both the plasma and the bottom layer when centrifuged. the tubular centers are densely packed and heavy. when their filament extensions are lost, they are found in the bottom layer with other lysed cell debris. however, when the filaments are intact, the straw cells remain within the supernatant, even when centrifuged at maximum speed  on a bench-top centrifuge. at  <dig> million cells per ml, they account for ~7% of dry mass in human blood.

we compared two methods in straw cell counting:  use a hemacytometer and count the number of dark dots around  <dig> μm in a defined volume in solution without any distortion to the blood samples and  count tubular straw cells from  <dig> μ of dried blood droplet on cover glass slide directly. we found the numbers derived from two different methods  are in surprisingly good agreement to each other. this agreement suggests that no artifacts were introduced in the counting process and sbcs reflect their actual blood content.

straw cells occur naturally and at a constant rate in the humans and animals we tested. sbc from nine domestic animals correlates directly to the animal's average expected life span, suggesting a simple connection between tubular transformation and the amount of cells needed to sustain life. in the animals tested, there was an inverse relationship between sbc and the average lifespan of those animals . however, humans appear to have high sbc levels but our average expected lifespan is much higher than the animals we tested and therefore does not fit the trend observed in figure  <dig>  perhaps humans, and possibly other primates, exhibit a higher tolerance to elevated sbc levels.

straw cells may be involved in a variety of human aging-related diseases; for example, invasive malignant tumors contain no distinct boundary between healthy tissue and irregularly shaped cancer cells. current cancer treatments such as chemotherapy and radiotherapy enhance tumor apoptosis, causing these cancerous cells to transform into apoptotic bodies  <cit> . the strategy of increasing tumor apoptosis is currently being employed in many cancer treatments  <cit> . our findings predict that this physical and chemical stress not only induces apoptosis but also produces viable straw cells. straw cells and apoptotic bodies may be the co-products of the same upstream stress responding pathway. we have observed that a dna ladder, a hallmark of apoptosis, accompanies the tubular transformation . the hydrophilic nature of straw cells also allows them to flow freely into the blood circulatory system. in vitro, straw cells originating from both normal cells and cancer cells germinate and grow back into vegetative cells within a few days to a few weeks. in general, after the remission of the original cancer, the recurrence of tumors in cancer patients frequently occurs within 2~ <dig> years after initial treatments <cit> .

we hypothesize that vast numbers of free circulating cancerous straw cells in blood are capable of regenerating back into actively growing tumor cells at new locations. these circulating straw cells provide a possible mechanism for the establishment of new sites in the body for tumorgenesis. the possibility for straw cells to colonize and grow into tumors may be very small, depending upon the availability of nutrients, dna mutations, and interactions with the host immune system. however, due to the large number of straw cells present within the blood circulatory system, metastasis could still very well be mediated through straw cells that are produced from increasing physiochemical stresses within a fast growing tumor mass. the straw cells robust cell wall  <cit>  may allow them to tolerate the harsh conditions provided by radiation and chemotherapy. enabling the straw cells to remain viable even after the original cancer cells, die off . cancerous straw cells would then be able to propagate when growth conditions improve in vivo.

since apoptosis was coined in the 1950s, it is believed that programmed cell death is important in keeping cell homeostasis, organ development, and maintaining proper cell population. although diseases are attributed to abnormal cell death, targeting cancer cells with promoters of apoptosis is an active route of treatment. it is possible that current approaches to cancer treatment involving chemotherapy may contribute to metastasis. although numerous chemotherapy treatments have been implemented  and they have saved many lives, the delay of a major breakthrough over controlling the disease may be due to the misleading idea that cells die through apoptosis. where in fact, a portion of the targeted cells enters into a straw cell survival state through "apoptosis" associated stresses to survive and propagate.

we counted the number of straw cells derived from lymphocytes  in human blood with characteristic short filamentous extensions to be consistent with the number of lymphocytes that die per day through apoptosis . the sbc in humans is around  <dig> /μl, 40% of which are smaller straw cells characteristic of lymphocytes. with a half-life of  <dig> hr in blood circulation, an estimated  <dig> billion of all cells are transformed into straw cells every day. injection of  <dig>  μg subcutaneously of a specific protein kinase inhibitor to a 30-gram mouse  resulted in a 30% reduction in sbc in the tail artery over  <dig> hrs. it is unclear if a 30% sbc reduction in mice could be translated to humans; more studies are needed to make the distinction. the important questions that remain to be answered are:  characterization of the upstream regulatory pathways that promote straw cell formation, 2) can treatments associated with straw cell reduction significantly improves overall health and longevity? 3) can straw cell treatment reduction also be an effective way to reduce the spread of tumors in conjunction with other types of treatments?

we have identified one protein involved in the biogenesis of straw cells from the cleavage of purified tubular extensions. this protein can then be targeted for straw cell inhibition, for example, pyridinyl imidazole inhibits the tubular transformation at  <dig> ppm in vitro and  <dig>  mg/kg bw/day in vivo by inhibiting a stress inducible protein kinase, which may be an early event in the signal transduction.

CONCLUSIONS
mammalian cells transform into individual tubular straw cells naturally in live blood and tissues in animals and humans, and also in response to increased stresses in caco <dig> cells. the transformation event in caco <dig> cell is characterized by a dramatic cellular deformation process which includes: nuclei fragmentation and packaging of chromatin into a much smaller tubular structure, synthesis of a tubular wall, growth of filamentous extensions, and the interconnection of tubes to form a tubular network. this tubular transformation occurs constantly and ubiquitously in every tissue we examined, suggesting that this "distinctive trait" involves multiple conserved pathways. certain features of the tubular transformation resemble events in apoptosis suggesting straw cells may have been studied for decades as products of programmed cell death while in fact they are the products of "programmed cell survival". sbcs may be an important indicator of intrinsic aging-related stress.

