BACKGROUND
fluorescence in situ hybridization  using whole chromosome-specific probes  is an important cytogenetic tool to study the origin and evolution of sex chromosomes in several organisms  <cit> . the diversity of sex-determining mechanisms, as well as the absence of heteromorphic sex chromosomes in many fish species make this group a useful model to study the evolution of vertebrate sex chromosomes  <cit> . however, research involving chromosome painting in fish is rarely performed because it is difficult to obtain the necessary probes. the few available studies are focused on karyotypic  <cit>  and sex chromosome evolution  <cit> . the current literature suggests that a variety of sex-determining mechanisms and sex chromosomes may have evolved independently in different fish species.

erythrinidae is a neotropical fish family that is characterized by species that have a wide variety of chromosomal forms, as well as a wide range of distinct sex chromosomes. the red wolf fish erythrinus erythrinus  is karyotypically diverse among different populations, with four currently identified karyomorphs   <cit> . karyomorph a is characterized by 2n =  <dig> chromosomes that have very similar karyotypic structures and the absence of heteromorphic sex chromosomes. karyomorphs b, c and d share an x1x1x2x2/x1x2y sex chromosome system, but they can differ in the diploid number and chromosomal morphology. karyomorph d has 2n =  <dig> chromosomes in females and 2n =  <dig> in males; previously published data suggests that karyomorph d was derived from a karyomorph a-like system  <cit> . in fact, although there are differences in the diploid number between karyomorphs a and d and only karyomorph d has a differentiated x1x1x2x2/x1x2y sex system, they share a relatively similar karyotypic structure that is characterized by several acrocentric chromosomes and a few bi-armed chromosomes. additionally, mapping of distinct classes of repetitive sequences  in the centromeric region of the y chromosome indicated that a centric fusion between acrocentric pair number  <dig> and  <dig> in karyomorph a led to the formation of these sex chromosomes, in addition to the unpaired x <dig> and x <dig> chromosomes in the male karyotype of karyomorph d  <cit> .

similarly, the wolf fish hoplias malabaricus  also demonstrates significant karyotypic diversity and well-defined population differences in the diploid number, chromosome morphology and sex chromosome systems. currently, seven easily distinguishable karyomorphs  have been identified  <cit> . three well-differentiated sex chromosome systems occur in this group, namely xx/xy in karyomorph b, x1x1x2x2/x1x2y in karyomorph d and xx/xy1y <dig> in karyomorph g; additionally, karyomorph c has an early differentiated xx/xy system  <cit> . karyomorph d has 2n =  <dig> chromosomes in females and 2n =  <dig> chromosomes in males; repetitive dna chromosomal mapping suggests that karyomorph d may have derived from a karyotype similar to karyomorph c, which is characterized by 2n =  <dig> chromosomes in both sexes  <cit> . a conspicuous proximal gc-rich heterochromatic/18s rdna site, which is present on the long arms of the x and y chromosomes in karyomorph c, is also located in the same region on the x <dig> chromosome and the short arm of the large y chromosome of karyomorph d; this suggests that the x <dig> and y chromosomes of karyomorph d derived from the xy chromosomes of karyomorph c. in addition, the y chromosome of karyomorph d shares similar dna sequences with chromosomes y and  <dig> of karyomorph c. chromosomal pair number  <dig> in karyomorph c and its homolog in karyomorph d  have centromeric satellite 5s hindiii-dna, as well as an exclusive interstitial site that is present on the long arms of the y chromosome of karyomorph d, which is the only non-centromeric location of this dna sequence in the entire karyotype. these data indicate that this interstitial site is derived from the centromere of chromosome  <dig>  which was fused to the ancestral y chromosome in karyomorph c and resulted in the dicentric y chromosome currently present in karyomorph d  <cit> . moreover, additional studies have shown that this dicentric y chromosome behaves as a stable component of the karyotype having a correct segregation during meiosis  <cit> .

in the present study, we analyzed the origin of the eer and hma x1x2y sex chromosomes by performing chromosome painting analysis with sex-chromosome-specific probes established by microdissection. the x <dig> chromosome of hma  and the y chromosome of eer  were microdissected and wcp-fish was performed on the eer  and hma  chromosomes. the results characterized the chromosomes that gave rise to the multiple sex determination systems and that both sex systems originated from different autosomal pairs. our data provide new insights into the origin and evolution of sex chromosomes in fish, which increases our understanding of vertebrate sex chromosome evolution.

RESULTS
hm-x <dig> probe hybridization to hma chromosomes
in karyomorph c, the x <dig> chromosome-specific probe  hybridized to both of the x chromosomes in females and the x and y chromosomes in males . when the hm-x <dig> probe was hybridized to karyomorph d, two chromosomes were completely painted in females, corresponding to both x <dig> chromosomes; in males, one chromosome was completely painted, corresponding to the x <dig> chromosome, and half of another chromosome was painted, corresponding to the y chromosome . no signal was observed on the x <dig> chromosome . in general, there was a uniform signal for all of the sex chromosomes except x <dig>  which indicates that there is high homology between their euchromatic and heterochromatic regions. additionally, faint hybridization signals were observed in the subtelomeric heterochromatic segments of some autosomes, which may possibly be due to shared repetitive sequences. these results suggest that the painted chromosome pair in karyomorph c is the ancestral chromosome pair for the sex chromosome system observed in karyomorph d.

ee-y probe hybridization to eer chromosomes
the y-chromosome-specific probe  completely painted two chromosome pairs in both males and females of karyomorph a , as well as the x <dig> and x <dig> chromosomes in females and the x <dig>  x <dig> and y chromosomes in males of karyomorph d . weak signals were observed in the subtelomeric heterochromatic segments of some autosomes, which indicate that these chromosomes may have similar repetitive sequences. these results suggest that the painted chromosome pairs in karyomorph a are the ancestral pairs for the sex chromosome system observed in karyomorph d.

reciprocal cross-species fish
none of the distinguishable sex chromosomes in either species displayed consistent hybridization signals with the cross-fish experiments. in hma, the ee-y probe hybridized completely to a medium and small autosomal submetacentric pair in males and females of karyomorphs c and d . in eer, the hm-x <dig> probe hybridized to a medium-sized autosomal acrocentric pair in males and females of karyomorphs a and d . the reciprocal cross-species fish experiments  clearly show that hybridization only occurred with autosomes in all of the karyomorphs that were analyzed.

discussion
origin of the sex chromosome systems in hma karyomorphs
the complete staining of both the x and y chromosomes with an hma-derived x <dig> probe for karyomorph c indicates that these sex chromosomes are highly similar. these results confirm the previous hypothesis that the xy chromosomes of hma karyomorph c are at an early stage of differentiation. indeed, a previous study has indicated that these chromosomes differ only by a slight amplification of repetitive sequences on the x chromosome  <cit> .

when hybridized with hma karyomorph d, the hma x <dig> probe painted both of the x <dig> chromosomes in females, as well as the entire x <dig> chromosome and half of the neo-y chromosomes in males. however, we did not detect hybridization with the x <dig> chromosome, which indicates that the x <dig> and x <dig> chromosomes lack sequence homology and are likely unrelated chromosomes. we hypothesize that the unpainted region of the neo-y chromosome corresponds to the x <dig> chromosome. thus, the multiple x1x2y system in hma originated through a tandem fusion between the proto-y chromosome conserved in karyomorph c and one autosome, which created the large neo-y chromosome that is characteristic of karyomorph d and one additional unpaired chromosome that was renamed x <dig> .

origin of the sex chromosome systems in eer karyomorphs
for eer karyomorph d, the eer-derived ee-y probe hybridized to the large metacentric y chromosome, as well as the entire acrocentric x <dig> and x <dig> chromosomes in both male and female karyotypes. these results indicate that the y metacentric chromosome arose from a centric fusion between two non-homologous acrocentric chromosomes, which were renamed x <dig> and x <dig>  additionally, the ee-y probe hybridized to four acrocentric chromosomes in males and females of eer karyomorph a. this indicates that the multiple sex system of eer karyomorph d derived from a karyomorph a-like ancestor through chromosomal rearrangements involving a putative sex pair that was morphologically undifferentiated and a pair of autosomes . although the sex chromosomes remain cytogenetically unidentified in karyomorph a, they are likely one of the acrocentric pairs that was entirely stained by the ee-y probe.

thus, in both species, reorganizations between undifferentiated or poorly differentiated sex chromosomes and autosomes gave rise to the multiple sex chromosome systems. rearrangements between sex chromosomes and autosomal pairs have previously been reported in several organisms  <cit> .

chromosomal rearrangements during the evolution of multiple sex chromosomes systems may reduce the need for alternative mechanisms to suppress recombination at breakpoint sites  <cit> . in the systems described here, the tandem and centric fusions were crucial steps for the origin of the x1x2y sex systems in hma and eer, respectively; no further differentiation appears to have occurred between the sex chromosomes within each species. thus, the primary chromosomal rearrangements that occurred during the origin of these multiple sex chromosome systems appear to have been sufficient to fix the resulting chromosomes in the respective populations.

independent origin of x1x2y sex systems in erythrinidae fishes
one interesting feature of fish sex chromosome biology is that only a few species present cytogenetically differentiated sex chromosomes. nonetheless, xy sex systems are not common in fish. because both of the fish species analyzed here are closely related and have similar multiple sex chromosomes that were derived from incipient xy systems, we were interested in comparing the origin of both sex systems. specifically, we were interested in whether the systems independently evolved or formed prior to the divergence of the hoplias and erythrinus genera. we used reciprocal cross-species fish with x and y probes to analyze the origin of the sex systems in these two genera. the absence of a signal on the recognizable sex chromosomes after inter-specific painting clearly indicates that the x1x2y chromosomes evolved independently in each species and are not related. therefore, distinct ancestral xy chromosomes and autosomal pairs were involved in the formation of the multiple sex chromosomes in each species .

numerous heteromorphic sex chromosomes have evolved independently in various plant and animal lineages  <cit> . moreover, comparative syntenic analysis supports the hypothesis that sex chromosomes have independently evolved in different vertebrate lineages  <cit> . in fish, a previous study that used linkage analysis with eight isolated sex-linked markers indicated that the sex chromosomes of oryzias javanicus are not homologous to those of any other oryzias species  <cit> . reciprocal cross-fish experiments using sex chromosome probes within the genus eigenmannia clearly indicated that there is no homology between the x1x2y and xy systems, which suggests that these sex chromosomes independently evolved  <cit> . similar results have also been reported for the salmonoid fish, where two paint probes specific to the short and long arms of the y chromosome of salvelinus namaycush hybridized to two different autosomal chromosome pairs in oncorhynchus mykiss and o. tshawytscha; again, these data indicate that there is no homology between the sex chromosomes of these two closely related genera  <cit> . these findings suggest that a variety of sex-determining mechanisms and sex chromosomes have independently evolved several times in the various fish genera. the most plausible explanation for the independent origin of sex chromosomes in fish is that different primary sex-determining genes may have evolved on different sex chromosomes, where an autosomal gene or a duplicated gene copy acquired a new mutation and gave rise to either male or female development; this would result in a novel sex-determining gene and produce new sex chromosomes from different autosomes  <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
in summary, we analyzed x1x2y sex chromosome evolution in hma and eer fish species. our data indicate that there is a high plasticity of sex determination mechanisms in fish. it is noteworthy that two cofamiliar species with the same type of multiple sex chromosome system that emerged from poorly differentiated xy sex chromosomes have independently evolved and have gone through distinct differentiation processes. this data highlight the potential role of studies conducted in fish models to better understand the process of vertebrate sex chromosome evolution.

