BACKGROUND
maternal environmental effects occur when the phenotype or growth environment of the mother plant affects the offspring phenotype beyond the direct effect of transmitted genes
 <cit> . the seed is simultaneously an important maternal component and a subsequent offspring. seed traits of the first generation or even of later generations in some annual plants are dependent on the abiotic environment and seed position on the parent plant during seed development and maturation
 <cit> . seed traits of most species vary between and within individuals, and much of the variation is phenotypic
 <cit> . the adaptive significance of maternal effects on seeds is being increasingly recognized
 <cit> .

maternal effects affect a range of offspring traits simultaneously, and these effects are likely to be highly context-dependent
 <cit> . however, most studies of maternal environmental effects on seeds have examined only one maternal factor and one seed trait
 <cit> , which may give an incomplete view of the influence of maternal effects
 <cit> . for example, maternal plants of senecio vulgaris grown at lower nutrient levels produced seeds that germinated later and had lower mass than those from plants grown at higher nutrient levels, but their seedlings survived longer when the maternal plant was not supplied with additional nutrients
 <cit> . thus, investigation of the interactive effect of different maternal factors on variation in seed traits is needed to gain a complete understanding of maternal environmental effects on seed quality, and thereby on the regeneration of populations.

using an outcome-based approach, marshall and uller  distinguished four types of maternal effects: anticipatory , selfish , bet-hedging , and transmissive . although this static framework is useful in distinguishing different types of maternal effects, these effects may be entangled.

seed heteromorphism is a phenomenon in which a single plant produces different morphophysiological types of seeds
 <cit> . seed dimorphism can be considered the main type of this phenomenon, and it is probably a form of bet-hedging that is expressed mostly in annual plants
 <cit> .on the basis of this theory, it is predicted that, in an unpredictable environment, bet-hedging maximizes the geometric mean fitness among generations
 <cit> . however, most studies have focused on changes in the mean offspring phenotype, and only a few studies have been done on variation in offspring phenotypes
 <cit> . in fact, there is variation even within each type of seed in heteromorphic species
 <cit> . to our knowledge, no study has been done on the comparison of seed size variation of heteromorphic species under different environmental regimes. here we focus on soil fertility and salinity as possible drivers of maternal effects on regeneration.

nutrient availability to the maternal plant could potentially affect seed production and seed traits
 <cit> . for example, seed production and seed size, germination and other seed quality traits of sarcobatus vermiculatus were decreased substantially with nutrient limitation
 <cit> . this may be a selfish maternal effect, i.e. plants may decrease seed quality and thereby increase total maternal fitness when there is a reduction in the quality of the maternal environment.

anticipatory maternal effects are predicted to be advantageous in systems where germination conditions are spatially or temporally variable but in a somewhat predictable manner
 <cit> . for example, campanula americana grows in habitats where light is a patchily distributed resource, and their seeds typically experience the same light environment as their mother plant. germination percentage of this species in autumn was higher when the offspring light environment matched the maternal environment
 <cit> . however, knowledge about the effect of maternal salinity environment on germination of offspring seeds is limited
 <cit> . we expect that seeds produced by maternal plants growing at high salinity would have higher salt tolerance than those produced by mother plants growing at low salinity, because the saline environment is predictable for the offspring of these seeds.

suaeda aralocaspica  freitag & schütze  is an annual halophyte which is 20–50 cm tall. it occurs in the gobi desert of central asia, where it grows in saline-alkaline sandy soils
 <cit> . this species is a model organism for studying interacting maternal effects on regeneration because it occurs  in a heterogeneous environment in terms of soil salinity and fertility; and  its seeds are dimorphic
 <cit> . s. aralocaspica plants produce brown seeds  and black seeds 
 <cit> . in this study, we tested the hypothesis that seed dimorphism, nutrients and salinity determine variation in offspring seed traits and germination success of s. aralocaspica via the combination of bet-hedging, selfish and anticipatory maternal effects. this main hypothesis leads to the following specific hypotheses:

 the seed morph ratio of s. aralocaspica can be fine-tuned by plant phenotype  and environmental conditions . we predict that the brown:black seed ratio should decrease under stressful conditions and therefore be negatively correlated with nutrient limitation and salinity. additionally, we predict that the brown:black seed morph ratio of plants grown from brown seeds should be higher than that of plants reared from black seeds, because brown seeds germinate faster and these plants may therefore experience better growth conditions during the short window of opportunity for establishment than those from black seeds.

 the size variation of brown seeds should be higher than that of black seeds, because brown seeds are dispersed further away from the mother plant than are black seeds; consequently, plants from brown seeds may experience more unpredictable environments. further, low nutrient and high salinity levels should increase seed size variation.

 maternal nutrient limitation should decrease seed size and germination percentage of s. aralocaspica.

RESULTS
seed morph ratio
the brown:black seed ratio was significantly affected by plant type , the interaction between seed type and salinity  and the interaction among seed type, salinity and nutrient level  . there were no significant differences in the ratio between plants from brown seeds and plants from black seeds under any salt treatment at low or moderate nutrient regimes .

results of three-way anova with the following factors: plant type, salinity and nutrient.

ratio: number of brown seeds/number of black seeds.

in the common garden experiment, the seed morph ratio per plant was  <dig>  ±  <dig>  in plants from brown seeds and  <dig>  ±  <dig>  in plants from black seeds .

seed size
there was a significant effect of salinity alone or in combination with plant type or nutrients on diameter of brown seeds. in contrast, there were no effect of plant type or nutrients on diameter of brown seeds and no significant interactive effect between plant type and nutrient regime . salinity significantly decreased the diameter of brown seeds in the low and moderate nutrient regimes, but not in the high nutrient regime .

the main effects of salinity and of nutrients on diameter of black seeds were significant. additionally, there were significant interactive effects between seed type and salinity  and between seed type and nutrients  on diameter of black seeds . high nutrients produced the thinnest black seeds. black seeds in the low salinity treatment were widest in the low and moderate nutrient regimes . brown seeds were significantly wider than black seeds  .

coefficient of variation  of seed size
the effects of seed type on cv of seed diameter varied by treatment, with black seeds having a higher cv of diameter in  <dig> treatments  and brown seeds having a higher cv of diameter in two treatments ; the latter under  <dig> salinity and moderate nutrients and under high salinity and low nutrients .

under low maternal nutrient conditions, cv for seed diameter in plants from brown seeds was relatively small, and seeds produced on plants grown at high salinity had the lowest cv for diameter, while those grown at control salinity had the highest cv . under moderate maternal nutrients, seeds produced on plants grown at high salinity had the lowest cv for diameter, while those grown at control salinity had the highest cv . cv for seed diameter in plants from brown seeds under high maternal nutrients was highest when grown under low salinity .

under low maternal salinity, cv of seed diameter in plants from black seeds was relatively small, and seeds produced by plants grown in low maternal nutrient conditions had the smallest cv for diameter . under moderate maternal nutrient conditions, cv for seed diameter in plants from black seeds was highest .

seed germination
germination of s. aralocaspica seeds was significantly affected by maternal soil nutrient levels, salinity and seed morph but not by type of mother plant . germination percentage of brown seeds was higher than that of black seeds under all treatments. maternal nutrient level did not affect germination percentage of brown seeds. for black seeds, higher maternal nutrient levels significantly decreased germination percentage . high maternal salinity significantly increased germination percentage of brown seeds for high maternal nutrient level  and of black seeds for moderate maternal nutrient level .

when brown seeds were germinated in  <dig> and 200 mmol l- <dig> nacl solution, maternal salinity did not affect germination, except for brown seeds from plants incubated at high maternal nutrient level. when brown seeds were germinated in 800 mmol l- <dig> nacl solution, high maternal salinity significantly increased final germination percentages for moderate  and high  maternal nutrient levels . however, seed viability was not affected by salt concentration and the percentage of total viable seed was  <dig> 

discussion
our study of maternal environment effects on seed traits in the s. aralocaspica produced four main results.  plants reared from brown seeds had a higher brown:black seed ratio than those reared from black seeds, and soil nutrient and salinity levels did not significantly affect seed morph ratio.  seed dimorphism, nutrient and salinity regulated seed size variation.  maternal nutrient limitation significantly increased seed size and germination percentage of black but not brown seeds.  seeds produced by plants growing at high salinity had higher salt tolerance than those from low salinity plants. the first and second results support bet-hedging maternal effects. the third result did not support selfish maternal effects, but it did support anticipatory maternal effects. the fourth result also supports anticipatory maternal effects.

bet-hedging
seed dimorphism may be a typical example of diversified bet-hedging, where offspring produced by each plant has two distinct ecological strategies to cope with variable environments. our study revealed that the brown:black seed ratio of s. aralocaspica is not controlled by variable maternal environmental conditions but by plant type  . however, environmentally-altered ratios of seed morphs previously have been reported
 <cit> . a consistent trend for the ratio / has been found in amphicarpic plants
 <cit> . thus, under stressful conditions plants tend to produce relatively more subterranean seeds with low dispersibility, and under very stressful conditions no aerial seeds are produced
 <cit> . for heteromorphic plants, stressful conditions may increase
 <cit> , decrease
 <cit>  or not alter
 <cit>  the seed morph ratio. plants of the amphicarpic species emex spinosa <cit> , cardamine chenopodifolia <cit>  and catananche lutea <cit>  from subterranean seeds produced more aerial fruits and seeds and allocated more biomass to aerial reproduction than those from aerial seeds.

a decrease under stress of the ratio / in amphicarpic plants has not been found in most heterodiasporous plants. plants reared from black seeds of chenopodium album  produced more brown seeds than plants from brown seeds, but this phenomenon was only observed for plants reared at 50 mmol l- <dig> nacl
 <cit> . plants reared from heteromorphic diaspores of dimorphotheca sinuata  and arctotis fastuosa  did not differ in ratio of seed morphs
 <cit> . our results indicated that plants grown from brown seeds produced a higher brown:black seed ratio than those produced from plants grown from black seeds in all nutrient and salinity treatments, which was confirmed by the common garden experiment. this pattern can be considered as a new model of heteromorphic species behavior. that is, the seed morph ratio of s. aralocaspica remains constant despite changes in maternal nutrient supply and salinity. the influence of plant type on seed morph ratio may have important consequences for ecological adaptation. brown seeds have high germinability and dispersability and represent the high risk strategy
 <cit> , whereas black seeds have low germinability and dispersability and represent the low risk strategy
 <cit> . thus, the brown:black seed ratio may represent the ratio of /, a risk index. given that plants grown from brown seeds have a higher risk index, it is expected that most plants in new habitats came from brown seeds. meanwhile, plants reared from black seeds have a lower risk index and remain in the maternal habitats, especially those that are frequently disturbed. hence, our results suggest plastic bet-hedging in the halophyte s. aralocaspica that allows plants to cope with unpredictable environmental variability.

dynamic bet-hedging
theory suggests that mothers should increase within-clutch variation in the offspring phenotype when they can not predict their offspring’s environmental conditions
 <cit> . in s. aralocaspica, size variation of black seeds is higher than that of brown seeds . seed dispersal is often limited, and most seeds of plants are dispersed relatively close to the maternal plant
 <cit> . primary  and secondary  seed dispersal of s. aralocaspica is limited. most brown and black seeds are likely to remain in their mother’s habitat, though dispersal distance of brown seeds is greater than that of black seeds . all brown seeds germinate the next spring following maturity in autumn. only a portion of the black seeds, which have non-deep physiological dormancy, can germinate in their first spring, and the others become part of a persistent soil seed bank
 <cit> . therefore, compared to brown seeds black seeds experience more unpredictable temporal environments and have higher variation in seed size.

plants of s. aralocaspica grown from brown seeds produced seeds with lower size variation under low levels of nutrient and high salinity, and plants grown from black seeds produced seeds with lower size variation under low levels of nutrients and salinity . thus, low nutrient and high salinity are predictable environmental conditions for plants grown from brown seeds, and low levels of nutrients and salinity are predictable environmental conditions for plants grown from black seeds. in salt deserts, low nutrient levels are predictable, and seeds produced by plants of s. aralocaspica from brown and black seeds had the lowest cv under low nutrient. brown seeds can germinate at high salinity, and seedlings from brown seeds can survive at high salinity. thus, the high maternal salinity is predictable for plants from brown seeds. however, black seeds germinate at low salinity, and seedlings from black seeds survive at low salinity. hence the low maternal salinity is predictable for plants from black seeds. seed size variation in response to changes in environmental predictability may be viewed as dynamic bet-hedging, an adaptive maternal effect
 <cit> . our study is the first to demonstrate variation of seed size of each seed morph as affected by specific maternal environment.

anticipatory maternal effects
while maternal nutrient limitation simply reduces the number of seeds, its impact on seed size and germination is more complex. nutrient limitation is reported to decrease, to increase or not to change seed size and germination percentage
 <cit> . the most striking finding of our study was that maternal nutrient limitation increased size of black seeds but had no significant effect on size of brown seeds in s. aralocaspica . the physiological mechanism of this phenomenon needs to be explored. varying environmental conditions may cause changes not only in seed size but also in germination percentage. changes in seed size may be related to seed germination; in many cases large seeds germinate better than small ones
 <cit> . our black seeds produced under low levels of nutrients had the widest diameter and the highest germination percentage. a large store of resources allows black seeds to germinate successfully under low nutrient conditions, thereby enhancing offspring fitness in s. aralocaspica. under stressful conditions, maternal fitness is increased by increasing offspring fitness. in mother plants, size and germination of black seeds is adjusted according to local nutrient conditions and thus maximize offspring and maternal fitness. this phenotypic plasticity is the anticipatory maternal effect also found in other plants
 <cit> .

maternal environment salinity had strong effects on seed germination in s. aralocaspica. seeds produced by plants grown at high maternal salinity had higher germination percentages than those produced by plants grown in low maternal salinity regardless of germination salinity . previous work demonstrated that seeds from maternal plants grown at high salinity germinated more readily at high salinity than seeds from low-salinity plants
 <cit> . the salinity environment of maternal plants of atriplex nummularia profoundly affected the germination response of their seeds
 <cit> . iris hexagona seeds from high-salinity mothers germinated earlier than those from low-salinity mothers, but these effects were not detectable 10 days after germination
 <cit> . maternal effects that have a significant influence on plant fitness may confer a fitness advantage in environmental conditions similar to those experienced by the parents
 <cit> . the pattern of germination percentage in s. aralocaspica suggests that maternal effects are more strongly expressed at high than at low salinity. we suspect that this kind of maternal effect is an anticipatory maternal effect
 <cit> .

CONCLUSIONS
we have documented multiple maternal effects on seed traits of s. aralocaspica. as predicted, seed morph ratio and seed size variation fine-tuned by maternal factors are bet-hedging maternal effects. increase in salt tolerance of offspring seeds through the effects of maternal salinity are anticipatory maternal effects. increase in seed size and in germination percentage through maternal nutrient limitation is also an anticipatory as opposed to selfish maternal effect. multiple interacting aspects of maternal plant phenotype and maternal environments together determine various seed traits via different maternal effects. our findings add to the increasing evidence that plants have evolved multiple maternal mechanisms that, together, may help to optimize long-term regeneration and maintenance of populations in environments with varying and unpredictable levels of environmental stress.

