BACKGROUND
the n-methyl-d-aspartate  antagonist ketamine  is an anesthetic drug used in veterinary practice  <cit> . however, recreational usage as a club drug has also been reported, and there are cases of fatal intoxication  particularly in polydrug users  <cit> . recreationally used kt has been reported to cause euphoric hallucinations such as a feeling of dissociation of the mind from the body, and due to these psychotropic effects, the possibility of the disappearance of subjective symptoms accompanying toxicity has been suggested  <cit> . furthermore, as this drug causes a loss of the ability to judge and induces amnesia, the possibility of its inappropriate usage  has been reported  <cit> .

although animal models of complicated psychiatric symptoms have not been established, some favorable psychological effects  have been reported  <cit> . on the other hand, an enhancement of the behavioral effects of other abused drugs , which supports the increased risk of severe intoxication in human polydrug abusers, has been observed  <cit> . therefore, in addition to a serious enhancement of the toxic effects of other drugs, it is possible that kt promotes cases of overdose by attenuating some painful subjective symptoms. in the present study, considering the importance of warning the danger associated with kt, the intraperitoneal  kt-induced alterations in behaviors and toxic interactions with other popular drugs of abuse, the psychostimulants cocaine  and methamphetamine   <cit> , were examined in mice.

RESULTS
alterations in locomotor activity 
for the kt-only groups , at  <dig> min time point, aggressive hyperlocomotion was observed and activity counts were increased as compared to the control group in the low kt -only group, whereas hypolocomotion accompanied by a loss of the righting reflex was observed and activity counts were attenuated as compared to the control group in the high kt -only group. at  <dig> min time point, recovery from hyperlocomotion was observed in the low kt-only group, whereas activity counts in the high kt-only group were significantly increased as compared to the control group until  <dig> min time point.

in the non-fatal dose coc -only and ma -only groups , only at  <dig> min time point, hyperlocomotion was observed and activity counts were increased as compared to the control group.

for the coc and ma groups of mice co-treated with kt , activity counts at  <dig> min time point were attenuated to levels significantly smaller than both the control and the psychostimulant-only groups, by co-treatment with the high dose  kt. furthermore, in the psychostimulant plus high kt groups, activity counts were increased at  <dig> min time point as compared to both the control and the psychostimulant-only groups. on the other hand, in the psychostimulant plus low kt  groups , at  <dig> min time point, activity counts were increased to levels as large as the psychostimulant-only groups, and no reversing effects against the psychostimulant-induced hyperlocomotion were caused by kt.

the anova analyses revealed significant main effects of kt treatment, psychostimulant treatment, and test time . furthermore, significant interactions between treatments and test times were also observed, which indicated some time-dependent and kt dose-dependent changes shown in fig.  <dig> 

alterations in stress-related depressive behaviors in the forced swimming test 
for the kt-only groups , at any time points, no significant alterations derived from stress-related depression in swimming behaviors  were observed in each parameter value, and the time until immobility was increased significantly as compared to the control group.

in the non-fatal dose coc -only and ma -only groups , stress-related depression in swimming behaviors was observed, and both time until immobility and activity counts were significantly attenuated.

for the coc and ma groups of mice co-treated with kt , recoveries from the alterations in each parameter value observed in the psychostimulant-only groups were provided by kt, and there were no significant differences as compared to the control group.

the anova analyses revealed significant main effects of kt and psychostimulant treatments . although significant interactions between kt and psychostimulant treatments were not observed, recoveries shown in fig.  <dig> were provided by kt in the coc and ma groups.

alterations in anxiety-related behaviors in the elevated plus-maze test 
for the kt-only groups , at any time points, no significant behavioral alterations derived from anxiety-related preference for closed arms  were observed in each parameter value. on the other hand, the number of entries into open arms and the time spent in open arms tended to be increased, and the latency to first open arm entry tended to be attenuated .

in the non-fatal dose coc -only and ma -only groups , anxiety-related behaviors were observed: the number of entries into and time spent in open arms were attenuated, and the latency to first open arm entry was increased.

for the coc and ma groups of mice co-treated with kt , recoveries from the alterations in each parameter value observed in the psychostimulant-only groups were provided by kt, and there were no significant differences, except for increased latency to first open arm entry, as compared to the control group.

for the locomotor activity on the plus-maze, no quantitative alterations were observed, and there were no significant differences in total number of entries into arms between the groups .

the anova analyses revealed significant main effects of kt and psychostimulant treatments, and significant interactions between kt and psychostimulant treatments, for the number of entries into and time spent in open arms, and the latency to first open arm entry . however, for the total number of entries into arms, no significant effects or interactions were observed.

alterations in toxic effects of high dose coc and ma 
for the toxic dose coc  and ma  groups, mortality and severe seizures were observed in some animals even in the psychostimulant-only groups , whereas neither mortality nor seizures were observed in the kt-only groups.

in the groups of mice co-treated with kt, the mortality rate tended to be increased and was significantly increased by co-treatment with the high dose kt , although the seizure scores were attenuated significantly by both low and high doses of kt, in a dose-dependent manner .

using a  <dig>  ×  <dig>  factorial design, the anova analyses revealed significant main effects of kt treatment on seizure scores .

discussion
the anesthetic effects of kt have been reported to be closely correlated with its antagonistic effects on nmda receptors  <cit> , but persistent modifications of other neurons including dopamine , norepinephrine , and serotonin  neurons have also been reported to accompany the behavioral effects of kt  <cit> . these kt-induced modifications of the neurons in the group of mice treated with a single kt are different depending on the dosage  <cit> : hyperlocomotion observed in both low and high dose kt groups  has been reported to be correlated with a da agonist action induced by kt, but with high kt doses which caused hypolocomotion during the early period , the activation of ne and 5-ht neurons has also been suggested. in the group of mice treated with a single coc or ma, the psychostimulant which exerted kt-like da agonistic actions  <cit> , hyperlocomotion was also observed . furthermore, in the coc- and ma-only groups, unlike in the kt-only groups, both stress-related depressive behaviors in the forced swimming test  and anxiety-related behaviors in the elevated plus-maze test  were observed . in the kt-only groups, there were no such stress-related depressive and anxiety-related behavioral alterations . on the contrary, the parameter values in the forced swimming test tended to be increased by kt at levels above those in the control group, which indicated an attenuation of the stress-related depressive behavioral alterations below the control level . furthermore, the kt-induced alterations in parameter values in the elevated plus-maze test  indicated a preference for open arms, that is, an attenuation of anxiety-related behavioral alterations below the control level . the mechanisms responsible for these behavioral alterations have not been elucidated. for the psychostimulant-only groups, the contribution of the neurons which have been reported to be correlated with stress-related depressive and anxiety-related behaviors   <cit>  can be predicted. for the kt-only groups, it is possible that the behavioral alterations caused by kt were correlated with the antagonistic effects of kt on nmda receptors, considering the fact that nmda antagonist actions have been demonstrated at both low and high doses of kt  <cit> . the contributions of other modified neurons such as da, ne, and 5-ht neurons  <cit>  can also be suspected.

in the non-fatal dose psychostimulant groups of mice co-treated with kt, the stress-related depressive and anxiety-related behavioral alterations caused by the psychostimulants were antagonized consistently by both high and low doses of kt . the alterations in locomotor activity were also antagonized by the high dose kt . in our preliminary experiments, the stress- and anxiety-related behavioral alterations were antagonized less effectively by mk- <dig>  a more selective and a high affinity antagonist for nmda receptors, which exerted stronger antagonistic effects on the locomotor activity than kt  <cit> . considering these preliminary results, contributions of other neurons such as da, ne, and 5-ht neurons, for which some modifications have been reported in both psychostimulant and kt treatments  <cit> , could be suspected for the antagonistic effects of kt. however, further experimental studies are required for elucidating the mechanisms related to these neurons for the different behavioral alterations in each test. in humans, although some unfavorable subjective effects such as dysphoria have been observed depending on the dose  <cit> , a characteristic euphoric mind-altering effect, which may persist subsequent to the appearance of the "peaceful out-of-body" feeling , has been reported for the recreational use of kt  <cit> . this sense of euphoric transcendence in humans, which has not been reported for other amnestic drugs such as thiopental and has been suspected to be the predominant reason for the dependence on and abuse of kt as a club drug  <cit> , cannot be identified with the attenuation of stress- and anxiety-related behavioral alterations in mice shown in the present experiments. however, the attenuation of painful subjective effects including stress and anxiety has been reported to increase a preference for drugs in humans  <cit> , and may promote a dangerous polydrug abuse such as a psychostimulant plus kt abuse  <cit> . for the kt-only treatment, although no significant behavioral abnormalities or fatal toxicities were observed at or after  <dig> min time point in our animal model, it is possible that the absence of stress- and anxiety-related behavioral alterations promotes further use of this drug in humans. furthermore, for the use of kt, a significantly greater incidence of abnormalities of mental status has been reported than for the use of the other amnestic drugs  <cit> . in rats, a delayed occurrence of some abnormal behaviors similar to those observed in the model of schizophrenia has been reported for the kt treatment groups in several behavioral tests  <cit> .

in the groups of mice treated with kt plus a toxic dose coc or ma, the drug frequently co-abused with kt in overdose cases  <cit> , kt significantly enhanced the fatality caused by coc or ma in spite of its anticonvulsant effects. the anticonvulsant effects of kt against coc- or ma-induced seizures seem to be correlated with nmda receptors, based on its antagonistic effects against nmda-induced convulsions and the reported contribution of nmda receptors to psychostimulant-induced seizures  <cit> . furthermore, considering the fact that the anticonvulsant effects of kt were as strong as mk- <dig> in our preliminary experiments, it is possible that receptors other than nmda receptors contributed to these effects. for example, a contribution of gabaa receptors is also predictable based on the antagonistic effects of kt against the gabaa antagonist bicuculline-induced seizures and the reported contribution of gabaa receptors to psychostimulant-induced seizures  <cit> . with respect to the increase in mortality rate despite the anticonvulsant effects of kt, the underlying mechanisms have not been elucidated. however, it is possible that kt directly enhanced the psychostimulant-induced cardiovascular and respiratory toxicity. considering that the behavioral effects mediated by da and ne neurons were enhanced by combining coc with kt  <cit> , the toxic peripheral effects  mediated by these neurons may also be enhanced by the psychostimulant-kt combination. therefore, it is possible that kt, like ethanol, a drug which increases the lethal effects of coc and for which behavioral effects similar to kt have been reported  <cit> , enhances the toxic effects of psychostimulants without causing severe convulsions or painful subjective symptoms such as anxiety.

CONCLUSIONS
our results support the contention that the recreational use of kt is dangerous because, in addition to its toxic effects with or without combined drugs of abuse, the accompanying attenuation of some painful subjective symptoms such as anxiety and stress-related depression may accelerate the use of the drugs and may promote an overdose without making the subject aware of the danger.

in our experiments, in addition to the absence of any stress-related depressive and anxiety-related behavioral alterations following a single dose kt in the forced swimming and elevated plus maze tests, a kt-induced attenuation of stress- and anxiety-related behaviors caused by coc or ma was demonstrated. the scores of the seizures caused by toxic doses of coc or ma were also attenuated by kt. nevertheless, the lethal effects caused by toxic doses of these psychostimulants were increased by kt.

